The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Naval History of the United States, by
Willis J. Abbot

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Naval History of the United States
       Volume 1 (of 2)

Author: Willis J. Abbot

Release Date: August 13, 2007 [EBook #22305]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NAVAL HISTORY ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Christine P. Travers and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





[Transcriber's note: Obvious printer's errors have been corrected, all
other inconsistencies are as in the original. Author's spelling has
been maintained.

Every chapter heading had an illustration; the corresponding tag has
been removed.]


[Illustration: Spilling Grog on the "Constitution" before Going into
Action.]




                         THE NAVAL HISTORY

                               OF THE

                            UNITED STATES


                                 BY

                           WILLIS J. ABBOT


                       With Many Illustrations




                             _VOLUME ONE_




                               NEW YORK:
                    PETER FENELON COLLIER, PUBLISHER.




                    Copyright, 1886, 1887, 1888, 1890
                                   By
                         Dodd, Mead and Company

                          _All rights reserved_




CONTENTS.

THE NAVAL HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES.


_PART I._

BLUE JACKETS OF '76.


CHAPTER I.

     Early Exploits upon the Water. -- Gallop's Battle with the
     Indians. -- Buccaneers and Pirates. -- Morgan and
     Blackbeard. -- Capt. Kidd turns Pirate. -- Downfall of the
     Buccaneers' Power.

CHAPTER II.

     Expeditions against Neighboring Colonies. -- Romantic Career
     of Sir William Phipps. -- Quelling a Mutiny. -- Expeditions
     against Quebec.

CHAPTER III.

     Opening of the American Revolution. -- The Affair of the
     Schooner "St. John." -- The Press-gang and its Work. -- The
     Sloop "Liberty." -- Destruction of the "Gaspee." -- The
     Boston Tea-party.

CHAPTER IV.

     The Beginning of the Navy. -- Lexington and Concord. -- A
     Blow Struck in Maine. -- Capture of the "Margaretta." --
     Gen. Washington and the Navy. -- Work of Capt. Manly.

CHAPTER V.

     Events of 1776. -- The First Cruise of the Regular Navy. --
     The "Lexington" and the "Edward." -- Mugford's Brave Fight.
     -- Loss of the "Yankee Hero." -- Capt. Manly, and the
     "Defence." -- American Vessels in European Waters. -- Good
     Work of the "Lexington" and the "Reprisal." -- the British
     defeated at Charleston.

CHAPTER VI.

     The Career of Paul Jones. -- In Command of the "Providence."
     -- Capture of the "Mellish." -- Exploits with the "Alfred."
     -- In Command of the "Ranger." -- Sweeping the English
     Channel. -- The Descent upon Whitehaven.

CHAPTER VII.

     Career of Paul Jones Continued. -- His Descent upon the
     Castle of Lord Selkirk. -- The Affair of the Plate. -- The
     Descent upon Whitehaven. -- The Battle with the "Drake." --
     Lieut. Simpson's Perfidy.

CHAPTER VIII.

     Career of Paul Jones Continued. -- His Search for a Ship. --
     Given Command of the "Bon Homme Richard." -- Landais and his
     Character. -- The Frustrated Mutiny. -- Landais quarrels
     with Jones. -- Edinburgh and Leith threatened. -- The
     Dominie's Prayer.

CHAPTER IX.

     Career of Paul Jones Concluded. -- The Battle between the
     "Bon Homme Richard" and the "Serapis." -- Treachery of
     Landais. -- Jones's Great Victory. -- Landais steals the
     "Alliance." -- Jones in Command of the "Ariel." -- The
     "Ariel" in the Storm. -- Arrival in America.

CHAPTER X.

     Career of Nicholas Biddle. -- His Exploit at Lewiston Jail.
     -- Cruise in the "Randolph." -- Battle with the "Yarmouth."
     -- The Fatal Explosion. -- Samuel Tucker. -- His Boyhood. --
     Encounter with Corsairs. -- Cruising in the "Franklin." --
     In Command of the "Boston." -- Anecdotes of Capt. Tucker.

CHAPTER XI.

     Hostilities in 1777. -- American Reverses. -- The British in
     Philadelphia. -- The Attack upon Fort Mifflin. -- Cruise of
     the "Raleigh" and the "Alfred." -- Torpedo Warfare. -- The
     Battle of the Kegs.

CHAPTER XII.

     Naval Events of 1778. -- Recruiting for the Navy. -- The
     Descent upon New Providence. -- Operations on the Delaware.
     -- Capt. Barry's Exploits. -- Destruction of the American
     Frigates. -- American Reverses. -- The Capture of the
     "Pigot." -- French Naval Exploits.

CHAPTER XIII.

     Last Years of the War. -- Disastrous Expedition to the
     Penobscot. -- Wholesale Captures on the Newfoundland Banks.
     -- French Ships in American Waters. -- Taking of Charleston.
     -- The "Trumbull's" Victory and Defeat. -- Capt. Barry and
     the "Alliance." -- Close of the War.

CHAPTER XIV.

     Work of the Privateers. -- The "Gen. Hancock" and the
     "Levant." -- Exploits of the "Pickering" -- the "Revenge."
     -- the "Holkar." -- The "Congress" and the "Savage." -- The
     "Hyder Ali" and the "Gen. Monk." -- The Whale-Boat
     Hostilities. -- The "Old Jersey" Prison-Ship.

CHAPTER XV.

     The Navy Disbanded. -- Aggressions of Barbary Corsairs. -- A
     Disgraceful Tribute. -- Bainbridge and the Dey. -- Gen.
     Eaton at Tunis. -- A Squadron sent to the Mediterranean. --
     Decatur and the Spaniards. -- The "Enterprise" and the
     "Tripoli." -- American Slaves in Algiers.

CHAPTER XVI.

     More Vigorous Policy. -- Commodore Morris sent to the
     Mediterranean. -- Porter's Cutting-Out Expedition. --
     Commodore Preble sent to the Mediterranean. -- His Encounter
     with a British Man-of-War. -- The Loss of the
     "Philadelphia." -- Decatur's Daring Adventure.

CHAPTER XVII.

     A Stirring Year. -- The Bombardment of Tripoli. -- Decatur's
     Hand-to-Hand Fight. -- Lieut. Trippe's Bravery. -- Lieut.
     Spence's Bold Deed. -- Somers's Narrow Escape. -- The
     Floating Mine. -- The Fatal Explosion. -- Close of the War.
     -- The End.


_PART II._

BLUE JACKETS OF 1812.


CHAPTER I.

     The Gathering of the War-Cloud. -- The Revolution ended, but
     the War for Independence yet unfought. -- Outrages upon
     American Sailors. -- The Right of Search. -- Impressment. --
     Boyhood of Commodore Porter. -- Early Days of Commodores
     Perry and Barney. -- Burning a Privateer. -- The Embargo. --
     War Inevitable

CHAPTER II.

     War with France. -- The Building of a Navy. -- First Success
     for the Americans. -- Cutting out the "Sandwich." -- The
     "Constellation" and "L'Insurgente." -- The "Constellation"
     and "La Vengeance"

CHAPTER III.

     Proposed Reduction of the Navy. -- Renewal of British
     Outrages. -- The Affair of the "Baltimore." -- Attack on the
     "Leander." -- Encounter between the "Chesapeake" and
     "Leopard." -- The "President" and "Little Belt"

CHAPTER IV.

     The War on the Ocean. -- Commodore Rodgers's Cruise. -- The
     Loss of the "Nautilus." -- First Success for the British. --
     The Escape of the "Constitution." -- The "Essex" takes the
     "Alert." -- The "Constitution" and the "Guerriere"

CHAPTER V.

     An International Debate. -- The "Wasp" and the "Frolic." --
     The "United States" and the "Macedonian." -- Ovations to the
     Victors

CHAPTER VI.

     Bainbridge takes Command of the "Constitution." -- The
     Defeat of the "Java." -- Close of the Year's Hostilities on
     the Ocean.

CHAPTER VII.

     The War on the Lakes. -- The Attack on Sackett's Harbor. --
     Oliver Hazard Perry ordered To Lake Erie. -- The Battle of
     Put-in-Bay.

CHAPTER VIII.

     On the Ocean. -- The "Hornet" sinks the "Peacock." -- The
     Blockade. -- Adventures of the "Sally." -- Hostilities on
     Chesapeake Bay. -- The Cruise of the "President".

CHAPTER IX.

     Decatur blockaded at New York. -- Attempts to escape through
     Long Island Sound. -- The Flag-Ship struck by Lightning. --
     Torpedoes. -- Fulton's Steam-Frigate. -- Action between the
     "Chesapeake" and "Shannon".

CHAPTER X.

     Cruise of the "Essex." -- A Rich Prize. -- The Mysterious
     Letter. -- Cape Horn rounded. -- Capture of a Peruvian
     Privateer. -- Among the British Whalers. -- Porter in
     Command of a Squadron. -- A Boy Commander. -- The Squadron
     lays up at Nookaheevah.

CHAPTER XI.

     War with the Savages. -- The Campaign against the Typees. --
     Departure from Nookaheevah. -- The "Essex" anchors at
     Valparaiso. -- Arrival of the "Phoebe" and "Cherub." -- They
     capture the "Essex." -- Porter's Encounter with the
     "Saturn." -- The Mutiny at Nookaheevah.

CHAPTER XII.

     Capture of the "Surveyor." -- Work of the Gunboat Flotilla.
     -- Operations on Chesapeake Bay. -- Cockburn's Depredations.
     -- Cruise of the "Argus." -- Her Capture by the "Pelican."
     -- Battle Between the "Enterprise" and "Boxer." -- End of
     the Year 1813 on the Ocean.

CHAPTER XIII.

     On the Lakes. -- Close of Hostilities on Lakes Erie and
     Huron. -- Desultory Warfare on Lake Ontario in 1813. --
     Hostilities on Lake Ontario in 1814. -- The Battle of Lake
     Champlain. -- End of the War upon the Lakes.

CHAPTER XIV.

     On the Ocean. -- The Work of the Sloops-of-War. -- Loss of
     the "Frolic." -- Fruitless Cruise of the "Adams." -- The
     "Peacock" Takes the "Epervier." -- The Cruise of the "Wasp."
     -- She Captures the "Reindeer." -- Sinks the "Avon." --
     Mysterious End of the "Wasp".

CHAPTER XV.

     Operations on the New England Coast. -- The Bombardment of
     Stonington. -- Destruction Of the United States Corvette
     "Adams." -- Operations on Chesapeake Bay. -- Work of
     Barney's Barge Flotilla. -- Advance of the British Upon
     Washington. -- Destruction of the Capitol. -- Operations
     Against Baltimore. -- Bombardment of Fort McHenry.

CHAPTER XVI.

     Desultory Hostilities on the Ocean. -- Attack Upon Fort
     Bowyer. -- Lafitte the Pirate. -- British Expedition against
     New Orleans. -- Battle of the Rigolets. -- Attack on New
     Orleans, and Defeat of the British. -- Work of the
     Blue-jackets. -- Capture of the Frigate "President." -- The
     "Constitution" takes The "Cyane" and "Levant." -- The
     "Hornet" takes the "Penguin." -- End of the War.

CHAPTER XVII.

     Privateers and Prisons of the War. -- The "Rossie." -- Salem
     Privateers. -- The "Gen. Armstrong" gives Battle to a
     British Squadron, and saves New Orleans. -- Narrative of a
     British Officer. -- The "Prince de Neufchatel." --
     Experiences of American Prisoners of War. -- The End.

CHAPTER XVIII.

     The Long Peace broken by the War With Mexico. -- Activity of
     the Navy. -- Captain Stockton's Stratagem. -- The Battle at
     San Jose. -- The Blockade. -- Instances of Personal Bravery.
     -- The Loss of the "Truxton." -- Yellow Fever in the
     Squadron. -- The Navy at Vera Cruz. -- Capture of Alvarado.

CHAPTER XIX.

     The Navy in Peace. -- Surveying the Dead Sea. -- Suppressing
     the Slave Trade. -- The Franklin Relief Expedition. --
     Commodore Perry in Japan. -- Signing of the Treaty. --
     Trouble in Chinese Waters. -- The Koszta Case. -- The Second
     Franklin Relief Expedition. -- Foote at Canton. -- "Blood is
     Thicker Than Water".


_PART III._

BLUE JACKETS OF '61.


CHAPTER I.

     The Opening of the Conflict. -- The Navies of the
     Contestants. -- Dix's Famous Despatch. -- The
     River-gunboats.

CHAPTER II.

     Fort Sumter Bombarded. -- Attempt of the "Star of the West"
     to re-enforce Anderson. -- The Naval Expedition to Fort
     Sumter. -- The Rescue of the Frigate "Constitution." --
     Burning the Norfolk Navy-Yard.

CHAPTER III.

     Difficulties of the Confederates in Getting a Navy. --
     Exploit of the "French Lady." -- Naval Skirmishing on the
     Potomac. -- The Cruise of the "Sumter"

CHAPTER IV.

     The Potomac Flotilla. -- Capture of Alexandria. -- Actions
     at Matthias Point. -- Bombardment of the Hatteras Forts.

CHAPTER V.

     The "Trent" Affair. -- Operations in Albemarle and Pamlico
     Sounds. -- Destruction of the Confederate Fleet.

CHAPTER VI.

     Reduction of Newbern. -- Exploits of Lieut. Cushing. --
     Destruction of the Ram "Albemarle".

CHAPTER VII.

     The Blockade-runners. -- Nassau and Wilmington. -- Work of
     the Cruisers.

CHAPTER VIII.

     Du Pont's Expedition to Hilton Head and Port Royal. -- The
     Fiery Circle.

CHAPTER IX.

     The First Ironclad Vessels in History. -- The "Merrimac"
     sinks the "Cumberland," and destroys the "Congress." -- Duel
     between the "Monitor" and "Merrimac".

CHAPTER X.

     The Navy in the Inland Waters. -- The Mississippi Squadron.
     -- Sweeping the Tennessee River.

CHAPTER XI.

     Famous Confederate Privateers, -- The "Alabama," the
     "Shenandoah," the "Nashville".

CHAPTER XII.

     Work of the Gulf Squadron. -- The Fight at the Passes of the
     Mississippi. -- Destruction of the Schooner "Judah." -- The
     Blockade of Galveston, and Capture of the "Harriet Lane".

CHAPTER XIII.

     The Capture of New Orleans. -- Farragut's Fleet passes Fort
     St. Philip and Fort Jackson.

CHAPTER XIV.

     Along the Mississippi. -- Forts Jackson and St. Philip
     Surrender. -- The Battle at St. Charles. -- The Ram
     "Arkansas." -- Bombardment and Capture of Port Hudson.

CHAPTER XV.

     On To Vicksburg. -- Bombardment of the Confederate
     Stronghold. -- Porter's Cruise in the Forests.

CHAPTER XVI.

     Vicksburg Surrenders, and the Mississippi is opened. --
     Naval Events along the Gulf Coast.

CHAPTER XVII.

     Operations about Charleston. -- The Bombardment, the Siege,
     and the Capture.

CHAPTER XVIII.

     The Battle of Mobile Bay.

CHAPTER XIX.

     The Fall of Fort Fisher. -- The Navy ends its Work.


_PART IV._

BLUE JACKETS IN TIME OF PEACE.


CHAPTER I.

     Police Service on the High Seas. -- War Service in Asiatic
     Ports. -- Losses by the Perils of the Deep. -- A Brush with
     the Pirates. -- Admiral Rodgers at Corea. -- Services in
     Arctic Waters. -- The Disaster at Samoa. -- The Attack on
     the "Baltimore's" Men at Valparaiso. -- Loss of the
     "Kearsarge." -- The Naval Review.

CHAPTER II.

     The Naval Militia. -- A Volunteer Service which in Time of
     War will be Effective. -- How Boys are trained for the Life
     of a Sailor. -- Conditions of Enlistment in the Volunteer
     Branch of the Service. -- The Work of the Seagoing Militia
     in Summer.

CHAPTER III.

     How the Navy has Grown. -- The Cost and Character of Our New
     White Ships of War. -- Our Period of Naval Weakness and our
     Advance to a Place among the Great Naval Powers. -- The New
     Devices of Naval Warfare. -- The Torpedo, the Dynamite Gun,
     and the Modern Rifle. -- Armor and its Possibilities.


_PART V._

THE NAVAL WAR WITH SPAIN.


CHAPTER I.

     The State of Cuba. -- Pertinacity of the Revolutionists. --
     Spain's Sacrifices and Failure. -- Spanish Barbarities. --
     The Policy of Reconcentration. -- American Sympathy aroused.
     -- The Struggle in Congress. -- The Assassination of the
     "Maine." -- Report of the Commission. -- The Onward March to
     Battle.

CHAPTER II.

     The Opening Days of the War. -- The First Blow struck in the
     Pacific. -- Dewey and his Fleet. -- The Battle at Manila. --
     An Eye-witness' Story. -- Delay and Doubt in the East. --
     Dull Times for the Blue-jackets. -- The Discovery of
     Cervera. -- Hobson's Exploit. -- The Outlook.

CHAPTER III.

     The Spanish Fleet makes a Dash from the Harbor. -- Its total
     Destruction. -- Admiral Cervera a Prisoner. -- Great Spanish
     Losses. -- American Fleet Loses but one Man.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


VOLUME ONE

     Spilling Grog on the "Constitution" before going into
     Action. _Frontispiece_.

     Commodore Esek Hopkins.

     Siege of Charleston, S.C., May, 1780.

     Captain John Paul Jones quelling the Mob at Whitehaven,
     Scotland, Nov., 1777.

     The Action between the "Bon Homme Richard" and the
     "Serapis," September 23, 1779.

     Commodore Barry.

     Shortening Sail on the "Lancaster"--The Oldest Cruiser in
     Commission.

     Commodore Decatur.

     Derelict.

     Cutting Away the Flag.

     Commodore Perry.

     Barney Regains his Ship.

     Toasting the Wooden Walls of Columbia.

     Commodore Macdonough.

     Hull Makes a Reconnoissance.

     The British Squadron.

     Lieut. Allen Fires a Shot.

     Commodore Rogers Hails.

     Explosion on the "President".

     "Hull Her, Boys!"

     Loading.

     Ready to Board.

     Engagement of the Frigates "United States" and "Macedonian,"
     Christmas Day, 1812.

     Assuming to be British Men-of-War.

     Marines Picking Off the Enemy.

     In the Cross-Trees.

     Perry's Recruits.

     Drilling the Raw Recruits.

     Commodore Perry at the Battle of Lake Erie.

     Perry's Victory--The Battle of Lake Erie, September 10,
     1813.

     Making Ready to Leave the "Lawrence".

     Awaiting the Boarders.

     "I am Commodore Rogers".

     Beating to Quarters.

     The Last Shot of the "Chesapeake".

     On Board the "Chesapeake".

     The Peruvian Privateer.

     The Duel at the Galapagos Islands.

     Firing the Howitzer.


VOLUME TWO

     Destruction of the "Maine," Havana Harbor, Feb. 15, 1898.
     _Frontispiece_

     The Fight with the "Boxer".

     The Surrender of the "Boxer".

     On the Way to Lake Erie.

     Hiram Paulding Fires the Guns.

     The Captain of the "Reindeer".

     The End of the "Reindeer".

     Lieut. Richmond Pearson Hobson, who Sank the "Merrimac" in
     Santiago Harbor, June 3, 1898.

     The Descent of Wareham.

     Sharp-Shooters.

     The March on Washington.

     Planning the Attack.

     Response to the Call for Volunteers to Accompany Hobson on
     the "Merrimac".

     The "President" Tries to Escape.

     Battleship "Massachusetts".

     Prison Chaplain and Jailer.

     The Last Volley of the War.

     New U. S. Torpedo-Boat "Talbot".

     The "Hartford," Farragut's Flagship.

     Departure of a Naval Expedition from Port Royal.

     Fort Moultrie.

     Anderson's Command Occupying Fort Sumter.

     Major Robert Anderson.

     The "Morris"--Torpedo-Boat of the Smallest Type--46-1/2 Tons
     Displacement, 800 Horse-Power.

     Blockading the Mouth of the Mississippi.

     Flag of the Confederacy.

     Naval Patrol on the Potomac.

     Attack on the Hatteras Forts.

     Spanish Merchant Steamer "Catalina" Captured by the Cruiser
     "Detroit," April 24, 1898.

     Flag of South Carolina.

     Nassau: The Haunt of Blockade-Runners.

     Cotton Ships at Nassau.

     Marines Saluting on the "Lancaster"--Our Oldest Naval Vessel
     in Active Service.

     Fortress Monroe.

     Du Pont's Expedition Off Cape Hatteras.

     The Opening Gun.

     Engagement of the "Monitor" and "Merrimac," March 9, 1862.

     A River Gunboat.

     Engagement of the "Kearsarge" and "Alabama," June 19, 1864.

     Rescue of Capt. Semmes.

     The "Nashville" Burning a Prize.

     Fort Pensacola.

     Levee at New Orleans Before the War.

     Farragut's Fleet Engaging the Enemy near New Orleans, April
     26, 1862.

     Breaking the Chain.

     Farragut Engaging the Port Hudson (La.) Batteries, March,
     1863.

     The "Arkansas" under Fire.

     Farragut's Fleet Engaging Forts Jackson and St. Philip and
     Confederate Fleet on the Mississippi River, below New
     Orleans, April 25, 1862.

     The Launching of the Battleship "Iowa".

     Passing the Vicksburg Batteries.

     Bailey's Dam on the Red River.

     Engagement Between the U. S. Flagship "Hartford" and the
     Confederate Ironclad "Tennessee," Mobile Bay, August 5,
     1864.

     Warships off Charleston Harbor.

     Battle of Mobile Bay--Union Fleet Engaging Fort Morgan and
     Confederate Vessels, August 5, 1864.

     Forward Turret of Monitor "Terror".

     Torpedo-Boat "Cushing".

     Dynamite Cruiser "Vesuvius".

     Ensign Worth Bagley, of the Torpedo-Boat "Winslow," Killed
     May 11, 1898.

     Partial View of the Wreck of the "Maine".

     Dewey's Victory--The Naval Fight in Manila Bay, May 1, 1898.

     The Defeat of Cervera's Fleet--The "Colon" Running Ashore.

     The Naval Board of Strategy, 1898.

     Rear-Admiral William Thomas Sampson.

     Bombardment of San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 13, 1898.

     Rear-Admiral George Dewey.

     Admiral Sampson's Fleet off Puerto Rico, in Search of
     Cervera's Vessels, May 1, 1898.

     Admiral Cervera's Fleet Approaching Santiago, May, 1898.

     Commodore John Crittenden Watson.

     General Miles's Expedition to Puerto Rico, as seen from the
     Deck of the "St. Paul".

     Hobson Sinking the "Merrimac" in the Entrance to Santiago
     Harbor, June 3, 1898.

     Rear-Admiral Winfield Scott Schley.

     Monitors at League Island Navy Yard, Philadelphia.

     Training Ship "Alliance"--Type of the Last Wooden
     Sloops-of-War.

     Training Ships "Portsmouth" and "Lancaster" at Brooklyn Navy
     Yard.

     "Racing Home"--The Battleship "Oregon" on her way from San
     Francisco to Key West.

     Hammock-Inspection on a Battleship.

     Armored Cruiser "New York" on her way to Puerto Rico.

     New York's Welcome to the Battleship "Texas".

     Spanish Merchant Steamer "Panama," Captured April 25, by
     Lighthouse Tender "Mangrove".

     Forward 13-inch Guns on Battleship "Indiana".

     Forward Deck of Dynamite Gun-Vessel "Vesuvius".

     Hospital Ship "Relief".

     Religious Service on Battleship "Iowa," off Havana.

     The Battleship "Maine" Leaving New York for Havana.

     Bombardment of Matanzas, Cuba, by the "New York,"
     "Cincinnati," and "Puritan," April 27, 1898.

     Ironclads in Action.

     Bombardment of Forts at Entrance of Santiago Harbor, Cuba,
     May 6, 1898.

     Torpedo-Boat "Ericsson".

     Deck-Tube and Projectile of a Torpedo-Boat.

     Crew of the "Indiana" Watching the "New York" Capture a
     Prize.

     Hurry-Work at Night on Monitor "Puritan" at League Island
     Navy Yard, Philadelphia.




PART I




BLUE-JACKETS OF '76.

CHAPTER I.

     EARLY EXPLOITS UPON THE WATER. -- GALLOP'S BATTLE WITH THE
     INDIANS. -- BUCCANEERS AND PIRATES. -- MORGAN AND
     BLACKBEARD. -- CAPT. KIDD TURNS PIRATE. -- DOWNFALL OF THE
     BUCCANEERS' POWER.


In May, 1636, a stanch little sloop of some twenty tons was standing
along Long Island Sound on a trading expedition. At her helm stood
John Gallop, a sturdy colonist, and a skilful seaman, who earned his
bread by trading with the Indians that at that time thronged the
shores of the Sound, and eagerly seized any opportunity to traffic
with the white men from the colonies of Plymouth or New Amsterdam. The
colonists sent out beads, knives, bright clothes, and sometimes,
unfortunately, rum and other strong drinks. The Indians in exchange
offered skins and peltries of all kinds; and, as their simple natures
had not been schooled to nice calculations of values, the traffic was
one of great profit to the more shrewd whites. But the trade was not
without its perils. Though the Indians were simple, and little likely
to drive hard bargains, yet they were savages, and little accustomed
to nice distinctions between their own property and that of others.
Their desires once aroused for some gaudy bit of cloth or shining
glass, they were ready enough to steal it, often making their booty
secure by the murder of the luckless trader. It so happened, that,
just before John Gallop set out with his sloop on the spring trading
cruise, the people of the colony were excitedly discussing the
probable fate of one Oldham, who some weeks before had set out on a
like errand, in a pinnace, with a crew of two white boys and two
Indians, and had never returned. So when, on this May morning, Gallop,
being forced to hug the shore by stormy weather, saw a small vessel
lying at anchor in a cove, he immediately ran down nearer, to
investigate. The crew of the sloop numbered two men and two boys,
beside the skipper, Gallop. Some heavy duck-guns on board were no mean
ordnance; and the New Englander determined to probe the mystery of
Oldham's disappearance, though it might require some fighting. As the
sloop bore down upon the anchored pinnace, Gallop found no lack of
signs to arouse his suspicion. The rigging of the strange craft was
loose, and seemed to have been cut. No lookout was visible, and she
seemed to have been deserted; but a nearer view showed, lying on the
deck of the pinnace, fourteen stalwart Indians, one of whom, catching
sight of the approaching sloop, cut the anchor cable, and called to
his companions to awake.

This action on the part of the Indians left Gallop no doubt as to
their character. Evidently they had captured the pinnace, and had
either murdered Oldham, or even then had him a prisoner in their
midst. The daring sailor wasted no time in debate as to the proper
course to pursue, but clapping all sail on his craft, soon brought her
alongside the pinnace. As the sloop came up, the Indians opened the
fight with fire-arms and spears; but Gallop's crew responded with
their duck-guns with such vigor that the Indians deserted the decks,
and fled below for shelter. Gallop was then in a quandary. The odds
against him were too great for him to dare to board, and the pinnace
was rapidly drifting ashore. After some deliberation he put up his
helm, and beat to windward of the pinnace; then, coming about, came
scudding down upon her before the wind. The two vessels met with a
tremendous shock. The bow of the sloop struck the pinnace fairly
amidships, forcing her over on her beam-ends, until the water poured
into the open hatchway. The affrighted Indians, unused to warfare on
the water, rushed upon deck. Six leaped into the sea, and were
drowned; the rest retreated again into the cabin. Gallop then prepared
to repeat his ramming manoeuvre. This time, to make the blow more
effective, he lashed his anchor to the bow, so that the sharp flukes
protruded; thus extemporizing an iron-clad ram more than two hundred
years before naval men thought of using one. Thus provided, the second
blow of the sloop was more terrible than the first. The sharp fluke of
the anchor crashed through the side of the pinnace, and the two
vessels hung tightly together. Gallop then began to double-load his
duck-guns, and fire through the sides of the pinnace; but, finding
that the enemy was not to be dislodged in this way, he broke his
vessel loose, and again made for the windward, preparatory to a third
blow. As the sloop drew off, four or five more Indians rushed from the
cabin of the pinnace, and leaped overboard but shared the fate of
their predecessors, being far from land. Gallop then came about, and
for the third time bore down upon his adversary. As he drew near, an
Indian appeared on the deck of the pinnace, and with humble gestures
offered to submit. Gallop ran alongside, and taking the man on board,
bound him hand and foot, and placed him in the hold. A second redskin
then begged for quarter; but Gallop, fearing to allow the two wily
savages to be together, cast the second into the sea, where he was
drowned. Gallop then boarded the pinnace. Two Indians were left, who
retreated into a small compartment of the hold, and were left
unmolested. In the cabin was found the mangled body of Mr. Oldham. A
tomahawk had been sunk deep into his skull, and his body was covered
with wounds. The floor of the cabin was littered with portions of the
cargo, which the murderous savages had plundered. Taking all that
remained of value upon his own craft, Gallop cut loose the pinnace;
and she drifted away, to go to pieces on a reef in Narragansett Bay.

This combat is the earliest action upon American waters of which we
have any trustworthy records. The only naval event antedating this was
the expedition from Virginia, under Capt. Samuel Argal, against the
little French settlement of San Sauveur. Indeed, had it not been for
the pirates and the neighboring French settlements, there would be
little in the early history of the American Colonies to attract the
lover of naval history. But about 1645 the buccaneers began to commit
depredations on the high seas, and it became necessary for the
Colonies to take steps for the protection of their commerce. In this
year an eighteen-gun ship from Cambridge, Mass., fell in with a
Barbary pirate of twenty guns, and was hard put to it to escape. And,
as the seventeenth century drew near its close, these pests of the sea
so increased, that evil was sure to befall the peaceful merchantman
that put to sea without due preparation for a fight or two with the
sea robbers.

It was in the low-lying islands of the Gulf of Mexico, that these
predatory gentry--buccaneers, marooners, or pirates--made their
headquarters, and lay in wait for the richly freighted merchantmen in
the West India trade. Men of all nationalities sailed under the "Jolly
Roger,"--as the dread black flag with skull and cross-bones was
called,--but chiefly were they French and Spaniards. The continual
wars that in that turbulent time racked Europe gave to the marauders
of the sea a specious excuse for their occupation. Thus, many a
Spanish schooner, manned by a swarthy crew bent on plunder, commenced
her career on the Spanish Main, with the intention of taking only
ships belonging to France and England; but let a richly laden Spanish
galleon appear, after a long season of ill-fortune, and all scruples
were thrown aside, the "Jolly Roger" sent merrily to the fore, and
another pirate was added to the list of those that made the highways
of the sea as dangerous to travel as the footpad infested common of
Hounslow Heath. English ships went out to hunt down the treacherous
Spaniards, and stayed to rob and pillage indiscriminately; and not a
few of the names now honored as those of eminent English discoverers,
were once dreaded as being borne by merciless pirates.

But the most powerful of the buccaneers on the Spanish Main were
French, and between them and the Spaniards an unceasing warfare was
waged. There were desperate men on either side, and mighty stories are
told of their deeds of valor. There were Pierre Francois, who, with
six and twenty desperadoes, dashed into the heart of a Spanish fleet,
and captured the admiral's flag-ship; Bartholomew Portuguese, who,
with thirty men, made repeated attacks upon a great Indiaman with a
crew of seventy, and though beaten back time and again, persisted
until the crew surrendered to the twenty buccaneers left alive;
Francois l'Olonoise, who sacked the cities of Maracaibo and
Gibraltar, and who, on hearing that a man-o'-war had been sent to
drive him away, went boldly to meet her, captured her, and slaughtered
all of the crew save one, whom he sent to bear the bloody tidings to
the governor of Havana.

Such were the buccaneers,--desperate, merciless, and insatiate in
their lust for plunder. So numerous did they finally become, that no
merchant dared to send a ship to the West Indies; and the pirates,
finding that they had fairly exterminated their game, were fain to
turn landwards for further booty. It was an Englishman that showed the
sea rovers this new plan of pillage; one Louis Scott, who descended
upon the town of Campeche, and, after stripping the place to the bare
walls, demanded that a heavy tribute be paid him, in default of which
he would burn the town. Loaded with booty, he sailed back to the
buccaneers' haunts in the Tortugas. This expedition was the example
that the buccaneers followed for the next few years. City after city
fell a prey to the demoniac attacks of the lawless rovers. Houses and
churches were sacked, towns given to the flames, rich and poor
plundered alike; murder was rampant; and men and women were subjected
to the most horrid tortures, to extort information as to buried
treasures.

Two great names stand out pre-eminent amid the host of outlaws that
took part in this reign of rapine,--l'Olonoise and Sir Henry Morgan.
The desperate exploits of these two worthies would, if recounted, fill
volumes; and probably no more extraordinary narrative of cruelty,
courage, suffering, and barbaric luxury could be fabricated. Morgan
was a Welshman, an emigrant, who, having worked out as a slave the
cost of his passage across the ocean, took immediate advantage of his
freedom to take up the trade of piracy. For him was no pillaging of
paltry merchant-ships. He demanded grander operations, and his bands
of desperadoes assumed the proportions of armies. Many were the towns
that suffered from the bloody visitations of Morgan and his men.
Puerto del Principe yielded up to them three hundred thousand pieces
of eight, five hundred head of cattle, and many prisoners. Porto Bello
was bravely defended against the barbarians; and the stubbornness of
the defence so enraged Morgan, that he swore that no quarter should be
given the defenders. And so when some hours later the chief fortress
surrendered, the merciless buccaneer locked its garrison in the
guard-room, set a torch to the magazine, and sent castle and garrison
flying into the air. Maracaibo and Gibraltar next fell into the
clutches of the pirate. At the latter town, finding himself caught in
a river with three men-of-war anchored at its mouth, he hastily built
a fire-ship, put some desperate men at the helm, and sent her, a sheet
of flame, into the midst of the squadron. The admiral's ship was
destroyed; and the pirates sailed away, exulting over their
adversaries' discomfiture. Rejoicing over their victories, the
followers of Morgan then planned a venture that should eclipse all
that had gone before. This was no less than a descent upon Panama, the
most powerful of the West Indian cities. For this undertaking, Morgan
gathered around him an army of over two thousand desperadoes of all
nationalities. A little village on the island of Hispaniola was chosen
as the recruiting station; and thither flocked pirates, thieves, and
adventurers from all parts of the world. It was a motley crew thus
gathered together,--Spaniards, swarthy skinned and black haired; wiry
Frenchmen, quick to anger, and ever ready with cutlass or pistol;
Malays and Lascars, half clad in gaudy colors, treacherous and sullen,
with a hand ever on their glittering creeses; Englishmen, handy alike
with fist, bludgeon, or cutlass, and mightily given to fearful oaths;
negroes, Moors, and a few West Indians mixed with the lawless throng.

Having gathered his band, procured provisions (chiefly by plundering),
and built a fleet of boats, Morgan put his forces in motion. The first
obstacle in his path was the Castle of Chagres, which guarded the
mouth of the Chagres River, up which the buccaneers must pass to reach
the city of Panama. To capture this fortress, Morgan sent his
vice-admiral Bradley, with four hundred men. The Spaniards were
evidently warned of their approach; for hardly had the first ship
flying the piratical ensign appeared at the mouth of the river, when
the royal standard of Spain was hoisted above the castle, and the dull
report of a shotted gun told the pirates that there was a stubborn
resistance in store for them.

Landing some miles below the castle, and cutting their way with
hatchet and sabre through the densely interwoven vegetation of a
tropical jungle, the pirates at last reached a spot from which a clear
view of the castle could be obtained. As they emerged from the forest
to the open, the sight greatly disheartened them. They saw a powerful
fort, with bastions, moat, drawbridge, and precipitous natural
defences. Many of the pirates advised a retreat; but Bradley,
dreading the anger of Morgan, ordered an assault. Time after time did
the desperate buccaneers, with horrid yells, rush upon the fort, only
to be beaten back by the well-directed volleys of the garrison. They
charged up to the very walls, threw over fireballs, and hacked the
timbers with axes, but to no avail. From behind their impregnable
ramparts, the Spaniards fired murderous volleys, crying out.--

"Come on, you English devils, you heretics, the enemies of God and of
the king! Let your comrades who are behind come also. We will serve
them as we have served you. You shall not get to Panama this time."

As night fell, the pirates withdrew into the thickets to escape the
fire of their enemies, and to discuss their discomfiture. As one group
of buccaneers lay in the jungle, a chance arrow, shot by an Indian in
the fort, struck one of them in the arm. Springing to his feet with a
cry of rage and pain, the wounded man cried out as he tore the arrow
from the bleeding wound,--

"Look here, my comrades. I will make this accursed arrow the means of
the destruction of all the Spaniards."

So saying, he wrapped a quantity of cotton about the head of the
arrow, charged his gun with powder, and, thrusting the arrow into the
muzzle, fired. His comrades eagerly watched the flight of the missile,
which was easily traced by the flaming cotton. Hurtling through the
air, the fiery missile fell upon a thatched roof within the castle,
and the dry straw and leaves were instantly in a blaze. With cries of
savage joy, the buccaneers ran about picking up the arrows that lay
scattered over the battle-field. Soon the air was full of the
fire-brands, and the woodwork within the castle enclosure was a mass
of flame. One arrow fell within the magazine; and a burst of smoke and
flame, and the dull roar of an explosion, followed. The Spaniards
worked valiantly to extinguish the flames, and to beat back their
assailants; but the fire raged beyond their control, and the bright
light made them easy targets for their foes. There could be but one
issue to such a conflict. By morning the fort was in the hands of the
buccaneers, and of the garrison of three hundred and fourteen only
fourteen were unhurt. Over the ruins of the fort the English flag was
hoisted, the shattered walls were repaired, and the place made a
rendezvous for Morgan's forces.

On the scene of the battle Morgan drilled his forces, and prepared for
the march and battles that were to come. After some days' preparation,
the expedition set out. The road lay through tangled tropical forests,
under a burning sun. Little food was taken, as the invaders expected
to live on the country; but the inhabitants fled before the advancing
column, destroying every thing eatable. Soon starvation stared the
desperadoes in the face. They fed upon berries, roots, and leaves. As
the days passed, and no food was to be found, they sliced up and
devoured coarse leather bags. For a time, it seemed that they would
never escape alive from the jungle; but at last, weak, weary, and
emaciated, they came out upon a grassy plain before the city of
Panama. Here, a few days later, a great battle was fought. The
Spaniards outnumbered the invaders, and were better provided with
munitions of war; yet the pirates, fighting with the bravery of
desperate men, were victorious, and the city fell into their hands.
Then followed days of murder, plunder, and debauchery. Morgan saw his
followers, maddened by liquor, scoff at the idea of discipline and
obedience. Fearing that while his men were helplessly drunk the
Spaniards would rally and cut them to pieces, he set fire to the city,
that the stores of rum might be destroyed. After sacking the town, the
vandals packed their plunder on the backs of mules, and retraced their
steps to the seaboard. Their booty amounted to over two millions of
dollars. Over the division of this enormous sum great dissensions
arose, and Morgan saw the mutinous spirit spreading rapidly among his
men. With a few accomplices, therefore, he loaded a ship with the
plunder, and secretly set sail; leaving over half of his band, without
food or shelter, in a hostile country. Many of the abandoned
buccaneers starved, some were shot or hanged by the enraged Spaniards;
but the leader of the rapacious gang reached Jamaica with a huge
fortune, and was appointed governor of the island, and made a baronet
by the reigning king of England, Charles the Second.

Such were some of the exploits of some of the more notorious of the
buccaneers. It may be readily imagined, that, with hordes of
desperadoes such as these infesting the waters of the West Indies,
there was little opportunity for the American Colonies to build up any
maritime interests in that direction. And as the merchantmen became
scarce on the Spanish Main, such of the buccaneers as did not turn
landward in search of booty put out to sea, and ravaged the ocean
pathways between the Colonies and England. It was against these
pirates, that the earliest naval operations of the Colonies were
directed. Several cruisers were fitted out to rid the seas of these
pests, but we hear little of their success. But the name of one
officer sent against the pirates has become notorious as that of the
worst villain of them all.

It was in January, 1665, that William III., King of England, issued
"to our true and well-beloved Capt. William Kidd, commander of the
ship 'Adventure,'" a commission to proceed against "divers wicked
persons who commit many and great piracies, robberies, and
depredations on the seas." Kidd was a merchant of New York, and had
commanded a privateer during the last war with France. He was a man of
great courage, and, being provided with a stanch ship and brave crew,
set out with high hopes of winning great reputation and much prize
money. But fortune was against him. For months the "Adventure"
ploughed the blue waves of the ocean, yet not a sail appeared on the
horizon. Once, indeed, three ships were seen in the distance. The men
of the "Adventure" were overjoyed at the prospect of a rich prize. The
ship was prepared for action. The men, stripped to the waist, stood at
their quarters, talking of the coming battle. Kidd stood in the
rigging with a spy-glass, eagerly examining the distant vessels. But
only disappointment was in store; for, as the ships drew nearer, Kidd
shut his spy-glass with an oath, saying,--

"They are only three English men-o'-war."

Continued disappointment bred discontent and mutiny among the crew.
They had been enlisted with lavish promises of prize money, but saw
before them nothing but a profitless cruise. The spirit of discontent
spread rapidly. Three or four ships that were sighted proved to be
neither pirates nor French, and were therefore beyond the powers of
capture granted Kidd by the king. Kidd fought against the growing
piratical sentiment for a long time; but temptation at last overcame
him, and he yielded. Near the Straits of Babelmandeb, at the entrance
to the Red Sea, he landed a party, plundered the adjoining country for
provisions, and, turning his ship's prow toward the straits, mustered
his crew on deck, and thus addressed them:--

"We have been unsuccessful hitherto, my boys," he said, "but take
courage. Fortune is now about to smile upon us. The fleet of the
'Great Mogul,' freighted with the richest treasures, is soon to come
out of the Red Sea. From the capture of those heavily laden ships, we
will all grow rich."

The crew, ready enough to become pirates, cheered lustily: and,
turning his back upon all hopes of an honorable career, Kidd set out
in search of the treasure fleet. After cruising for four days, the
"Adventure" fell in with the squadron, which proved to be under convoy
of an English and a Dutch man-of-war. The squadron was a large one,
and the ships greatly scattered. By skilful seamanship, Kidd dashed
down upon an outlying vessel, hoping to capture and plunder it before
the convoying men-of-war could come to its rescue. But his first shot
attracted the attention of the watchful guardians; and, though several
miles away, they packed on all sail, and bore down to the rescue with
such spirit that the disappointed pirate was forced to sheer off. Kidd
was now desperate. He had failed as a reputable privateer, and his
first attempt at piracy had failed. Thenceforward, he cast aside all
scruples, and captured large ships and small, tortured their crews,
and for a time seemed resolved to lead a piratical life. But there are
evidences that at times this strange man relented, and strove to
return to the path of duty and right. On one occasion, a Dutch ship
crossed the path of the "Adventure," and the crew clamorously demanded
her capture. Kidd firmly refused. A tumult arose. The captain drew his
sabre and pistols, and gathering about him those still faithful,
addressed the mutineers, saying,--

"You may take the boats and go. But those who thus leave this ship
will never ascend its sides again."

The mutineers murmured loudly. One man, a gunner, named William Moore,
stepped forward, saying,--

"You are ruining us all. You are keeping us in beggary and starvation.
But for your whims, we might all be prosperous and rich."

At this outspoken mutiny, Kidd flew into a passion. Seizing a heavy
bucket that stood near, he dealt Moore a terrible blow on the head.
The unhappy man fell to the deck with a fractured skull, and the other
mutineers sullenly yielded to the captain's will. Moore died the next
day; and months after, when Kidd, after roving the seas, and robbing
ships of every nationality, was brought to trial at London, it was
for the murder of William Moore that he was condemned to die. For
Kidd's career subsequent to the incident of the Dutch ship was that of
a hardened pirate. He captured and robbed ships, and tortured their
passengers. He went to Madagascar, the rendezvous of the pirates, and
joined in their revelry and debauchery. On the island were five or six
hundred pirates, and ships flying the black flag were continually
arriving or departing. The streets resounded with shouts of revelry,
with curses, and with the cries of rage. Strong drinks were freely
used. Drunkenness was everywhere. It was no uncommon thing for a
hogshead of wine to be opened, and left standing in the streets, that
any might drink who chose. The pirates, flush with their ill-gotten
gains, spent money on gambling and kindred vices lavishly. The women
who accompanied them to this lawless place were decked out with
barbaric splendor in silks and jewels. On the arrival of a ship, the
debauchery was unbounded. Such noted pirates as Blackbeard, Steed
Bonnet, and Avary made the place their rendezvous, and brought thither
their rich prizes and wretched prisoners. Blackbeard was one of the
most desperate pirates of the age. He, with part of his crew, once
terrorized the officials of Charleston, S.C., exacting tribute of
medicines and provisions. Finally he was killed in action, and sixteen
of his desperate gang expiated their crimes on the gallows.

To Madagascar, too, often came the two female pirates, Mary Read and
Anne Bonny. These women, masquerading in men's clothing, were as
desperate and bloody as the men by whose side they fought. By a
strange coincidence, these two women enlisted on the same ship. Each
knowing her own sex, and being ignorant of that of the other, they
fell in love; and the final discovery of their mutual deception
increased their intimacy. After serving with the pirates, working at
the guns, swinging a cutlass in the boarding parties, and fighting a
duel in which she killed her opponent, Mary Read determined to escape.
There is every evidence that she wearied of the evil life she was
leading, and was determined to quit it; but, before she could carry
her intentions into effect, the ship on which she served was captured,
and taken to England, where the pirates expiated their crimes on the
gallows, Mary Read dying in prison before the day set for her
execution.

After some months spent in licentious revelry at Madagascar, Kidd set
out on a further cruise. During this voyage he learned that he had
been proscribed as a pirate, and a price set on his head. Strange as
it may appear, this news was a surprise to him. He seems to have
deceived himself into thinking that his acts of piracy were simply the
legitimate work of a privateersman. For a time he knew not what to do;
but as by this time the coarse pleasures of an outlaw's life were
distasteful to him, he determined to proceed to New York, and endeavor
to prove himself an honest man. This determination proved to be an
unfortunate one for him; for hardly had he arrived, when he was taken
into custody, and sent to England for trial. He made an able defence,
but was found guilty, and sentenced to be hanged; a sentence which was
executed some months later, in the presence of a vast multitude of
people, who applauded in the death of Kidd the end of the reign of
outlaws upon the ocean.




CHAPTER II.

     EXPEDITIONS AGAINST NEIGHBORING COLONIES. -- ROMANTIC CAREER
     OF SIR WILLIAM PHIPPS. -- QUELLING A MUTINY. -- EXPEDITIONS
     AGAINST QUEBEC.


While it was chiefly in expeditions against the buccaneers, or in the
defence of merchantmen against these predatory gentry, that the
American colonists gained their experience in naval warfare, there
were, nevertheless, some few naval expeditions fitted out by the
colonists against the forces of a hostile government. Both to the
north and south lay the territory of France and Spain,--England's
traditional enemies; and so soon as the colonies began to give
evidence of their value to the mother country, so soon were they
dragged into the quarrels in which the haughty mistress of the seas
was ever plunged. Of the southern colonies, South Carolina was
continually embroiled with Spain, owing to the conviction of the
Spanish that the boundaries of Florida--at that time a Spanish
colony--included the greater part of the Carolinas. For the purpose of
enforcing this idea, the Spaniards, in 1706, fitted out an expedition
of four ships-of-war and a galley, which, under the command of a
celebrated French admiral, was despatched to take Charleston. The
people of Charleston were in no whit daunted, and on the receipt of
the news of the expedition began preparations for resistance. They had
no naval vessels; but several large merchantmen, being in port, were
hastily provided with batteries, and a large galley was converted into
a flag-ship. Having no trained naval officers, the command of the
improvised squadron was tendered to a certain Lieut.-Col. Rhett, who
possessed the confidence of the colonists. Rhett accepted the command;
and when the attacking party cast anchor some miles below the city,
and landed their shore forces, he weighed anchor, and set out to
attack them. But the Spaniards avoided the conflict, and fled out to
sea, leaving their land forces to bear the brunt of battle. In this
action, more than half of the invaders were killed or taken prisoners.
Some days later, one of the Spanish vessels, having been separated
from her consorts, was discovered by Rhett, who attacked her, and
after a sharp fight captured her, bringing her with ninety prisoners
to Charleston.

But it was chiefly in expeditions against the French colonies to the
northward that the naval strength of the English colonies was exerted.
Particularly were the colonies of Port Royal, in Acadia, and the
French stronghold of Quebec coveted by the British, and they proved
fertile sources of contention in the opening years of the eighteenth
century. Although the movement for the capture of these colonies was
incited by the ruling authorities of Great Britain, its execution was
left largely to the colonists. One of the earliest of these
expeditions was that which sailed from Nantasket, near Boston, in
April, 1690, bound for the conquest of Port Royal.

This expedition was under the command of Sir William Phipps, a sturdy
colonist, whose life was not devoid of romantic episodes. Though his
ambitions were of the lowliest,--his dearest wish being "to command a
king's ship, and own a fair brick house in the Green Lane of North
Boston,"--he managed to win for himself no small amount of fame and
respect in the colonies. His first achievement was characteristic of
that time, when Spanish galleons, freighted with golden ingots, still
sailed the seas, when pirates buried their booty, and when the
treasures carried down in sunken ships were not brought up the next
day by divers clad in patented submarine armor. From a weather-beaten
old seaman, with whom he became acquainted while pursuing his trade
of ship-carpentering Phipps learned of a sunken wreck lying on the
sandy bottom many fathoms beneath the blue surface of the Gulf of
Mexico. The vessel had gone down fifty years before, and had carried
with her great store of gold and silver, which she was carrying from
the rich mines of Central and South America to the Court of Spain.
Phipps, laboriously toiling with adze and saw in his ship-yard,
listened to the story of the sailor, his blood coursing quicker in his
veins, and his ambition for wealth and position aroused to its fullest
extent. Here, then, thought he, was the opportunity of a lifetime.
Could he but recover the treasures carried down with the sunken ship,
he would have wealth and position in the colony. With these two allies
at his command, the task of securing a command in the king's navy
would be an easy one. But to seek out the sunken treasure required a
ship and seamen. Clearly his own slender means could never meet the
demands of so great an undertaking. Therefore, gathering together all
his small savings, William Phipps set sail for England, in the hopes
of interesting capitalists there in his scheme. By dint of indomitable
persistence, the unknown American ship-carpenter managed to secure the
influence of certain officials of high station in England, and finally
managed to get the assistance of the British admiralty. A frigate,
fully manned, was given him, and he set sail for the West Indies.

Once arrived in the waters of the Spanish Main, he began his search.
Cruising about the spot indicated by his seafaring informant as the
location of the sunken vessel, sounding and dredging occupied the time
of the treasure-seekers for months. The crew, wearying of the
fruitless search, began to murmur, and signs of mutiny were rife.
Phipps, filled with thoughts of the treasure for which he sought, saw
not at all the lowering looks, nor heard the half-uttered threats, of
the crew as he passed them. But finally the mutiny so developed that
he could no longer ignore its existence.

It was then the era of the buccaneers. Doubtless some of the crew had
visited the outlaws' rendezvous at New Providence, and had told their
comrades of the revelry and ease in which the sea robbers spent their
days. And so it happened that one day, as Phipps stood on the
quarter-deck vainly trying to choke down the nameless fear that had
begun to oppress him,--the fear that his life's venture had proved a
failure,--his crew came crowding aft, armed to the teeth, and loudly
demanded that the captain should abandon his foolish search, and lead
them on a fearless buccaneering cruise along the Spanish Main. The
mutiny was one which might well have dismayed the boldest sea captain.
The men were desperate, and well armed. Phipps was almost without
support; for his officers, by their irresolute and timid demeanor,
gave him little assurance of aid.

Standing on the quarter-deck, Phipps listened impatiently to the
complaints of the mutineers; but, when their spokesman called upon him
to lead them upon a piratical cruise, he lost all control of himself,
and, throwing all prudence to the winds, sprung into the midst of the
malcontents, and laid about him right manfully with his bare fists.
The mutineers were all well armed, but seemed loath to use their
weapons; and the captain, a tall, powerful man, soon awed them all
into submission.

Though he showed indomitable energy in overcoming obstacles, Phipps
was not destined to discover the object of his search at this time;
and, after several months' cruising, he was forced, by the leaky
condition of his vessel, to abandon the search. But, before leaving
the waters of the Spanish Main, he obtained enough information to
convince him that his plan was a practicable one, and no mere
visionary scheme. On reaching England, he went at once to some wealthy
noblemen, and, laying before them all the facts in his possession, so
interested them in the project that they readily agreed to supply him
with a fresh outfit. After a few weeks spent in organizing his
expedition, the treasure-seeker was again on the ocean, making his way
toward the Mexican Gulf. This time his search was successful, and a
few days' work with divers and dredges about the sunken ship brought
to light bullion and specie to the amount of more than a million and a
half dollars. As his ill success in the first expedition had embroiled
him with his crew, so his good fortune this time aroused the cupidity
of the sailors. Vague rumors of plotting against his life reached the
ears of Phipps. Examining further into the matter, he learned that the
crew was plotting to seize the vessel, divide the treasure, and set
out upon a buccaneering cruise. Alarmed at this intelligence, Phipps
strove to conciliate the seamen by offering them a share of the
treasure. Each man should receive a portion, he promised, even if he
himself had to pay it. The men agreed to this proposition; and so
well did Phipps keep his word with them on returning to England, that,
of the whole treasure, only about eighty thousand dollars remained to
him as his share. This, however, was an ample fortune for those times;
and with it Phipps returned to Boston, and began to devote himself to
the task of securing a command in the royal navy.

His first opportunity to distinguish himself came in the expedition of
1690 against Port Royal. Throughout the wars between France and
England, the French settlement of Port Royal had been a thorn in the
flesh of Massachusetts. From Port Royal, the trim-built speedy French
privateers put to sea, and seldom returned without bringing in their
wake some captured coaster or luckless fisherman hailing from the
colony of the Puritans. When the depredations of the privateers became
unbearable, Massachusetts bestirred herself, and the doughty Phipps
was sent with an expedition to reduce their unneighborly neighbor to
subjection. Seven vessels and two hundred and eighty-eight men were
put under the command of the lucky treasure-hunter. The expedition was
devoid of exciting or novel features. Port Royal was reached without
disaster, and the governor surrendered with a promptitude which should
have won immunity for the people of the village. But the Massachusetts
sailors had not undertaken the enterprise for glory alone, and they
plundered the town before taking to their ships again.

This expedition, however, was but an unimportant incident in the naval
annals of the colonies. It was followed quickly by an expedition of
much graver importance.

When Phipps returned after capturing and plundering Port Royal, he
found Boston vastly excited over the preparations for an expedition
against Quebec. The colony was in no condition to undertake the work
of conquest. Prolonged Indian wars had greatly depleted its treasury.
Vainly it appealed to England for aid, but, receiving no
encouragement, sturdily determined to undertake the expedition
unaided. Sailors were pressed from the merchant-shipping. Trained
bands, as the militia of that day was called, drilled in the streets,
and on the common. Subscription papers were being circulated; and
vessel owners were blandly given the choice between voluntarily
loaning their vessels to the colony, or having them peremptorily
seized. In this way a fleet of thirty-two vessels had been collected;
the largest of which was a ship called the "Six Friends," built for
the West India trade, and carrying forty-four guns. This armada was
manned by seamen picked up by a press so vigorous, that Gloucester,
the chief seafaring town of the colony, was robbed of two-thirds of
its men. Hardly had Capt. Phipps, flushed with victory, returned from
his Port Royal expedition, when he was given command of the armada
destined for the capture of Quebec.

Early in August the flotilla set sail from Boston Harbor. The day was
clear and warm, with a light breeze blowing. From his flag-ship Phipps
gave the signal for weighing anchor, and soon the decks of the vessels
thickly strewn about the harbor resounded to the tread of men about
the capstan. Thirty-two vessels of the squadron floated lightly on the
calm waters of the bay; and darting in and out among them were light
craft carrying pleasure-seekers who had come down to witness the
sailing of the fleet, friends and relatives of the sailors who were
there to say farewell, and the civic dignitaries who came to wish the
expedition success. One by one the vessels beat their way down the
bay, and, rounding the dangerous reef at the mouth of the harbor, laid
their course to the northward. It was a motley fleet of vessels. The
"Six Brothers" led the way, followed by brigs, schooners, and many
sloop-rigged fishing-smacks. With so ill-assorted a flotilla, it was
impossible to keep any definite sailing order. The first night
scattered the vessels far and wide, and thenceforward the squadron was
not united until it again came to anchor just above the mouth of the
St. Lawrence. It seemed as though the very elements had combined
against the voyagers. Though looking for summer weather, they
encountered the bitter gales of November. Only after they had all
safely entered the St. Lawrence, and were beyond injury from the
storms, did the gales cease. They had suffered all the injury that
tempestuous weather could do them, and they then had to chafe under
the enforced restraints of a calm.

Phipps had rallied his scattered fleet, and had proceeded up the great
river of the North to within three days' sail of Quebec, when the calm
overtook him. On the way up the river he had captured two French
luggers, and learned from his prisoners that Quebec was poorly
fortified, that the cannon on the redoubts were dismounted, and that
hardly two hundred men could be rallied to its defence. Highly elated
at this, the Massachusetts admiral pressed forward. He anticipated
that Quebec, like Port Royal, would surrender without striking a
blow. Visions of high honors, and perhaps even a commission in the
royal navy, floated across his brain. And while thus hurrying forward
his fleet, drilling his men, and building his air-castles, his further
progress was stopped by a dead calm which lasted three weeks.

How fatal to his hopes that calm was, Phipps, perhaps, never knew. The
information he had wrung from his French prisoners was absolutely
correct. Quebec at that time was helpless, and virtually at his mercy.
But, while the Massachusetts armada lay idly floating on the unruffled
bosom of the river, a man was hastening towards Quebec whose timely
arrival meant the salvation of the French citadel.

This man was Frontenac, then governor of the French colony, and one of
the most picturesque figures in American history. A soldier of France;
a polished courtier at the royal court; a hero on the battle-field,
and a favorite in the ball-room; a man poor in pocket, but rich in
influential connections,--Frontenac had come to the New World to seek
that fortune and position which he had in vain sought in the Old. When
the vague rumors of the hostile expedition of the Massachusetts colony
reached his ears, Frontenac was far from Quebec, toiling in the
western part of the colony. Wasting no time, he turned his steps
toward the threatened city. His road lay through an almost trackless
wilderness; his progress was impeded by the pelting rains of the
autumnal storms. But through forest and through rain he rode fiercely;
and at last as he burst from the forest, and saw towering before him
the rocks of Cape Diamond, a cry of joy burst from his lips. On the
broad, still bosom of the St Lawrence Bay floated not a single hostile
sail. The soldier had come in time.

With the governor in the city, all took courage, and the work of
preparation for the coming struggle went forward with a rush. Far and
wide throughout the parishes was spread the news of war, and daily
volunteers came flocking in to the defence. The ramparts were
strengthened, and cannon mounted. Volunteers and regulars drilled side
by side, until the four thousand men in the city were converted into a
well-disciplined body of troops. And all the time the sentinels on the
Saut au Matelot were eagerly watching the river for the first sign of
the English invaders.

It was before dawn, on the morning of Oct. 16, that the people of the
little city, and the soldiery in the tents, were awakened by the alarm
raised by the sentries. All rushed to the brink of the heights, and
peered eagerly out into the darkness. Far down the river could be seen
the twinkling lights of vessels. As the eager watchers strove to count
them, other lights appeared upon the scene, moving to and fro, but
with a steady advance upon Quebec. The gray dawn, breaking in the
east, showed the advancing fleet. Frontenac and his lieutenants
watched the ships of the enemy round the jutting headland of the Point
of Orleans; and, by the time the sun had risen, thirty-four hostile
craft were at anchor in the basin of Quebec.

The progress of the fleet up the river, from the point at which it had
been so long delayed, had been slow, and greatly impeded by the
determined hostility of the settlers along the banks. The sailors at
their work were apt to be startled by the whiz of a bullet; and an
inquiry as to the cause would have probably discovered some crouching
sharp-shooter, his long rifle in his hand, hidden in a clump of bushes
along the shore. Bands of armed men followed the fleet up the stream,
keeping pace with the vessels, and occasionally affording gentle
reminders of their presence in the shape of volleys of rifle-balls
that sung through the crowded decks of the transports, and gave the
sailor lads a hearty disgust for this river fighting. Phipps tried
repeatedly to land shore parties to clear the banks of skirmishers,
and to move on the city by land. As often, however, as he made the
effort, his troops were beaten back by the ambushed sharp-shooters,
and his boats returned to the ships, bringing several dead and
wounded.

While the soldiery on the highlands of Quebec were eagerly examining
the hostile fleet, the invaders were looking with wonder and
admiration at the scene of surpassing beauty spread out before them.
Parkman, the historian and lover of the annals of the French in
America, thus describes it:--

"When, after his protracted voyage, Phipps sailed into the basin of
Quebec, one of the grandest scenes on the western continent opened
upon his sight. The wide expanse of waters, the lofty promontory
beyond, and the opposing Heights of Levi, the cataract of Montmorenci,
the distant range of the Laurentian Mountains, the warlike rock with
its diadem of walls and towers, the roofs of the Lower Town
clustering on the strand beneath, the Chateau St. Louis perched at the
brink of the cliff, and over it the white banner, spangled with
_fleurs de lis_, flaunting defiance in the clear autumnal air."

Little time was spent, however, in admiration of the scene. When the
click of the last chain-cable had ceased, and, with their anchors
reposing at the bottom of the stream, the ships swung around with
their bows to the current, a boat put off from the flag-ship bearing
an officer intrusted with a note from Phipps to the commandant of the
fort. The reception of this officer was highly theatrical. Half way to
the shore he was taken into a French canoe, blindfolded, and taken
ashore. The populace crowded about him as he landed, hooting and
jeering him as he was led through winding, narrow ways, up stairways,
and over obstructions, until at last the bandage was torn from his
eyes, and he found himself in the presence of Frontenac. The French
commander was clad in a brilliant uniform, and surrounded by his
staff, gay in warlike finery. With courtly courtesy he asked the envoy
for his letter, which, proving to be a curt summons to surrender, he
answered forthwith in a stinging speech. The envoy, abashed, asked for
a written answer.

"No," thundered Frontenac, "I will answer your master only by the
mouths of my cannon, that he may learn that a man like me is not to be
summoned after this fashion. Let him do his best, and I will do mine."

The envoy returned to his craft, and made his report. The next day
hostilities opened. Wheeling his ships into line before the
fortifications, Phipps opened a heavy fire upon the city. From the
frowning ramparts on the heights, Frontenac's cannon answered in kind.
Fiercely the contest raged until nightfall, and vast was the
consumption of gunpowder; but damage done on either side was but
little. All night the belligerents rested on their arms; but, at
daybreak, the roar of the cannonade recommenced.

The gunners of the opposing forces were now upon their mettle, and the
gunnery was much better than the day before. A shot from the shore cut
the flagstaff of the admiral's ship, and the cross of St. George fell
into the river. Straightway a canoe put out from the shore, and with
swift, strong paddle-strokes was guided in chase of the floating
trophy. The fire of the fleet was quickly concentrated upon the
adventurous canoeists. Cannon-balls and rifle-bullets cut the water
about them; but their frail craft survived the leaden tempest, and
they captured the trophy, and bore it off in triumph.

Phipps felt that the incident was an unfavorable omen, and would
discourage his men. He cast about in his mind for a means of
retaliation. Far over the roofs of the city rose a tapering spire,
that of the cathedral in the Upper Town. On this spire, the devout
Catholics of the French city had hung a picture of the Holy Family as
an invocation of Divine aid. Through his spy-glass, Phipps could see
that some strange object hung from the steeple, and, suspecting its
character, commanded the gunners to try to knock it down. For hours
the Puritans wasted their ammunition in this vain target-practice, but
to no avail. The picture still hung on high; and the devout Frenchmen
ascribed its escape to a miracle, although its destruction would have
been more miraculous still.

It did not take long to convince Phipps that in this contest his fleet
was getting badly worsted, and he soon withdrew his vessels to a place
of safety. The flag-ship had been fairly riddled with shot; and her
rigging was so badly cut, that she could only get out of range of the
enemy's guns by cutting her cables, and drifting away with the
current. Her example was soon followed by the remaining vessels.

Sorely crestfallen, Phipps abandoned the fight, and prepared to return
to Boston. His voyage thither was stormy; and three or four of his
vessels never were heard of, having been dashed to pieces by the
waves, or cast away upon the iron-bound coast of Nova Scotia or Maine.
His expedition was the most costly in lives and in treasure ever
undertaken by a single colony, and, despite its failure, forms the
most notable incident in the naval annals of the colonies prior to the
Revolution.

The French colonies continued to be a fruitful source of war and
turmoil. Many were the joint military and naval expeditions fitted out
against them by the British colonies. Quebec, Louisbourg, and Port
Royal were all threatened; and the two latter were captured by
colonial expeditions. From a naval point of view, these expeditions
were but trifling. They are of some importance, however, in that they
gave the colonists an opportunity to try their prowess on the ocean;
and in this irregular service were bred some sailors who fought right
valiantly for the rebellious colonies against the king, and others who
did no less valiant service under the royal banner.




CHAPTER III.

     OPENING OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION. -- THE AFFAIR OF THE
     SCHOONER "ST. JOHN." -- THE PRESS-GANG AND ITS WORK. -- THE
     SLOOP "LIBERTY." -- DESTRUCTION OF THE "GASPEE." -- THE
     BOSTON TEA-PARTY.


It is unnecessary to enter into an account of the causes that led up
to the revolt of the American Colonies against the oppression of King
George and his subservient Parliament. The story of the Stamp Act, the
indignation of the Colonies, their futile attempts to convince
Parliament of the injustice of the measure, the stern measures adopted
by the British to put down the rising insubordination, the Boston
Massacre, and the battles at Concord and Lexington are familiar to
every American boy. But not every young American knows that almost the
first act of open resistance to the authority of the king took place
on the water, and was to some extent a naval action.

The revenue laws, enacted by the English Parliament as a means of
extorting money from the Colonies, were very obnoxious to the people
of America. Particularly did the colonists of Rhode Island protest
against them, and seldom lost an opportunity to evade the payment of
the taxes.

Between Providence and Newport, illicit trade flourished; and the
waters of Narragansett Bay were dotted with the sail of small craft
carrying cargoes on which no duties had ever been paid. In order to
stop this nefarious traffic, armed vessels were stationed in the Bay,
with orders to chase and search all craft suspected of smuggling. The
presence of these vessels gave great offence to the colonists, and the
inflexible manner in which the naval officers discharged their duty
caused more than one open defiance of the authority of King George.

The first serious trouble to grow out of the presence of the British
cruisers in the bay was the affair of the schooner "St. John." This
vessel was engaged in patrolling the waters of the bay in search of
smugglers. While so engaged, her commander, Lieut. Hill, learned that
a brig had discharged a suspicious cargo at night near Howland's
Ferry. Running down to that point to investigate, the king's officers
found the cargo to consist of smuggled goods; and, leaving a few men
in charge, the cruiser hastily put out to sea in pursuit of the
smuggler. The swift sailing schooner soon overtook the brig, and the
latter was taken in to Newport as a prize. Although this affair
occurred early in 1764, the sturdy colonists even then had little
liking for the officers of the king. The sailors of the "St. John,"
careless of the evident dislike of the citizens of the town, swaggered
about the streets, boasting of their capture, and making merry at the
expense of the Yankees. Two or three fights between sailors and
townspeople so stirred up the landsmen, that they determined to
destroy the "St. John," and had actually fitted up an armed sloop for
that purpose, when a second man-of-war appeared in the harbor and put
a final stopper to the project. Though thus balked of their revenge,
the townspeople showed their hatred for the king's navy by seizing a
battery, and firing several shots at the two armed vessels, but
without effect.

During the same year, the little town of Newport again gave evidence
of the growth of the revolutionary spirit. This time the good old
British custom of procuring sailors for the king's ships by a system
of kidnapping, commonly known as impressment, was the cause of the
outbreak. For some months the British man-of-war "Maidstone" lay in
the harbor of Newport, idly tugging at her anchors. It was a period of
peace, and her officers had nothing to occupy their attention.
Therefore they devoted themselves to increasing the crew of the vessel
by means of raids upon the taverns along the water-front of the city.

The seafaring men of Newport knew little peace while the "Maidstone"
was in port. The king's service was the dread of every sailor; and,
with the press-gang nightly walking the streets, no sailor could feel
secure. All knew the life led by the sailors on the king's ships.
Those were the days when the cat-o'-nine-tails flourished, and the
command of a beardless bit of a midshipmen was enough to send a poor
fellow to the gratings, to have his back cut to pieces by the
merciless lash. The Yankee sailors had little liking for this phase of
sea-life, and they gave the men-of-war a wide berth.

Often it happened, however, that a party of jolly mariners sitting
over their pipes and grog in the snug parlor of some seashore tavern,
spinning yarns of the service they had seen on the gun-decks of his
Majesty's ships, or of shipwreck and adventure in the merchant
service, would start up and listen in affright, as the measured tramp
of a body of men came up the street. Then came the heavy blow on the
door.

"Open in the king's name," shouts a gruff voice outside; and the
entrapped sailors, overturning the lights, spring for doors and
windows, in vain attempts to escape the fate in store for them. The
press-gang seldom returned to the ship empty handed, and the luckless
tar who once fell into their clutches was wise to accept his capture
good-naturedly; for the bos'n's cat was the remedy commonly prescribed
for sulkiness.

As long as the "Maidstone" lay in the harbor of Newport, raids such as
this were of common occurrence. The people of the city grumbled a
little; but it was the king's will, and none dared oppose it. The
wives and sweethearts of the kidnapped sailors shed many a bitter tear
over the disappearance of their husbands and lovers; but what were the
tears of women to King George? And so the press-gang of the
"Maidstone" might have continued to enjoy unopposed the stirring sport
of hunting men like beasts, had the leaders not committed one
atrocious act of inhumanity that roused the long-suffering people to
resistance.

One breezy afternoon, a stanch brig, under full sail, came up the bay,
and entered the harbor of Newport. Her sides were weather-beaten, and
her dingy sails and patched cordage showed that she had just completed
her long voyage. Her crew, a fine set of bronzed and hardy sailors,
were gathered on her forecastle, eagerly regarding the cluster of
cottages that made up the little town of Newport. In those cottages
were many loved ones, wives, mothers, and sweethearts, whom the brave
fellows had not seen for long and weary months; for the brig was just
returning from a voyage to the western coast of Africa.

It is hard to describe the feelings aroused by the arrival of a ship
in port after a long voyage. From the outmost end of the longest
wharf the relatives and friends of the sailors eagerly watch the
approaching vessel, striving to find in her appearance some token of
the safety of the loved ones on board. If a flag hangs at half-mast in
the rigging, bitter is the suspense, and fearful the dread, of each
anxious waiter, lest her husband or lover or son be the unfortunate
one whose death is mourned. And on the deck of the ship the excitement
is no less great. Even the hardened breast of the sailor swells with
emotion when he first catches sight of his native town, after long
months of absence. With eyes sharpened by constant searching for
objects upon the broad bosom of the ocean, he scans the waiting crowd,
striving to distinguish in the distance some well-beloved face. His
spirits are light with the happy anticipation of a season in port with
his loved ones, and he discharges his last duties before leaving the
ship with a blithe heart.

So it was with the crew of the home-coming brig. Right merrily they
sung out their choruses as they pulled at the ropes, and brought the
vessel to anchor. The rumble of the hawser through the hawseholes was
sweet music to their ears; and so intent were they upon the crowd on
the dock, that they did not notice two long-boats which had put off
from the man-of-war, and were pulling for the brig. The captain of the
merchantman, however, noticed the approach of the boats, and wondered
what it meant. "Those fellows think I've smuggled goods aboard," said
he. "However, they can spend their time searching if they want. I've
nothing in the hold I'm afraid to have seen."

The boats were soon alongside; and two or three officers, with a
handful of jackies, clambered aboard the brig.

"Muster your men aft, captain," said the leader, scorning any response
to the captain's salutation. "The king has need of a few fine fellows
for his service."

"Surely, sir, you are not about to press any of these men," protested
the captain. "They are just returning after a long voyage, and have
not yet seen their families."

"What's that to me, sir?" was the response. "Muster your crew without
more words."

Sullenly the men came aft, and ranged themselves in line before the
boarding-officers. Each feared lest he might be one of those chosen to
fill the ship's roll of the "Maidstone;" yet each cherished the hope
that he might be spared to go ashore, and see the loved ones whose
greeting he had so fondly anticipated.

The boarding-officers looked the crew over, and, after consulting
together, gruffly ordered the men to go below, and pack up their
traps.

"Surely you don't propose to take my entire crew?" said the captain of
the brig in wondering indignation.

"I know my business, sir," was the gruff reply, "and I do not propose
to suffer any more interference."

The crew of the brig soon came on deck, carrying their bags of
clothes, and were ordered into the man-o'-war's boats, which speedily
conveyed them to their floating prison. Their fond visions of home had
been rudely dispelled. They were now enrolled in his Majesty's
service, and subject to the will of a blue-coated tyrant. This was all
their welcome home.

When the news of this cruel outrage reached the shore, the indignation
of the people knew no bounds. The thought of their fellow-townsmen
thus cruelly deprived of their liberty, at the conclusion of a long
and perilous voyage, set the whole village in a turmoil. Wild plots
were concocted for the destruction of the man-of-war, that, sullen and
unyielding, lay at her anchorage in the harbor. But the wrong done was
beyond redress. The captured men were not to be liberated. There was
no ordnance in the little town to compete with the guns of the
"Maidstone," and the enraged citizens could only vent their anger by
impotent threats and curses. Bands of angry men and boys paraded the
streets, crying, "Down with the press-gang," and invoking the
vengeance of Heaven upon the officers of the man-of-war. Finally, they
found a boat belonging to the "Maidstone" lying at a wharf. Dragging
this ashore, the crowd procured ropes, and, after pulling the captured
trophy up and down the streets, took it to the common in front of the
Court-House, where it was burned in the presence of a great crowd,
which heaped execrations upon the heads of the officers of the
"Maidstone," and King George's press-gang.

After this occurrence, there was a long truce between the people of
Newport and the officers of the British navy. But the little town was
intolerant of oppression, and the revolutionary spirit broke out again
in 1769. Historians have eulogized Boston as the cradle of liberty,
and by the British pamphleteers of that era the Massachusetts city
was often called a hot-bed of rebellion. It would appear, however,
that, while the people of Boston were resting contentedly under the
king's rule, the citizens of Newport were chafing under the yoke, and
were quick to resist any attempts at tyranny.

It is noticeable, that, in each outbreak of the people of Newport
against the authority of the king's vessels, the vigor of the
resistance increased, and their acts of retaliation became bolder.
Thus in the affair of the "St. John" the king's vessel was fired on,
while in the affair of the "Maidstone" the royal property was actually
destroyed. In the later affairs with the sloop "Liberty" and the
schooner "Gaspee," the revolt of the colonists was still more open,
and the consequences more serious.

In 1769 the armed sloop "Liberty," Capt. Reid, was stationed in
Narragansett Bay for the purpose of enforcing the revenue laws. Her
errand made her obnoxious to the people on the coast, and the
extraordinary zeal of her captain in discharging his duty made her
doubly detested by seafaring people afloat or shore.

On the 17th of July the "Liberty," while cruising near the mouth of
the bay, sighted a sloop and a brig under full sail, bound out.
Promptly giving chase, the armed vessel soon overtook the merchantmen
sufficiently to send a shot skipping along the crests of the waves, as
a polite Invitation to stop. The two vessels hove to, and a boat was
sent from the man-of-war to examine their papers, and see if all was
right. Though no flaw was found in the papers of either vessel, Capt.
Reid determined to take them back to Newport, which was done. In the
harbor the two vessels were brought to anchor under the guns of the
armed sloop, and without any reason or explanation were kept there
several days. After submitting to this wanton detention for two days,
Capt. Packwood of the brig went on board the "Liberty" to make a
protest to Capt. Reid, and at the same time to get some wearing
apparel taken from his cabin at the time his vessel had been captured.
On reaching the deck of the armed vessel, he found Capt. Reid absent,
and his request for his property was received with ridicule. Hot words
soon led to violence; and as Capt. Packwood stepped in to his boat to
return to his ship, he was fired at several times, none of the shots
taking effect.

[Illustration: Siege of Charleston, S.C., May, 1780.
Copyright, 1874, by Johnson, Wilson & Co.]

The news of this assault spread like wildfire in the little town. The
people congregated on the streets, demanding reparation. The
authorities sent a message to Capt. Reid, demanding that the man who
fired the shots be given up. Soon a boat came from the "Liberty,"
bringing a man who was handed over to the authorities as the culprit.
A brief examination into the case showed that the man was not the
guilty party, and that his surrender was a mere subterfuge. The people
then determined to be trifled with no longer, and made preparations to
take vengeance upon the insolent oppressors.

The work of preparation went on quietly; and by nightfall a large
number of men had agreed to assemble at a given signal, and march upon
the enemy. Neither the authorities of the town nor the officers on the
threatened vessel were given any intimation of the impending outbreak.
Yet the knots of men who stood talking earnestly on the street
corners, or looked significantly at the trim navy vessel lying in the
harbor, might have well given cause for suspicion.

That night, just as the dusk was deepening into dark, a crowd of men
marched down the street to a spot where a number of boats lay hidden
in the shadow of a wharf. Embarking in these silently, they bent to
the oars at the whispered word of command; and the boats were soon
gliding swiftly over the smooth, dark surface of the harbor, toward
the sloop-of-war. As they drew near, the cry of the lookout rang
out,--

"Boat ahoy!"

No answer. The boats, crowded with armed men, still advanced.

"Boat ahoy! Answer, or I'll fire."

And, receiving no response, the lookout gave the alarm, and the watch
came tumbling up, just in time to be driven below or disarmed by the
crowd of armed men that swarmed over the gunwale of the vessel. There
was no bloodshed. The crew of the "Liberty" was fairly surprised, and
made no resistance. The victorious citizens cut the sloop's cables,
and allowed her to float on shore near Long Wharf. Then, feeling sure
that their prey could not escape them, they cut away her masts,
liberated their captives, and taking the sloop's boats, dragged them
through the streets to the common, where they were burned on a
triumphal bonfire, amid the cheers of the populace.

But the exploit was not to end here. With the high tide the next day,
the hulk of the sloop floated away, and drifted ashore again on Goat
Island. When night fell, some adventurous spirits stealthily went
over, and, applying the torch to the stranded ship, burned it to the
water's edge. Thus did the people of Newport resist tyranny.

It may well be imagined that so bold a defiance of the royal authority
caused a great sensation. Prolonged and vigorous were the attempts of
the servants of the king to find out the rebellious parties who had
thus destroyed his Majesty's property. But their efforts were in vain.
The identity of the captors of the "Liberty" was carefully concealed,
and even to this day none of their names has become known. But, before
the people of Newport had done talking about this affair, another
outbreak occurred, which cast the capture and destruction of the
"Liberty" into the shade.

This was the affair of the "Gaspee,"--considered by many historians
the virtual opening of the revolutionary struggle of the Colonies
against Great Britain. The "Gaspee," like the "St. John" and the
"Liberty," was an armed vessel stationed in Narragansett Bay to
enforce the revenue. She was commanded by Lieut. Dudingston of the
British navy, and carried eight guns. By pursuing the usual tactics of
the British officers stationed on the American coast, Duddingston had
made himself hated; and his vessel was marked for destruction. Not a
boat could pass between Providence and Newport without being subjected
to search by the crew of the "Gaspee;" and the Yankee sailors swore
darkly, that, when the time was ripe, they would put an end to the
Britisher's officious meddling.

The propitious time arrived one bright June morning in the year 1772,
when the "Gaspee" gave chase to a Newport packet which was scudding
for Providence, under the command of Capt. Thomas Lindsey. The armed
vessel was a clean-cut little craft, and, carrying no heavier load
than a few light guns of the calibre then in vogue, could overhaul
with ease almost any merchantman on the coast. So on this eventful day
she was rapidly overhauling the chase, when, by a blunder of the
pilot, she was run hard and fast upon a spit of sand running out from
Namquit Point, and thus saw her projected prize sail away in triumph.

But the escape of her prize was not the greatest disaster that was to
befall the "Gaspee" that day. Lindsey, finding himself safe from the
clutches of the enemy, continued his course to Providence, and on
arriving at that city reported the condition of the "Gaspee" to a
prominent citizen, who straightway determined to organize an
expedition for the destruction of the pest of marine traffic. He
therefore gave orders to a trusty ship-master to collect eight of the
largest long-boats in the harbor, and, having muffled their oars and
rowlocks, place them at Fenner's Wharf, near a noted tavern.

That night, soon after sunset, as the tradesmen were shutting up their
shops, and the laboring men were standing on the streets talking after
their day's work, a man passed down the middle of each street, beating
a drum, and crying aloud,--

"The schooner 'Gaspee' is ashore on Namquit Point. Who will help
destroy her?"

All who expressed a desire to join in the enterprise were directed to
repair to the Sabin House; and thither, later in the evening, flocked
many of the townspeople carrying guns, powder-flasks, and
bullet-pouches. Within the house all was life and bustle. The great
hall was crowded with determined men, discussing the plan of attack.
Guns stood in every corner, while down in the kitchen a half a dozen
men stood about a glowing fire busily casting bullets. At last, all
being prepared, the party crossed the street to the dock, and
embarked,--a veteran sea-captain taking the tiller of each boat.

On the way down the harbor the boats stopped, and took aboard a number
of paving-stones and stout clubs, as weapons for those who had no
muskets. After this stoppage the boats continued on their way, until,
when within sixty yards of the "Gaspee," the long-drawn hail. "Who
comes there?" rang out over the water. No answer was made, and the
lookout quickly repeated his hail. Capt. Whipple, one of the leaders of
the attack, then responded,--

"I want to come on board."

Dudingston, who was below at the time, rushed on deck, exclaiming,
"Stand off. You can't come aboard."

As Dudingston stood at the side of the "Gaspee" warning off the
assailants, he presented a good mark; and Joseph Bucklin, who pulled
an oar in the leading boat, turned to a comrade and said, "Ephe, lend
me your gun, and I can kill that fellow." The gun was accordingly
handed him, and he fired. Dudingston fell to the deck. Just as the
shot was fired, the leader of the assailants cried out,--

"I am sheriff of the county of Kent. I am come for the commander of
this vessel; and have him I will, dead or alive. Men, spring to your
oars."

In an instant the boats were under the lee of the schooner, and the
attacking party was clambering over the side. The first man to attempt
to board seized a rope, and was clambering up, when one of the British
cut the rope, and let him fall into the water. He quickly recovered
himself, and was soon on deck, where he found his comrades driving the
crew of the "Gaspee" below, and meeting with but little resistance.

A surgeon who was with the party of Americans led the boarders below,
and began the task of tying the hands of the captured crew with strong
tarred cord. While thus engaged, he was called on deck.

"What is wanted, Mr. Brown?" asked he, calling the name of the person
inquiring for him.

"Don't call names, but go immediately into the cabin," was the
response. "There is one wounded, and will bleed to death."

The surgeon went into the captain's cabin, and there found Dudingston,
severely wounded, and bleeding freely. Seeing no cloth suitable for
bandages, the surgeon opened his vest, and began to tear his own shirt
into strips to bind up the wound. With the tenderest care the hurt of
the injured officer was attended to; and he was gently lowered into a
boat, and rowed up the river to Providence.

The Americans remained in possession of the captured schooner, and
quickly began the work of demolition. In the captain's cabin were a
number of bottles of liquor, and for these the men made a rush; but
the American surgeon dashed the bottles to pieces with the heels of
his heavy boots, so that no scenes of drunkenness were enacted. After
breaking up the furniture and trappings of the craft, her people were
bundled over the side into the boats of their captors, and the torch
was set to the schooner. The boats layoff a little distance until the
roaring flames satisfied them that the "Gaspee" would never again
annoy American merchantmen. As the schooner's shotted guns went off
one after the other, the Americans turned their boats' prows homeward,
and soon dispersed quietly to their homes.

It is almost incredible that the identity of the parties to this
expedition was kept a secret until long after the Revolution. Although
the British authorities made the most strenuous efforts, and offered
huge rewards for the detection of the culprits, not one was discovered
until after the Colonies had thrown off the royal yoke, when they came
boldly forward, and boasted of their exploit.

After the destruction of the "Gaspee," the colonists in no way openly
opposed the authority of the king, until the time of those stirring
events immediately preceding the American Revolution. Little was done
on the water to betoken the hatred of the colonists for King George.
The turbulent little towns of Providence and Newport subsided, and the
scene of revolt was transferred to Massachusetts, and particularly to
Boston. In the streets of Boston occurred the famous massacre, and at
the wharves of Boston lay the three ships whose cargo aroused the ire
of the famous Boston tea-party.

To almost every young American the story of the Boston tea-party is as
familiar as his own name,--how the British Parliament levied a tax
upon tea, how the Colonies refused to pay it; and determined to use
none of the article; how British merchants strove to force the tea
upon the unwilling colonists, and how the latter refused to permit the
vessels to unload, and in some cases drove them back to England. At
Philadelphia, Annapolis, Charleston, Newport, and Providence,
disturbances took place over the arrival of the tea-ships; but at
Boston the turbulence was the greatest.

The story of that dramatic scene in the great drama of American
revolution has been told too often to bear repetition. The arrival of
three ships laden with tea aroused instant indignation in the New
England city. Mass meetings were held, the captains of the vessels
warned not to attempt to unload their cargoes, and the consignees were
terrified into refusing to have any thing to do with the tea.

In the midst of an indignation meeting held at the Old South Church, a
shrill war-whoop resounded from one of the galleries. The startled
audience, looking in that direction, saw a person disguised as a
Mohawk Indian, who wildly waved his arms and shouted,--

"Boston Harbor, a tea-pot to-night! Hurrah for Griffin's Wharf."

In wild excitement the meeting adjourned, and the people crowded out
into the streets. Other Indians were seen running down the streets in
the direction of Griffin's Wharf, where the tea-ships were moored, and
thither the people turned their steps.

On reaching the wharf, a scene of wild confusion was witnessed. The
three tea-ships lay side by side at the wharf. Their decks were
crowded with men, many of them wearing the Indian disguise. The
hatches were off the hatchways; and the chests of tea were being
rapidly passed up, broken open, and thrown overboard. There was little
noise, as the workers seemed to be well disciplined, and went about
their work in the bright moonlight with systematic activity. In about
three hours the work was done. Three hundred and forty-two chests of
tea had been thrown overboard, and the rioters dispersed quietly to
their homes.

The incident of the destruction of the tea in Boston Harbor was the
last of the petty incidents that led up to the American Revolution.
Following quick upon it came Lexington, Concord, and Bunker
Hill,--then the great conflict was fairly under way, and the Colonies
were fighting for liberty. What part the sailors of the colonies took
in that struggle, it is the purpose of this book to recount.




CHAPTER IV.

     THE BEGINNING OF THE NAVY. -- LEXINGTON AND CONCORD. -- A
     BLOW STRUCK IN MAINE. -- CAPTURE OF THE "MARGARETTA." --
     GEN. WASHINGTON AND THE NAVY. -- WORK OF CAPT. MANLY.


In treating of the history of the navy during the war of the
Revolution, we must always bear in mind the fact, that, during the
greater part of that war, there was no navy. Indeed, the subject
presents much the same aspect as the celebrated chapter on snakes in
Ireland, which consisted of exactly six words, "There are no snakes in
Ireland." So many of the episodes and incidents of the Revolutionary
war that we chronicle as part of the naval history of that struggle
are naval only in that they took place on the water. The participants
in them were often longshoremen, fishermen, or privateersmen, and but
seldom sailors enrolled in the regular navy of the united colonies.
Nevertheless, these irregular forces accomplished some results that
would be creditable to a navy in the highest state of efficiency and
discipline.

The expense of building vessels-of-war, and the difficulty, amounting
even to impossibility, of procuring cannon for their armament,
deterred the Colonies from equipping a naval force. All the energies
of the revolutionists were directed towards organizing and equipping
the army. The cause of independence upon the ocean was left to shift
for itself. But, as the war spread, the depredations of British
vessels along the coast became so intolerable that some colonies
fitted out armed vessels for self-protection. Private enterprise sent
out many privateers to prey upon British commerce, so that the
opening months of the year 1776 saw many vessels on the ocean to
support the cause of the Colonies. To man these vessels, there were
plenty of sailors; for even at that early day New England had begun to
develop that race of hardy seamen for which she is still noted in this
day of decadence in the American marine. There was, however, a sad
lack of trained officers to command the vessels of the infant navy.
Many Americans were enrolled on the lists of the ships flying the
royal banner of England, but most of these remained in the British
service. The men, therefore, who were to command the ships of the
colonies, were trained in the rough school of the merchant service,
and had smelt gunpowder only when resisting piratical attacks, or in
serving themselves as privateers.

For these reasons the encounters and exploits that we shall consider
as being part of the naval operations of the Revolutionary war were of
a kind that would to-day be regarded as insignificant skirmishes; and
the naval officer of to-day would look with supreme contempt upon most
of his brethren of '76, as so many untrained sea-guerillas.
Nevertheless, the achievements of some of the seamen of the Revolution
are not insignificant, even when compared with exploits of the era of
Farragut; and it must be remembered that the efforts of the devoted
men were directed against a nation that had in commission at the
opening of the war three hundred and fifty-three vessels, and even
then bore proudly the title conferred upon her by the consent of all
nations,--"The Mistress of the Seas."

It was on the 19th of April, 1775, that the redoubtable Major Pitcairn
and his corps of scarlet-coated British regulars shot down the
colonists on the green at Lexington, and then fled back to Boston
followed by the enraged minute-men, who harassed the retreating
redcoats with a constant fire of musketry. The news of the battle
spread far and wide; and wherever the story was told, the colonists
began arming themselves, and preparing for resistance to the
continually increasing despotism of the British authorities.

On the 9th of May, a coasting schooner from Boston put into the little
seaport of Machias on the coast of Maine. The people of the little
town gathered at the wharf, and from the sailors first heard the story
of Lexington and Concord. The yoke of the British Government had
rested lightly on the shoulders of the people of Machias. Far from
the chief cities of the New World, they had heard little of the
continued dissensions between the Colonies and the home Government,
and they heard the story of the rebellion with amazement. But however
unprepared they might have been for the news of the outbreak, their
sympathies went warmly out to their struggling brethren, and they
determined to place themselves shoulder to shoulder with the
Massachusetts colonists in the fight against the oppression of the
British. Their opportunity for action came that very night.

As the sturdy young colonists stood on the deck listening to the
stories of the newly arrived sailors, they could see floating lightly
at anchor near the wharf a trimly rigged schooner flying the ensign of
the British navy. This craft was the "Margaretta," an armed schooner
acting as convoy to two sloops that were then loading with ship-timber
to be used in the service of the king.

The Boston sailors had not yet finished their narrative of the two
battles, when the thought occurred to some of the adventurous
listeners that they might strike a retaliatory blow by capturing the
"Margaretta." Therefore, bidding the sailors to say nothing to the
British of Lexington and Concord, they left the wharf and dispersed
through the town, seeking for recruits. That same evening, sixty
stalwart men assembled in a secluded farm-house, and laid their plans
for the destruction of the schooner. It was then Saturday night, and
the conspirators determined to attack the vessel the next morning
while the officers were at church. All were to proceed by twos and
threes to the wharf, in order that no suspicion might be aroused. Once
at the water-side, they would rush to their boats, and carry the
schooner by boarding.

Sunday morning dawned clear, and all seemed propitious for the
conspirators. The "Margaretta" had then been in port for more than a
week, and her officers had no reason to doubt the loyalty and
friendship of the inhabitants: no whisper of the occurrences in
Massachusetts, nor any hint of the purposes of the people of Machias,
had reached their ears. Therefore, on this peaceful May morning, Capt.
Moore donned his full-dress uniform, and with his brother officers
proceeded to the little church in the village.

Every thing then seemed favorable to the success of the adventure.
The "Margaretta," manned by a sleepy crew, and deserted by her
officers, lay within easy distance of the shore. It seemed as though
the conspirators had only to divide into two parties; and while the
one surrounded the church, and captured the worshipping officers, the
others might descend upon the schooner, and easily make themselves
masters of all.

But the plot failed. History fails to record just how or why the
suspicions of Capt. Moore were aroused. Whether it was that the wary
captain noticed the absence of most of the young men of the
congregation, or whether he saw the conspirators assembling on the
dock, is not known. But certain it is that the good dominie in the
pulpit, and the pious people in the pews, were mightily startled by
the sudden uprisal of Capt. Moore, who sprang from his seat, and,
calling upon his officers to follow him, leaped through the great
window of the church, and ran like mad for the shore, followed by the
rest of the naval party.

There was no more church for the good people of Machias that morning.
Even the preacher came down from his pulpit to stare through his
horn-rimmed glasses at the retreating forms of his whilom listeners.
And, as he stood in blank amazement at the church door, he saw a large
party of the missing young men of his congregation come dashing down
the street in hot pursuit of the retreating mariners. In their hands,
the pursuers carried sabres, cutlasses, old flint-lock muskets,
cumbrous horse-pistols, scythes, and reaping-hooks. The pursued wore
no arms; and, as no boat awaited them at the shore, their case looked
hopeless indeed. But the old salt left in charge of the schooner was
equal to the occasion. The unsabbath-like tumult on the shore quickly
attracted his attention, and with unfeigned astonishment he had
observed his commander's unseemly egress from the church. But, when
the armed band of colonists appeared upon the scene, he ceased to rub
his eyes in wonder, and quickly loaded up a swivel gun, with which he
let fly, over the heads of his officers, and in dangerous proximity to
the advancing colonists. This fire checked the advance of the
conspirators; and, while they wavered and hung back, a boat put off
from the schooner, and soon took the officers aboard. Then, after
firing a few solid shot over the town, merely as an admonition of what
might be expected if the hot-headed young men persisted in their
violent outbreaks, the "Margaretta" dropped down the bay to a more
secluded anchorage.

The defeated conspirators were vastly chagrined at the miscarriage of
their plot; but, nothing daunted, they resolved to attempt to carry
the schooner by assault, since strategy had failed. Therefore, early
the next morning, four young men seized upon a sloop, and, bringing
her up to the wharf, cheered lustily. A crowd soon gathered, and the
project was explained, and volunteers called for. Thirty-five hardy
sailors and woodmen hastily armed themselves with muskets, pitchforks,
and axes; and, after taking aboard a small supply of provisions, the
sloop dropped down the harbor toward the "Margaretta." The captain of
the threatened schooner had observed through his spy-glass the
proceedings at the wharf, and suspected his danger. He was utterly
ignorant of the reason for this sudden hostility on the part of the
people of Machias. He knew nothing of the quarrel that had thus
provoked the rebellion of the colonies. Therefore, he sought to avoid
a conflict; and, upon the approach of the sloop, he hoisted his
anchor, and fled down the bay.

The sloop followed in hot haste. The Yankees crowded forward, and
shouted taunts and jeers at their more powerful enemy who thus strove
to avoid the conflict. Both vessels were under full sail; and the size
of the schooner was beginning to tell, when, in jibing, she carried
away her main boom. Nevertheless, she was so far ahead of the sloop
that she was able to put into Holmes Bay, and take a spar out of a
vessel lying there, before the sloop overtook her. But the delay
incident upon changing the spars brought the sloop within range; and
Capt. Moore, still anxious to avoid an encounter, cut away his boats,
and stood out to sea. With plenty of sea room, and with a spanking
breeze on the quarter, the sloop proved to be the better sailer. Moore
then prepared for battle, and, as the sloop overhauled him, let fly
one of his swivels, following it immediately with his whole broadside,
killing one man. The sloop returned the fire with her one piece of
ordnance, which was so well aimed as to kill the man at the helm of
the "Margaretta," and clear her quarter-deck. The two vessels then
closed, and a hand-to-hand battle began, in which muskets,
hand-grenades, pikes, pitchforks, and cutlasses were used with deadly
effect. The colonists strove to board their enemy, but were repeatedly
beaten back. If any had thought that Capt. Moore's continued efforts
to avoid a conflict were signs of cowardice, they were quickly
undeceived; for that officer fought like a tiger, standing on the
quarter-deck rail, cheering on his men, and hurling hand-grenades down
upon his assailants, until a shot brought him down. The fall of their
captain disheartened the British; and the Americans quickly swarmed
over the sides of the "Margaretta," and drove her crew below.

This victory was no mean achievement for the colonists. The
"Margaretta" was vastly the superior, both in metal and in the
strength of her crew. She was ably officered by trained and courageous
seamen; while the Yankees had no leaders save one Jeremiah O'Brien,
whom they had elected, by acclamation, captain. That the Americans had
so quickly brought their more powerful foe to terms, spoke volumes for
their pluck and determination. Nor were they content to rest with the
capture of the schooner. Transferring her armament to the sloop,
O'Brien set out in search of prizes, and soon fell in with, and
captured, two small British cruisers. These he took to Watertown,
where the Massachusetts Legislature was then in session. The news of
his victory was received with vast enthusiasm; and the Legislature
conferred upon him the rank of captain, and ordered him to set out on
another cruise, and particularly watch out for British vessels
bringing over provisions or munitions of war to the king's troops in
America.

But by this time Great Britain was aroused. The king saw all America
up in arms against his authority, and he determined to punish the
rebellious colonists. A naval expedition was therefore sent against
Falmouth, and that unfortunate town was given to the flames. The
Legislature of Massachusetts then passed a law granting commissions to
privateers, and directing the seizure of British ships. Thereafter the
hostilities on the ocean, which had been previously unauthorized and
somewhat piratical, had the stamp of legislative authority.

Petty hostilities along the coast were very active during the first
few months of the war. The exploits of Capt. O'Brien stirred up seamen
from Maine to the Carolinas, and luckless indeed was the British
vessel that fell into their clutches. At Providence two armed American
vessels re-took a Yankee brig and sloop that had been captured by the
British. At Dartmouth a party of soldiers captured a British armed
brig. In addition to these exploits, the success of the American
privateers, which had got to sea in great numbers, added greatly to
the credit of the American cause.

The first order looking toward the establishment of a national navy
was given by Gen. Washington in the latter part of 1775. The
sagacious general, knowing that the British forces in Boston were
supplied with provisions and munitions of war by sea, conceived the
idea of fitting out some swift-sailing cruisers to intercept the
enemy's cruisers, and cut off their supplies. Accordingly, on his own
authority, he sent out Capt. Broughton with two armed schooners
belonging to the colony of Massachusetts. Broughton was ordered to
intercept two brigs bound for Quebec with military stores. This he
failed to do, but brought in ten other vessels. Congress, however,
directed the release of the captured ships, as it was then intended
only to take such vessels as were actually employed in the king's
service.

By this time Congress had become convinced that some naval force was
absolutely essential to the success of the American cause. In October,
1775, it therefore fitted out, and ordered to sea, a number of small
vessels. Of these the first to sail was the "Lee," under command of
Capt. John Manly, whose honorable name, won in the opening years of
the Revolution, fairly entitles him to the station of the father of
the American navy.

With his swift cruiser, Manly patrolled the New England coast, and was
marvellously successful in capturing British storeships. Washington
wrote to Congress, "I am in very great want of powder, lead, mortars,
and, indeed, most sorts of military stores." Hardly had the letter
been forwarded, when Manly appeared in port with a prize heavy laden
with just the goods for which the commander-in-chief had applied. A
queer coincidence is on record regarding these captured stores. Samuel
Tucker, an able Yankee seaman, later an officer in the American navy,
was on the docks at Liverpool as a transport was loading for America.
As he saw the great cases of guns and barrels of powder marked
"Boston" being lowered into the hold of the vessel, he said to a
friend who stood with him, "I would walk barefoot one hundred miles,
if by that means these arms could only take the direction of
Cambridge." Three months later Tucker was in Washington's camp at
Cambridge, and there saw the very arms he had so coveted on the
Liverpool docks. They had been captured by Capt. Manly.

Manly's activity proved very harassing to the British, and the
sloop-of-war "Falcon" was sent out to capture the Yankee. She fell in
with the "Lee" near Gloucester, just as the latter was making for
that port with a merchant schooner in convoy. Manly, seeing that the
Englishman was too heavy for him, deserted his convoy and ran into the
port, where he anchored, out of reach of the sloop's guns. Capt.
Lindzee of the "Falcon" stopped to capture the abandoned schooner, and
then taking his vessel to the mouth of the port, anchored her in such
a way as to prevent any escape for the "Lee." He then prepared to
capture the Yankee by boarding. The "Falcon" drew too much water to
run alongside the "Lee" at the anchorage Manly had chosen; and the
Englishman therefore put his men in large barges, and with a force of
about forty men set out to capture the schooner. Manly saw the force
that was to be brought against him, and sent his men to quarters,
preparing for a desperate resistance. The schooner was lying near the
shore; and the townspeople and militia gathered by the water-side,
with guns in their hands, prepared to lend their aid to the brave
defenders of the "Lee." As the three barges drew near the schooner,
Manly mounted the rail, and hailed them, warning them to keep off lest
he fire upon them.

"Fire, and be hanged to you," was the response of the lieutenant in
command of the assailants. "We have no fear of traitors."

So saying, the British pressed on through a fierce storm of musketry
from the deck of the schooner and from the shore. They showed no lack
of courage. The lieutenant himself brought his boat under the cabin
windows, and was in the act of boarding, when a shot from the shore
struck him in the thigh, and he was carried back to the man-of-war.
Capt. Lindzee, who had watched the progress of the fight from the deck
of the "Falcon," was greatly enraged when his lieutenant was thus
disabled; and he hastily despatched re-enforcements to the scene of
action, and directed the gunners on the "Falcon" to commence a
cannonade of the town.

"Now," said he with an oath, "my boys, we will aim at the Presbyterian
church. Well, my brave fellows, one shot more, and the house of God
will fall before you."

But the British were fairly outfought, and the outcome of the battle
was disastrous to them. A newspaper of the period, speaking of the
fight says, "Under God, our little party at the water-side performed
wonders; for they soon made themselves masters of both the schooners,
the cutter, the two barges, the boat, and every man in them, and all
that pertained to them. In the action, which lasted several hours, we
have lost but one man; two others wounded,--one of whom is since dead,
the other very slightly wounded. We took of the man-of-war's men
thirty-five; several are wounded, and one since dead; twenty-four are
sent to headquarters. The remainder, being impressed from this and
neighboring towns, are permitted to return to their friends. This
morning Capt. Lindzee warped off with but one-half of his men, with
neither a prize-boat nor tender, except a small skiff the wounded
lieutenant returned in."

The work done by the small armed schooners of which the "Lee" was a
type encouraged Congress to proceed with the work of organizing a
regular navy; and by the end of 1775 that body had authorized the
building of thirteen war-vessels carrying from twenty-four to
thirty-two guns each. But as some naval force was obviously necessary
during the construction of this fleet, five vessels were procured, and
the new navy was organized with the following roster of officers:--

  Esek Hopkins        _Commander-in-chief._
  Dudley Saltonstall  _Captain of the "Alfred."_
  Abraham Whipple     _Captain of the "Columbus."_
  Nicholas Biddle     _Captain of the "Andrea Doria."_
  John B. Hopkins     _Captain of the "Cabot."_

A long list of lieutenants was also provided, among whom stands out
boldly the name of John Paul Jones. John Manly, whose dashing work in
the schooner "Lee" we have already noticed, was left in command of his
little craft until the thirty-two-gun ship "Hancock" was completed,
when he was put in charge of her.

It may possibly have occurred to some of my readers to wonder what
flag floated from the mastheads of these ships. There is much
confusion upon this point, and not a little uncertainty. There were
three classes of American armed vessels on the seas. First were the
privateers, that sailed under any flag that might suit their purpose.
Next came the vessels fitted out and commissioned by the individual
colonies; these usually floated the flag of the colony from which they
hailed. Last came the vessels commissioned by Congress, which at the
outset floated many banners of diverse kinds. It fell to the lot of
Lieut. Paul Jones, however, to hoist the first authorized American
flag over a regularly commissioned vessel-of-war. This flag was of
bunting, showing a pine-tree on a plain white ground, with the words
"Liberty Tree" and "Appeal to God" prominently displayed. This flag
was chiefly used until the adoption of the stars and stripes. The
"rattlesnake flag," with a reptile in the act of striking, and the
legend "Don't tread on me," was largely used by the privateers.

The year 1775 closed with but little activity upon the ocean. The
ships of the regular navy were late in getting into commission, and an
early winter impeded their usefulness. Some little work was done by
privateers and the ships of the different colonies, and the ships of
the British navy were kept fully occupied in guarding against the
operations of these gentry. The man-of-war "Nautilus" chased an
American privateer into a little cove near Beverly, and in the heat of
the chase both vessels ran aground. The people on shore put off to the
privateer, and quickly stripped her of her cordage and armament, and
with the guns built a small battery by the water-side, from which they
opened a telling fire upon the stranded "Nautilus." The man-of-war
returned in kind, and did some slight damage to the town; but when the
tide had risen she slipped her cables and departed. Such desultory
encounters were of frequent occurrence, but no naval battles of any
importance took place until the spring of 1776.

[Illustration: Commodore Esek Hopkins.]




CHAPTER V.

     EVENTS OF 1776. -- THE FIRST CRUISE OF THE REGULAR NAVY. --
     THE "LEXINGTON" AND THE "EDWARD." -- MUGFORD'S BRAVE FIGHT.
     -- LOSS OF THE "YANKEE HERO." -- CAPT. MANLY, AND THE
     "DEFENCE." -- AMERICAN VESSELS IN EUROPEAN WATERS. -- GOOD
     WORK OF THE "LEXINGTON" AND THE "REPRISAL." -- THE BRITISH
     DEFEATED AT CHARLESTON.


The year 1776 witnessed some good service done for the cause of
liberty by the little colonial navy. The squadron, under the command
of Ezekiel Hopkins, left the Delaware in February, as soon as the ice
had left the river, and made a descent upon the island of New
Providence, where the British had established a naval station. The
force under Hopkins consisted of seven vessels-of-war, and one
despatch-boat. The attack was successful in every way, a landing party
of three hundred marines and sailors which was sent ashore meeting
with but little resistance from the British garrison. By this exploit,
the Americans captured over a hundred cannon, and a great quantity of
naval stores.

After this exploit, Hopkins left New Providence, carrying away with
him the governor and one or two notable citizens, and continued his
cruise. His course was shaped to the northward, and early in April he
found himself off the shore of Long Island. He had picked up a couple
of insignificant British vessels,--one a tender of six guns, and the
other an eight-gun bomb-brig. But his cruise had been mainly barren of
results; and his crew, who had looked forward to sharp service and
plenty of prize-money, were beginning to grumble. But their inactivity
was not of long duration; for before daylight on the morning of April
6, the lookout at the masthead of the "Alfred" sighted a large ship,
bearing down upon the American squadron. The night was clear and
beautiful, the wind light, and the sea smooth; and so, although it
lacked several hours to daylight, the commanders determined to give
battle to the stranger. Soon, therefore, the roll of the drums beating
to quarters was heard over the water, and the angry glare of the
battle lanterns on the gun-decks made the open ports of the war-ships
stand out like fiery eyes against the black hulls. The Englishman, who
proved later to be the "Glasgow," twenty guns, carrying one hundred
and fifty men, might easily have escaped; but, apparently undaunted by
the odds against him, he awaited the attack. The little "Cabot" was
the first American ship to open fire on the enemy. Her attack, though
sharp and plucky, was injudicious; for two of the Englishman's heavy
broadsides were enough to send her out of the battle for repairs. The
"Glasgow" and the "Alfred" then took up the fight, and exchanged
repeated broadsides; the American vessel suffering the more serious
injuries of the two. After some hours of this fighting, the "Glasgow"
hauled away, and made good her escape, although she was almost
surrounded by the vessels of the American squadron. It would seem that
only the most careless seamanship on the part of the Americans could
have enabled a twenty-gun vessel to escape from four vessels, each one
of which was singly almost a match for her. It is evident that the
Continental Congress took the same view of the matter, for Hopkins was
soon after dismissed from the service.

This action was little to the credit of the sailors of the colonial
navy. Fortunately, a second action during the same month set them in a
better light before the people of the country. This was the encounter
of the "Lexington," Capt. Barry, with the British vessel "Edward," off
the capes of Virginia. The two vessels were laid yard-arm to yard-arm;
and a hot battle ensued, in which the Americans came off the victors.
The career of this little American brig was a rather remarkable one.
The year following her capture of the "Edward," she was again off the
capes of the Delaware, and again fell in with a British ship. This
time, however, the Englishman was a frigate, and the luckless
"Lexington" was forced to surrender. Her captor left the Americans
aboard their own craft, and, putting a prize crew aboard, ordered them
to follow in the wake of the frigate. That night the Americans plotted
the recapture of their vessel. By a concerted movement, they
overpowered their captors; and the "Lexington" was taken into
Baltimore, where she was soon recommissioned, and ordered to cruise in
European waters.

Shortly after the battle between the "Lexington" and the "Edward,"
there was fought in Massachusetts Bay an action in which the Americans
showed the most determined bravery, and which for the courage shown,
and losses suffered on either side, may well be regarded as the most
important of the naval battles of that year. Early in May, a merchant
seaman named Mugford had succeeded, after great importunity, in
securing the command of the armed vessel "Franklin," a small cruiser
mounting only four guns. The naval authorities had been unwilling to
give him the command, though he showed great zeal in pressing his
suit. Indeed, after the appointment had been made, certain damaging
rumors concerning the newly appointed captain reached the ears of the
marine committee, and caused them to send an express messenger to
Boston to cancel Mugford's commission. But the order arrived too late.
Mugford had already fitted out his ship, and sailed. He had been but a
few days at sea, when the British ship "Hope," of four hundred tons
and mounting six guns, hove in sight. More than this, the lookout
reported that the fleet of the British commodore Banks lay but a few
miles away, and in plain sight. Many a man would have been daunted by
such odds. Not so Capt. Mugford. Mustering his men, he showed them the
British ship, told them that she carried heavier metal than the
"Franklin," told them that the British fleet lay near at hand, and
would doubtless try to take a hand in the engagement; then, having
pointed out all the odds against them, he said, "Now, my lads, it's a
desperate case; but we can take her, and win lots of glory and
prize-money. Will you stand by me?"

The jackies wasted no time in debate, but, cheering lustily for the
captain, went to their posts, and made ready for a hot fight. The
naval discipline of the present day was little known, and less
observed, at that time in the American navy. The perfect order which
makes the gun-deck of a ship going into action as quiet and solemn as
during Sunday prayers then gave place to excited talk and bustle. The
men stood in crews at the four guns; but most of the jackies were
mustered on the forecastle, ready to board. All expected a desperate
resistance. Great was their surprise, then, when they were permitted
to take a raking position under the stern of the "Hope," and to board
her without a shot being fired. But as Mugford, at the head of the
boarders, clambered over the taffrail, he heard the captain of the
"Hope" order the men to cut the topsail halliards and ties, with the
intention of so crippling the ship that the British squadron might
overhaul and recapture her.

"Avast there!" bawled Mugford, seeing through the plot in an instant,
and clapping a pistol to the head of the captain; "if a knife is
touched to those ropes, not a man of this crew shall live."

This threat so terrified the captured sailors, that they relinquished
their design; and Mugford, crowding all sail on his prize, soon was
bowling along before a stiff breeze, with the British squadron in hot
pursuit. An examination of the ship's papers showed her to be the most
valuable prize yet taken by the Americans. In her hold were fifteen
hundred barrels of powder, a thousand carbines, a great number of
travelling carriages for cannon, and a most complete assortment of
artillery instruments and pioneer tools. While running for Boston
Harbor, through the channel known as Point Shirley gut, the vessel
grounded, but was soon floated, and taken safely to her anchorage. Her
arrival was most timely, as the American army was in the most dire
straits for gunpowder. It may well be imagined that there was no
longer any talk about revoking Capt. Mugford's commission.

Mugford remained in port only long enough to take a supply of powder
from his prize; then put to sea again. He well knew that the British
fleet that had chased him into Boston Harbor was still blockading the
harbor's mouth, but he hoped to evade it by going out through a
circuitous channel. Unluckily, in thus attempting to avoid the enemy,
the "Franklin" ran aground, and there remained hard and fast in full
view of the enemy. He had as consort the privateer schooner "Lady
Washington," whose captain, seeing Mugford's dangerous predicament,
volunteered to remain near at hand and assist in the defence.

Mugford knew that his case was desperate, and made preparations for a
most determined resistance. Swinging his craft around, he mounted all
four of his guns on that side which commanded the channel in the
direction from which the enemy was expected. Boarding-nettings were
triced up, and strengthened with cables and cordage, to make an
effective barrier against the assaults of boarders. The men were
served with double rations of grog, and set to work sharpening the
cutlasses and spears, with which they were well provided. The work of
preparation was completed none too soon; for about nine o'clock
Mugford heard the rattle of oars in rowlocks, and saw boats gliding
towards the "Franklin" through the darkness.

"Boat ahoy!" he challenged. "Keep off, or I shall fire into you."

"Don't fire," was the response; "we are friends from Boston coming to
your aid."

"We want none of your aid," cried Mugford with an oath. Then, turning
to his crew, he shouted, "Let them have it, boys."

The roar of the cannon then mingled with the rattle of the musketry,
the cries of the wounded, and the shouts and curses of the combatants,
as the British strove to clamber up the sides of the "Franklin." Not
less than two hundred men were engaged on the side of the British, who
advanced to the fray in thirteen large barges, many of them carrying
swivel guns. Several boats dashed in close under the side of the
"Franklin," and their crews strove manfully to board, but were beaten
back by the Yankees, who rained cutlass blows upon them. The long
pikes with which the Americans were armed proved particularly
effective. "One man with that weapon is positive of having killed nine
of the enemy," says a newspaper of that day.

Unhappily, however, the heroic Mugford, while urging on his men to a
more vigorous resistance, was struck by a musket-ball, which inflicted
a mortal wound. At the moment the wound was received, he was reaching
out over the quarter to catch hold of the mast of one of the barges,
in the hope of upsetting her. As he fell to the deck, he called his
first lieutenant, and said, "I am a dead man. Do not give up the
vessel; you will be able to beat them off." Nearly forty years after,
the heroic Lawrence, dying on the deck of the "Chesapeake," repeated
Mugford's words, "Don't give up the ship."

For about half an hour the battle raged fiercely. The British, beaten
back with great loss, returned again and again to the attack. The
boats would come under the lee of the "Franklin;" but, not being
provided with grappling-irons, the British were forced to lay hold of
the gunwales of the enemy with their hands, which the Americans
promptly lopped off with their cutlasses. Shots from the swivel guns
of the Yankee soon stove in two of the boats of the enemy, which sunk,
carrying down many of their crew. After nearly an hour of this
desperate fighting, the British withdrew, having lost about seventy
men. The only loss sustained by the Americans was that of their brave
commander Mugford.

About a month after this battle, there occurred off the coast of
Massachusetts a battle in which the Americans, though they fought with
the most undaunted bravery, were forced to strike their colors to
their adversary. The American was the privateer "Yankee Hero" of
Newburyport. She sailed from that place for Boston on the 7th of June
with only forty men aboard, intending to ship her full complement of
one hundred and twenty at Boston. As the "Hero" rounded Cape Ann, she
sighted a sail on the horizon, but in her short-handed condition did
not think it worth while to give chase. The stranger, however, had
caught sight of the "Hero;" and, a fresh southerly breeze springing
up, she began to close with the American. As she came closer, Capt.
Tracy of the "Yankee Hero" saw that she was a ship-of-war. Despite the
desperate efforts of the Americans to escape, their pursuer rapidly
overhauled them, and soon coming up within half a mile, opened fire
with her bow chasers. The brig returned the fire with a swivel gun,
which had little effect. Seeing this, Capt. Tracy ordered the firing
to cease until the ships should came to close quarters. The stranger
rapidly overhauled the privateer, keeping up all the time a vigorous
fire. Tracy with difficulty restrained the ardor of his men, who were
anxious to try to cripple their pursuer. When the enemy came within
pistol-shot, Tracy saw that the time for action on his part had come,
and immediately opened fire with all the guns and small-arms that
could be brought to bear. The only possible chance for escape lay in
crippling the big craft with a lucky shot; but broadside after
broadside was fired, and still the great ship came rushing along in
the wake of the flying privateer. Closer and closer drew the bulky
man-of-war, until her bow crept past the stern of the "Yankee Hero,"
and the marines upon her forecastle poured down a destructive volley
of musketry upon the brig's crowded deck. The plight of the privateer
was now a desperate one. Her heavy antagonist was close alongside, and
towered high above her, so that the marines on the quarter-deck and
forecastle of the Englishman were on a level with the leading blocks
of the Yankee. From the depressed guns of the frigate, a murderous
fire poured down upon the smaller craft. For an hour and twenty
minutes the two vessels continued the fight, pouring hot broadsides
into each other, and separated by less than a hundred feet of water.
The brisk breeze blowing carried away the clouds of smoke, and left
the men on the deck of the Yankee no protection from sharp-shooters on
the enemy's deck. Accordingly, the execution was frightful. Tracy,
from his post on the quarter-deck, saw his men falling like sheep,
while the continual volleys of the great ship had so cut the cordage
of the weaker vessel that escape was impossible. At last a musket-ball
struck Capt. Tracy in the thigh, and he fell bleeding to the deck. For
a moment his men wavered at their guns; but he called manfully to
them, from where he lay, to fight on boldly for the honor of the
"Yankee Hero." Two petty officers had rushed to his assistance; and he
directed them to lay him upon a chest of arms upon the quarter-deck,
whence he might direct the course of the battle. But, strong though
was his spirit, his body was too weak to perform the task he had
allotted it; and, growing faint from pain and loss of blood, he was
carried below.

He lay unconscious for a few minutes, but was recalled to his senses
by the piteous cries of wounded men by whom he was surrounded. When he
came to himself, he saw the cabin filled with grievously wounded
people, bleeding and suffering for lack of surgical aid. The firing of
the privateer had ceased, but the enemy was still pouring in pitiless
broadsides. Enraged at this spectacle, Capt. Tracy ordered his men to
re-open the conflict, and directed that he be taken in a chair to the
quarter-deck. But, on getting into the chair, he was suddenly seized
with a fainting spell, and gave orders, by signs, that the colors be
struck.

When the inequality of the two enemies is considered, this action
appears to be a most notable reason for pride in the powers of the
Americans. The "Yankee Hero" was a low single-decked vessel of
fourteen guns, while her captor was the British frigate of thirty-two
guns. Yet the little American vessel had held her own for two hours,
and by good gunnery and skilful manoeuvring had succeeded in doing
almost as much damage as she had suffered.

In reading of the naval engagements of the Revolution, one is
impressed with the small sacrifice of life that attended the most
protracted conflicts. Thus in the action just recorded only four men
were killed upon the defeated ship, although for more than an hour the
two vessels had exchanged broadsides a distance of less than a hundred
feet apart. The execution done on the British frigate has never been
recorded, but was probably even less.

Only the most fragmentary account can be given of any naval actions in
the year 1776, except those in which America's great naval hero Paul
Jones took part. Of the trivial encounters that go to complete the
naval annals of the year, only the briefest recountal is necessary.
The work of the little brig "Andrea Doria," Capt. Biddle, deserves a
passing mention. This little fourteen-gun craft had the most wonderful
luck in making prizes. Besides capturing two transports loaded with
British soldiers, she took so many merchantmen, that on one cruise she
brought back to port only five of her original crew, the rest having
all been put aboard prizes.

On the 17th of June, the crew of the Connecticut cruiser "Defence," a
fourteen-gun brig, heard the sound of distant cannonading coming
faintly over the water. All sail was crowded upon the brig, and she
made all possible speed to the scene of conflict. About nightfall, she
fell in with four American schooners that had just been having a
tussle with two heavy British transports. Three of the American
vessels were privateers, the fourth was the little cruiser "Lee" in
which Capt. John Manly had done such brilliant service. The four
schooners had found the transports too powerful for them, and had
therefore drawn off, but were eager to renew the fray with the help of
the "Defence." Accordingly the "Defence" led the way to Nantasket
Roads, where the transports lay at anchor. Capt. Harding wasted little
time in manoeuvring, but, laying his vessel alongside the larger of
the two transports, summoned her commander to strike.

"Ay, ay--I'll strike," was the response from the threatened vessel;
and instantly a heavy broadside was poured into the "Defence." A sharp
action followed, lasting for nearly an hour. The "Defence" bore the
brunt of the conflict, for the four schooners did not come to
sufficiently close quarters to be of much assistance against the
enemy. The gunnery of the Americans proved too much for the enemy,
however; and after losing eighteen men, together with a large number
wounded, the British surrendered. The American vessel was a good deal
cut up aloft, and lost nine of her men. The next morning a third
transport was sighted by the "Defence," and speedily overhauled and
captured. More than five hundred British soldiers were thus captured;
and the British thenceforward dared not treat the Americans as rebels,
lest the colonial army authorities should retaliate upon the British
prisoners in their hands.

It was in the year 1776 that the first naval vessel giving allegiance
to the American Colonies showed herself in European waters. This
vessel was the "Reprisal," Capt. Wickes, a small craft, mounting
sixteen guns. Early in the summer of '76, the "Reprisal" made a cruise
to Martinique, taking several prizes. When near the island, she
encountered the British sloop-of-war "Shark," and a sharp battle
ensued. In size and weight of metal, the two vessels were about evenly
matched; but the "Reprisal" had been sending out so many prize-crews,
that she was short eighty men of her full crew. Therefore, when, after
a brisk interchange of broadsides, the British sloop sheered off, and
left the "Reprisal" to continue her course, Capt. Wickes rejoiced in
his escape as being almost equal to a victory.

After completing this cruise, the "Reprisal" was ordered to France for
the purpose of conveying thither from Philadelphia Benjamin Franklin,
the ambassador sent from the Colonies to interest the French in the
cause of American liberty. While on the way over, she took two or
three prizes, which were sold in France. After landing her
distinguished passenger, she cruised about in the proverbially
tempestuous Bay of Biscay, where she forced several British vessels to
strike to the American flag, then first seen in those waters. On
returning to France to sell his newly captured prizes, Capt. Wickes
found trouble in store for him. The British ambassador at Paris had
declared that the American cruiser was a detestable pirate; and that
for France to permit the pirate to anchor in her harbors, or sell his
prizes in her markets, was equal to a declaration of war against
England. Wickes was, therefore, admonished to take his ships and
prisoners away. But even in that early day Yankee wit was sharp, and
able to extricate its possessor from troublesome scrapes. Wickes knew
that there were plenty of purchasers to be had for his prizes: so,
gathering a few ship-owners together, he took them out to sea beyond
the jurisdiction of France, and there sold them to the highest bidder.

The money thus obtained Wickes used in purchasing vessels suitable for
armed cruisers. While these were fitting out, the "Lexington" and the
"Dolphin" arrived in France, and soon joined the "Reprisal" in a
cruise around the British Islands. The little squadron fairly swept
the Channel and the Irish Sea of merchantmen. The excitement in
England ran high, and the admiralty despatched all the available
men-of-war in search of the marauders. But the swift-sailing cruisers
escaped all pursuers. Once indeed the "Reprisal" came near falling
into the hands of the enemy, but escaped by throwing overboard every
thing movable, sawing away her bulwarks, and even cutting away her
heavy timbers.

The result of this cruise so aroused England, that France no longer
dared to harbor the audacious Yankee cruisers. The "Lexington" and
"Reprisal" were, therefore, ordered to leave European waters
forthwith. The "Lexington" complied first, and when one day out from
the port of Morlaix encountered the British man-of-war cutter "Alert."
The "Alert" was the smaller of the two vessels, but her commander had
in him all that pluck and those sterling seamanlike qualities that
made the name of England great upon the ocean. A stiff breeze was
blowing, and a heavy cross sea running, when the two vessels came
together. The gunners sighted their pieces at random and fired,
knowing little whether the shot would go plunging into the waves, or
fly high into the air. As a result, they carried on a spirited
cannonade for upwards of two hours, with the sole effect of carrying
away the top hamper of the "Alert," and exhausting most of the powder
on the American craft.

Finding his ammunition rapidly giving out, the captain of the
"Lexington" clapped on all sail, and soon showed his crippled
antagonist a clean pair of heels. But so great was the activity of
the crew of the "Alert" that they repaired the damage done aloft, and
in four hours overtook the "American," and opened fire upon her The
battle now became one-sided; for the "Lexington," being short of
powder, could make little resistance to the brisk attack of her
persevering adversary. In less than an hour she was forced to strike
her flag.

The fate of the "Reprisal" was even harder than that of her consort.
While crossing the Atlantic on her way back to the coast of America,
she was overtaken by a furious gale. With furled sails and battened
hatches, the little craft made a desperate fight for life. But the
fierce wind carried away her masts and spars, and the tossing waves
opened her seams, so that it became apparent to all on board that the
fate of the gallant craft, that had so nobly defended the cause of
American liberty, was sealed. As the water rose higher and higher in
the hold, the officers saw that it was no longer a question of the
possibility of saving the ship, but that their lives and those of the
crew were in the greatest danger. Boats were lowered; but the angry
white-capped waves tossed them madly aloft, and, turning them over and
over, sent the poor fellows that manned them to their long account.
All hands then set to work at the construction of a huge raft; and
just as the ship's stern settled, it was pushed off, and all that
could reach it clambered on. A few poor fellows clung to the sinking
ship; and their comrades on the raft saw them crowd on the forecastle,
and heard their despairing cries as the good ship threw her prow high
in the air, and sunk stern foremost to the placid depths of the stormy
ocean. But those on the raft were not destined to escape the fate of
their comrades. The haggard sufferers were doomed to see the frail
structure on which their lives depended go slowly to pieces before the
mighty power of the remorseless sea. Bit by bit their foothold
vanished from beneath them. One by one they were swept off into the
seething cauldron of the storm. At last but one man remained, the cook
of the ill-fated vessel, who floated about for three days on a piece
of wreckage, until, half-starved and nearly crazed, he was picked up
by a passing vessel, and told the tale of the wreck. So ended the
career of the patriotic and gallant Capt. Wickes and his crew, and
such is the fate that every stout fellow braves when he dons his blue
jacket and goes to serve his country on the ocean.

In addition to the exploits of the American cruisers upon the high
seas, certain operations of the British navy along the American coast,
during the year 1776, demand attention. Of these the most important
was the attack by Sir Peter Parker upon Charleston, in September of
that year,--an attack made memorable by the determined courage of the
Americans, the daring exploit of Sergt. Jasper, and the discovery of
the remarkable qualities of palmetto logs as a material for
fortifications.

Charleston was then a town of but a few thousand inhabitants; but,
small as it was, it had become particularly obnoxious to the British
on account of the strong revolutionary sentiment of its people, and
their many open acts of defiance of King George's authority. When the
offensive Stamp Act first was published, the people of Charleston rose
in revolt; and the stamps for the city being stored in an armed
fortress in the bay, known as Castle Johnson, a party of a hundred and
fifty armed men went down the bay, surprised the garrison, captured
the castle, and, loading its guns, defied the authorities. Not until
the promise had been made that the stamps should be sent back to
England, did the rebellious Carolinians lay down their arms. Nor was
their peace of long duration. When the news of the battle of Lexington
reached the little Southern seaport, the people straightway cast about
for an opportunity to strike a blow against the tyranny of England.
The opportunity soon offered itself. An English sloop laden with
powder was lying at St. Augustine, Fla. Learning this, the people of
Charleston fitted out a vessel, which captured the powder-ship, and,
eluding a number of British cruisers, returned safely to Charleston
with fifteen thousand pounds of gunpowder for the colonial army. Soon
after the colonial troops took possession of the forts in the harbor,
and Charleston became a revolutionary stronghold.

Therefore, when the war authorities of Great Britain prepared to take
active, offensive measures against the seaport cities of the
rebellious colonies, Charleston was one of the first points chosen for
attack. It was on the 4th of June, 1776, that the British fleet, under
the command of the veteran admiral, Sir Peter Parker, appeared off
Charleston bar. The colonists had learned of its approach some time
before; and the town was crowded with troops, both regular and
volunteer. Two forts, Johnson and Sullivan, were erected at points
commanding the entrance to the harbor. Troops were thrown out to
oppose the advance of landing parties. The wharves were covered with
breastworks, and the streets leading up from the water-side were
barricaded. There was a great scarceness of lead for bullets; and to
supply that need the leaden sashes, in which window-panes were at that
time set, were melted down. When the fleet of the enemy appeared in
the offing, Charleston was quite ready to give the invaders a warm
reception.

Fort Sullivan was the chief work in the harbor, and against this
Parker began a vigorous cannonade early on the morning of the 28th of
June. The fort had been built of logs of palmetto wood, and was looked
upon with some distrust by its defenders, who did not know how well
that material could withstand cannon-shot; but the opening volley of
the fleet re-assured them. The balls penetrated deep in the soft,
spongy wood without detaching any of the splinters, which, in a
battle, are more dangerous than the shot themselves. The fort soon
replied to the fire of the fleet; and the thunder of three hundred
cannon rang out over the bay, while dense clouds of sulphurous smoke
hid the scene from the eager gaze of the crowds of people on the
housetops of the city.

When the stately ships of the British squadron swung into line before
the little wooden fort, there was hardly a sailor who did not take his
station without a feeling of contempt for the insignificant obstacle
that they were about to sweep from their path. But as the day wore on,
and the ceaseless cannonade seemed to have no effect on the bastions
of the fort, the case began to look serious.

"Mind the commodore, and the fifty-gun ships," was the command
Moultrie gave to the gunners in the fort when the action commenced,
and right well did they heed the injunction. The quarter-decks of the
ships-of-the-line were swept clean of officers. The gunners in the
fort soon found that the fire of the enemy was doing little or no
execution, and they sighted their guns as coolly as though out for a
day's target practice. The huge iron balls crashed through the hulls
of the ships, or swept their decks, doing terrific execution. The
cable of the "Bristol" was shot away, and she swung round with her
stern to the fort. In this position she was raked repeatedly; her
captain was killed, and at one time not an officer remained on her
quarter-deck except the admiral Sir Peter Parker. When the conflict
ceased, this ship alone contained forty killed and seventy-one wounded
men. The other ships suffered nearly as severely. The twenty-eight-gun
ship "Actaeon" grounded during the course of the engagement; and when,
after ten hours' fruitless cannonading, the British abandoned the task
of reducing the fort, and determined to withdraw, she was found to be
immovable. Accordingly Admiral Parker signalled to her officer to
abandon the ship, and set her on fire. This was accordingly done; and
the ship was left with her colors flying, and her guns loaded. This
movement was observed by the Americans, who, in spite of the danger of
an explosion, boarded the ship, fired her guns at the "Bristol,"
loaded three boats with stores, and pulled away, leaving the "Actaeon"
to blow up, which she did half an hour later.

While the battle was at its hottest, and the shot and shell were
flying thick over the fort, the flagstaff was shot away; and the flag
of South Carolina, a blue ground, bearing a silver crescent, fell on
the beach outside the parapet. Sergt. William Jasper, seeing this,
leaped on the bastion, walked calmly through the storm of flying
missiles, picked up the flag, and fastened it upon a sponge-staff.
Then standing upon the highest point of the parapet, in full view of
the ships and the men in the fort, he calmly fixed the staff upright,
and returned to his place, leaving the flag proudly waving. The next
day the governor of the colony visited the fort, and seeking out the
brave sergeant, handed him a handsome sword and a lieutenant's
commission. But Jasper proved to be as modest as he was brave; for he
declined the proffered promotion, with the remark,--

"I am not fit to keep officers' company; I am but a sergeant."

The complete failure of the attack upon Charleston was a bitter pill
for the English to swallow. They had brought against the raw,
untrained forces of the colony some of the finest ships of the boasted
navy of Great Britain. They had fought well and pluckily. The fact
that Sir Peter Parker was in command was in itself a guaranty that the
attack would be a spirited one; and the tremendous loss of life in the
fleet affords convincing proof that no poltroonery lurked among the
British sailors. The loss of the British during the engagement, in
killed and wounded, amounted to two hundred and twenty-five men. The
Americans had ten men killed and twenty-two wounded. Moultrie, the
commandant of the fort, says that after the battle was over they
picked up more than twelve hundred solid shot of different sizes, and
many thirteen-inch shells. Most of the shells that fell within the
fort fell into a large pool of water, which extinguished their fuses,
thus robbing them of their power for evil.

In his report of this battle, Admiral Parker fell into a queer error.
He reports that a large party of men entering the fort met a man going
out, whom they straightway hanged to a neighboring tree, in full view
of the fleet. From this the admiral concluded that there was an
incipient mutiny in the fort, and the ringleader was hanged as an
example. Col. Moultrie, however, explained this by stating that the
man hanging in the tree was simply the coat of a soldier, which had
been carried away by a cannon-shot, and left hanging in the branches.




CHAPTER VI.

     THE CAREER OF PAUL JONES. -- IN COMMAND OF THE "PROVIDENCE."
     -- CAPTURE OF THE "MELLISH." -- EXPLOITS WITH THE "ALFRED."
     -- IN COMMAND OF THE "RANGER." -- SWEEPING THE ENGLISH
     CHANNEL. -- THE DESCENT UPON WHITEHAVEN.


We have already spoken of the farcical affair between the fleet under
Ezekiel Hopkins and the English frigate "Glasgow," in which the
English vessel, by superior seamanship, and taking advantage of the
blunders of the Americans, escaped capture. The primary result of this
battle was to cause the dismissal from the service of Hopkins. But his
dismissal led to the advancement of a young naval officer, whose name
became one of the most glorious in American naval annals, and whose
fame as a skilful seaman has not been tarnished by the hand of time.

[Illustration: Captain John Paul Jones Quelling The Mob At White
Haven, Scotland, Nov., 1777.]

At the time of the escape of the "Glasgow," there was serving upon the
"Alfred" a young lieutenant, by name John Paul Jones. Jones was a
Scotchman. His rightful name was John Paul; but for some reason, never
fully understood, he had assumed the surname of Jones, and his record
under the name of Paul Jones forms one of the most glorious chapters
of American naval history. When given a lieutenant's commission in the
colonial navy, Jones was twenty-nine years old. From the day when a
lad of thirteen years he shipped for his first voyage, he had spent
his life on the ocean. He had served on peaceful merchantmen, and
in the less peaceful, but at that time equally respectable,
slave-trade. A small inheritance had enabled him to assume the station
of a Virginia gentleman; and he had become warmly attached to American
ideas and principles, and at the outbreak of the Revolution put his
services at the command of Congress. He was first offered a captain's
commission with the command of the "Providence," mounting twelve guns
and carrying one hundred men. But with extraordinary modesty the young
sailor declined, saying that he hardly felt himself fitted to
discharge the duties of a first lieutenant. The lieutenant's
commission, however, he accepted; and it was in this station that with
his own hands he hoisted the first American flag to the masthead of
the "Alfred."

The wretched fiasco which attended the attack of the American fleet
upon the "Glasgow" was greatly deplored by Jones. However, he
refrained from any criticism upon his superiors, and sincerely
regretted the finding of the court of inquiry, by which the captain of
the "Providence" was dismissed the service, and Lieut. Paul Jones
recommended to fill the vacancy.

The duties which devolved upon Capt. Jones were manifold and arduous.
The ocean was swarming with powerful British men-of-war, which in his
little craft he must avoid, while keeping a sharp outlook for foemen
with whom he was equally matched. More than once, from the masthead of
the "Providence," the lookout could discover white sails of one or
more vessels, any one of which, with a single broadside, could have
sent the audacious Yankee to the bottom. But luckily the "Providence"
was a fast sailer, and wonderfully obedient to her helm. To her good
sailing qualities, and to his own admirable seamanship, Jones owed
more than one fortunate escape. Once, when almost overtaken by a
powerful man-of-war, he edged away until he brought his pursuer on his
weather quarter; then, putting his helm up suddenly, he stood dead
before the wind, thus doubling on his course, and running past his
adversary within pistol-shot of her guns, but in a course directly
opposite to that upon which she was standing. The heavy war-ship went
plunging ahead like a heavy hound eluded by the agile fox, and the
Yankee proceeded safely on her course.

Some days later the "Providence" was lying to on the great banks near
the Isle of Sables. It was a holiday for the crew; for no sails were
in sight, and Capt. Jones had indulgently allowed them to get out
their cod-lines and enjoy an afternoon's fishing. In the midst of
their sport, as they were hauling in the finny monsters right merrily,
the hail of the lookout warned them that a strange sail was in sight.
The stranger drew rapidly nearer, and was soon made out to be a war
vessel. Jones, finding after a short trial that his light craft could
easily outstrip the lumbering man-of-war, managed to keep just out of
reach. Now and then the pursuer would luff up and let fly a broadside;
the shot skipping along over the waves, but sinking before they
reached the "Providence." Jones, who had an element of humor in his
character, responded to this cannonade with one musket, which, with
great solemnity, was discharged in response to each broadside. After
keeping up this burlesque battle for some hours, the "Providence"
spread her sails, and soon left her foe hull down beneath the horizon.

After having thus eluded his pursuer, Jones skirted the coast of Cape
Breton, and put into the harbor of Canso, where he found three British
fishing schooners lying at anchor. The inhabitants of the little
fishing village were electrified to see the "Providence" cast anchor
in the harbor, and, lowering her boats, send two crews of armed
sailors to seize the British craft. No resistance was made, however;
and the Americans burned one schooner, scuttled a second, and after
filling the third with fish, taken from the other two, took her out of
the harbor with the "Providence" leading the way.

From the crew of the captured vessel, Jones learned that at the Island
of Madame, not far from Canso, there was a considerable flotilla of
British merchantmen. Accordingly he proceeded thither with the
intention of destroying them. On arriving, he found the harbor too
shallow to admit the "Providence;" and accordingly taking up a
position from which he could, with his cannon, command the harbor, he
despatched armed boats' crews to attack the shipping. On entering the
harbor, the Americans found nine British vessels lying at anchor.
Ships and brigs, as well as small fishing schooners, were in the
fleet. It was a rich prize for the Americans, and it was won without
bloodshed; for the peaceful fishermen offered no resistance to the
Yankees, and looked upon the capture of their vessels with amazement.
The condition of these poor men, thus left on a bleak coast with no
means of escape, appealed strongly to Jones's humanity. He therefore
told them, that, if they would assist him in making ready for sea such
of the prizes as he wished to take with him, he would leave them
vessels enough to carry them back to England. The fishermen heartily
agreed to the proposition, and worked faithfully for several days at
the task of fitting out the captured vessels. The night before the day
on which Jones had intended leaving the harbor, the wind came on to
blow, and a violent storm of wind and rain set in. Even the usually
calm surface of the little harbor was lashed to fury by the shrieking
wind. The schooner "Sea-Flower"--one of the captured prizes--was torn
from her moorings; and though her crew got out the sweeps, and
struggled valiantly for headway against the driving storm, she drifted
on shore, and lay there a total wreck. The schooner "Ebenezer," which
Jones had brought from Canso laden with fish, drifted on a sunken
reef, and was there so battered by the roaring waves that she went to
pieces. Her crew, after vainly striving to launch the boats, built a
raft, and saved themselves on that.

The next day the storm abated; and Capt. Jones, taking with him three
heavily laden prizes, left the harbor, and turned his ship's prow
homeward. The voyage to Newport, then the headquarters of the little
navy, was made without other incident than the futile chase of three
British ships, which ran into the harbor of Louisbourg. On his
arrival, Jones reported that he had been cruising for forty-seven
days, and in that time had captured sixteen prizes, beside the
fishing-vessels he burned at Cape Breton. Eight of his prizes he had
manned, and sent into port; the remainder he had burned. It was the
first effective blow the colonists had yet struck at their powerful
foe upon the ocean.

Hardly had Paul Jones completed this first cruise, when his mind, ever
active in the service of his country, suggested to him a new
enterprise in which he might contribute to the cause of American
liberty. At this early period of the Revolution, the British were
treating American prisoners with almost inconceivable barbarity. Many
were sent to the "Old Jersey" prison-ship, of whose horrors we shall
read something later on. Others, to the number of about a hundred,
were taken to Cape Breton, and forced to labor like Russian felons in
the underground coal-mines. Jones's plan was bold in its conception,
but needed only energy and promptitude to make it perfectly feasible.

He besought the authorities to give him command of a squadron, that he
might move on Cape Breton, destroy the British coal and fishing
vessels always congregated there, and liberate the hapless Americans
who were passing their lives in the dark misery of underground mining.
His plan was received with favor, but the authorities lacked the means
to give him the proper aid. However, two vessels, the "Alfred" and the
"Providence," were assigned to him; and he went speedily to work to
prepare for the adventure. At the outset, he was handicapped by lack
of men. The privateers were then fitting out in every port; and seamen
saw in privateering easier service, milder discipline, and greater
profits than they could hope for in the regular navy. When, by hard
work, the muster-roll of the "Alfred" showed her full complement of
men shipped, the stormy month of November had arrived, and the golden
hour for success was past.

Nevertheless, Jones, taking command of the "Alfred," and putting the
"Providence" in the command of Capt. Hacker, left Newport, and laid
his course to the northward. When he arrived off the entrance to the
harbor of Louisbourg, he was so lucky as to encounter an English brig,
the "Mellish," which, after a short resistance, struck her flag. She
proved to be laden with heavy warm clothing for the British troops in
Canada. This capture was a piece of great good fortune for the
Americans, and many a poor fellow in Washington's army that winter had
cause to bless Paul Jones for his activity and success.

The day succeeding the capture of the "Mellish" dawned gray and
cheerless. Light flurries of snow swept across the waves, and by noon
a heavy snowstorm, driven by a violent north-east gale, darkened the
air, and lashed the waves into fury. Jones stood dauntless at his post
on deck, encouraging the sailors by cheery words, and keeping the
sturdy little vessel on her course. All day and night the storm
roared; and when, the next morning, Jones, wearied by his ceaseless
vigilance, looked anxiously across the waters for his consort, she was
not to be seen. The people on the "Alfred" supposed, of course, that
the "Providence" was lost, with all on board, and mourned the sad fate
of their comrades. But, in fact, Capt. Hacker, affrighted by the
storm, had basely deserted his leader during the night, and made off
for Newport, leaving Jones to prosecute his enterprise alone.

Jones recognized in this desertion the knell of the enterprise upon
which he had embarked. Nevertheless, he disdained to return to port:
so sending the "Mellish" and a second prize, which the British
afterwards recaptured, back to Massachusetts, he continued his cruise
along the Nova Scotia coast. Again he sought out the harbor of Canso,
and, entering it, found a large English transport laden with
provisions aground just inside the bar. Boats' crews from the "Alfred"
soon set the torch to the stranded ship, and then, landing, fired a
huge warehouse filled with whale-oil and the products of the
fisheries. Leaving the blazing pile behind, the "Alfred" put out again
into the stormy sea, and made for the northward.

As he approached Louisbourg, Jones fell in with a considerable fleet
of British coal-vessels, in convoy of the frigate "Flora." A heavy fog
hung over the ocean; and the fleet Yankee, flying here and there, was
able to cut out and capture three of the vessels without alarming the
frigate, that continued unsuspectingly on her course. Two days later,
Jones snapped up a Liverpool privateer, that fired scarcely a single
gun in resistance. Then crowded with prisoners, embarrassed by prizes,
and short of food and water, the "Alfred" turned her course homeward.

Five valuable prizes sailed in her wake. Anxiety for the safety of
these gave Jones no rest by day or night. He was ceaselessly on the
watch lest some hostile man-of-war should overhaul his fleet, and
force him to abandon his hard-won fruits of victory. All went well
until, when off St. George's Bank, he encountered the frigate
"Milford,"--the same craft to whose cannon-balls Jones, but a few
months before, had tauntingly responded with musket-shots.

It was late in the afternoon when the "Milford" was sighted; and
Jones, seeing that she could by no possibility overtake his squadron
before night, ordered his prizes to continue their course without
regard to any lights or apparent signals from the "Alfred." When
darkness fell upon the sea, the Yankees were scudding along on the
starboard tack, with the Englishman coming bravely up astern. From the
tops of the "Alfred" swung two burning lanterns, which the enemy
doubtless pronounced a bit of beastly stupidity on the part of the
Yankee, affording, as it did, an excellent guide for the pursuer to
steer by. But during the night the wily Jones changed his course. The
prizes, with the exception of the captured privateer, continued on
the starboard tack. The "Alfred" and the privateer made off on the
port tack, with the "Milford" in full cry in their wake. Not until the
morning dawned did the Englishman discover how he had been tricked.

Having thus secured the safety of his prizes, it only remained for
Jones to escape with the privateer. Unluckily, however, the officer
put in charge of the privateer proved incapable, and his craft fell
into hands of the British. Jones, however, safely carried the "Alfred"
clear of the "Milford's" guns, and, a heavy storm coming up, soon
eluded his foe in the snow and darkness. Thereupon he shaped his
course for Boston, where he arrived on the 5th of December, 1776. Had
he been delayed two days longer, both his provisions and his water
would have been exhausted.

For the ensuing six months Jones remained on shore, not by any means
inactive, for his brain was teeming with great projects for his
country's service. He had been deprived of the command of the
"Alfred," and another ship was not easily to be found: so he turned
his attention to questions of naval organization, and the results of
many of his suggestions are observable in the United States navy
to-day. It was not until June 14, 1777, that a command was found for
him. This was the eighteen-gun ship "Ranger," built to carry a
frigate's battery of twenty-six guns. She had been built for the
revolutionary government, at Portsmouth, and was a stanch-built, solid
craft, though miserably slow and somewhat crank. Jones, though
disappointed with the sailing qualities of the craft, was nevertheless
vastly delighted to be again in command of a man-of-war, and wasted no
time in getting her ready for sea.

It so happened, that, on the very day Paul Jones received his
commission as commander of the "Ranger," the Continental Congress
adopted the Stars and Stripes for the national flag. Jones,
anticipating this action, had prepared a flag in accordance with the
proposed designs, and, upon hearing of the action of Congress, had it
run to the masthead, while the cannon of the "Ranger" thundered out
their deep-mouthed greetings to the starry banner destined to wave
over the most glorious nation of the earth. Thus it happened that the
same hand that had given the pine-tree banner to the winds was the
first to fling out to the breezes the bright folds of the Stars and
Stripes.

Early in October the "Ranger" left Portsmouth, and made for the coast
of France. Astute agents of the Americans in that country were having
a fleet, powerful frigate built there for Jones, which he was to take,
leaving the sluggish "Ranger" to be sold. But, on his arrival at
Nantes, Jones was grievously disappointed to learn that the British
Government had so vigorously protested against the building of a
vessel-of-war in France for the Americans, that the French Government
had been obliged to notify the American agents that their plan must be
abandoned. France was at this time at peace with Great Britain, and,
though inclined to be friendly with the rebellious colonies, was not
ready to entirely abandon her position as a neutral power. Later, when
she took up arms against England, she gave the Americans every right
in her ports they could desire.

Jones thus found himself in European waters with a vessel too weak to
stand against the frigates England could send to take her, and too
slow to elude them. But he determined to strike some effective blows
for the cause of liberty. Accordingly he planned an enterprise, which,
for audacity of conception and dash in execution, has never been
equalled by any naval expedition since.

This was nothing less than a virtual invasion of England. The "Ranger"
lay at Brest. Jones planned to dash across the English Channel, and
cruise along the coast of England, burning shipping and towns, as a
piece of retaliation upon the British for their wanton outrages along
the American coast. It was a bold plan. The channel was thronged with
the heavy frigates of Great Britain, any one of which could have
annihilated the audacious Yankee cruiser. Nevertheless, Jones
determined to brave the danger.

At the outset, it seemed as though his purpose was to be balked by
heavy weather. For days after the "Ranger" left Brest, she battled
against the chop-seas of the English Channel. The sky was dark, and
the light of the sun obscured by gray clouds. The wind whistled
through the rigging, and tore at the tightly furled sails. Great green
walls of water, capped with snowy foam, beat thunderously against the
sides of the "Ranger." Now and then a port would be driven in, and the
men between decks drenched by the incoming deluge. The "Ranger" had
encountered an equinoctial gale in its worst form.

When the gale died away, Jones found himself off the Scilly Islands,
in full view of the coast of England. Here he encountered a
merchantman, which he took and scuttled, sending the crew ashore to
spread the news that an American man-of-war was ravaging the channel.
Having alarmed all England, he changed his hunting-ground to St.
George's Channel and the Irish Sea, where he captured several ships;
sending one, a prize, back to Brest. He was in waters with which he
had been familiar from his youth, and he made good use of his
knowledge; dashing here and there, lying in wait in the highway of
commerce, and then secreting himself in some sequestered cove while
the enemy's ship-of-war went by in fruitless search for the marauder.
All England was aroused by the exploits of the Yankee cruiser. Never
since the days of the Invincible Armada had war been so brought home
to the people of the tight little island. Long had the British
boastfully claimed the title of monarch of the seas. Long had they
sung the vainglorious song,--

          "Britannia needs no bulwarks,
           No towers along the steep;
           Her march is o'er the mountain waves,
           Her home is on the deep."

But Paul Jones showed Great Britain that her boasted power was a
bubble. He ravaged the seas within cannon-shot of English headlands.
He captured and burned merchantmen, drove the rates of insurance up to
panic prices, paralyzed British shipping-trade, and even made small
incursions into British territory.

The reports that reached Jones of British barbarity along the American
coast, of the burning of Falmouth, of tribute levied on innumerable
seaport towns,--all aroused in him a determination to strike a
retaliatory blow. Whitehaven, a small seaport, was the spot chosen by
him for attack; and he brought his ship to off the mouth of the harbor
late one night, intending to send in a boat's crew to fire the
shipping. But so strong a wind sprung up, as to threaten to drive the
ship ashore; and Jones was forced to make sail, and get an offing. A
second attempt, made upon a small harbor called Lochryan, on the
western coast of Scotland, was defeated by a like cause.

But the expedition against Lochryan, though in itself futile, was the
means of giving Jones an opportunity to show his merits as a fighter.
Soon after leaving Lochryan, he entered the bay of Carrichfergus, on
which is situated the Irish commercial city of Belfast. The bay was
constantly filled with merchantmen; and the "Ranger," with her ports
closed, and her warlike character carefully disguised, excited no
suspicion aboard a trim, heavy-built craft that lay at anchor a little
farther up the bay. This craft was the British man-of-war "Drake,"
mounting twenty guns. Soon after his arrival in the bay, Jones learned
the character of the "Drake," and determined to attempt her capture
during the night. Accordingly he dropped anchor near by, and, while
carefully concealing the character of his craft, made every
preparation for a midnight fight. The men sat between decks,
sharpening cutlasses, and cleaning and priming their pistols; the
cannon were loaded with grape, and depressed for work at close
quarters; battle lanterns were hung in place, ready to be lighted at
the signal for action.

At ten o'clock, the tramp of men about the capstan gave notice that
the anchor was being brought to the catheads. Soon the creaking of
cordage, and the snapping of the sails, told that the fresh breeze was
being caught by the spreading sails. Then the waves rippled about the
bow of the ship, and the "Ranger" was fairly under way.

It was a pitch-dark night, but the lights on board the "Drake" showed
where she was lying. On the "Ranger" all lights were extinguished, and
no noise told of her progress towards her enemy. It was the captain's
plan to run his vessel across the "Drake's" cable, drop his own
anchor, let the "Ranger" swing alongside the Englishman, and then
fight it out at close quarters. But this plan, though well laid,
failed of execution. The anchor was not let fall in season; and the
"Ranger," instead of bringing up alongside her enemy, came to anchor
half a cable-length astern. The swift-flowing tide and the fresh
breeze made it impossible to warp the ship alongside: so Jones ordered
the cable cut, and the "Ranger" scudded down the bay before the
ever-freshening gale. It does not appear that the people on the
"Drake" were aware of the danger they so narrowly escaped.

The wind that had aided the tide in defeating Jones's enterprise blew
stronger and stronger, and before morning the sea was tossing before a
regular north-east gale. Against it the "Ranger" could make no
headway: so Jones gave his ship her head, and scudded before the wind
until within the vicinity of Whitehaven, when he determined to again
attempt to destroy the shipping in that port. This time he was
successful. Bringing the "Ranger" to anchor near the bar, Capt. Jones
called for volunteers to accompany him on the expedition. He himself
was to be their leader; for as a boy he had often sailed in and out of
the little harbor, knew where the forts stood, and where the colliers
anchored most thickly. The landing party was divided into two
boat-loads; Jones taking command of one, while Lieut. Wallingford held
the tiller of the other boat. With muffled oars the Americans made for
the shore, the boats' keels grated upon the pebbly shore, and an
instant later the adventurers had scaled the ramparts of the forts,
and had made themselves masters of the garrisons. All was done
quietly. The guns in the fortifications were spiked; and, leaving the
few soldiers on guard gagged and bound, Jones and his followers
hastened down to the wharves to set fire to the shipping.

In the harbor were not less than two hundred and twenty vessels, large
and small. On the north side of the harbor, near the forts, were about
one hundred and fifty vessels. These Jones undertook to destroy. The
others were left to Lieut. Wallingford, with his boat's crew of
fifteen picked men.

When Jones and his followers reached the cluster of merchantmen, they
found their torches so far burned out as to be useless. Failure stared
them in the face then, when success was almost within their grasp.
Jones, however, was not to be balked of his prey. Running his boat
ashore, he hastened to a neighboring house, where he demanded candles.
With these he returned, led his men aboard a large ship from which the
crew fled, and deliberately built a fire in her hold. Lest the fire
should go out, he found a barrel of tar, and threw it upon the flames.
Then with the great ship roaring and crackling, and surrounded by
scores of other vessels in danger from the flames, Jones withdrew,
thinking his work complete.

Many writers have criticised Paul Jones for not having stayed longer
to complete the destruction of the vessels in the harbor. But, with
the gradually brightening day, his position, which was at the best
very dangerous, was becoming desperate. There were one hundred and
fifty vessels in that part of the harbor; the crews averaged ten men
to a vessel: so that nearly fifteen hundred men were opposed to the
plucky little band of Americans. The roar of the fire aroused the
people of the town, and they rushed in crowds to the wharf. In
describing the affair Jones writes, "The inhabitants began to appear
in thousands, and individuals ran hastily toward us. I stood between
them and the ship on fire, with my pistol in my hand, and ordered them
to stand, which they did with some precipitation. The sun was a full
hour's march above the horizon; and, as sleep no longer ruled the
world, it was time to retire. We re-embarked without opposition,
having released a number of prisoners, as our boats could not carry
them. After all my people had embarked, I stood upon the pier for a
considerable space, yet no person advanced. I saw all the eminences
round the town covered with the amazed inhabitants."

As his boat drew away from the blazing shipping, Jones looked
anxiously across the harbor to the spot to which Lieut. Wallingford
had been despatched. But no flames were seen in that quarter; for,
Wallingford's torches having gone out, he had abandoned the
enterprise. And so the Americans, having regained their ship, took
their departure, leaving only one of the enemy's vessels burning. A
most lame and impotent conclusion it was indeed; but, as Jones said,
"What was done is sufficient to show that not all the boasted British
navy is sufficient to protect their own coasts, and that the scenes of
distress which they have occasioned in America may soon be brought
home to their own doors."




CHAPTER VII.

     CAREER OF PAUL JONES CONTINUED. -- HIS DESCENT UPON THE
     CASTLE OF LORD SELKIRK -- THE AFFAIR OF THE PLATE. -- THE
     DESCENT UPON WHITEHAVEN. -- THE BATTLE WITH THE
     "DRAKE."-LIEUT. SIMPSON'S PERFIDY.


We now come to the glorious part of the career of Paul Jones upon the
ocean. Heretofore he has been chiefly occupied in the capture of
defenceless merchantmen. His work has been that of the privateer, even
if not of the pirate that the British have always claimed he was. But
the time came when Jones proved that he was ready to fight an
adversary of his mettle; was willing to take heavy blows, and deal
stunning ones in return. His daring was not confined to dashing
expeditions in which the danger was chiefly overcome by spirit and
rapid movements. While this class of operations was ever a favorite
with the doughty seaman, he was not at all averse to the deadly naval
duel.

We shall for a time abandon our account of the general naval incidents
of the Revolution, to follow the career of Paul Jones to the end of
the war. His career is not only the most interesting, but the most
important, feature of the naval operations of that war. He stands out
alone, a grand figure in naval history, as does Decatur in the wars
with the Barbary pirates, or Farragut in the war for the Union. The
war of 1812 affords no such example of single greatness in the navy.
There we find Perry, McDonough, and Porter, all equally great. But in
'76 there was no one to stand beside Paul Jones.

When the "Ranger" left the harbor of Whitehaven, her captain was heavy
hearted. He felt that he had had the opportunity to strike a heavy
blow at the British shipping, but had nevertheless inflicted only a
trifling hurt. Angry with himself for not having better planned the
adventure, and discontented with his lieutenant for not having by
presence of mind prevented the fiasco, he felt that peace of mind
could only be obtained by some deed of successful daring.

He was cruising in seas familiar to him as a sailor. Along the
Scottish shores his boyhood hours had been spent. This knowledge he
sought to turn to account. From the deck of his ship, he could see the
wooded shores of St. Mary's Island, on which were the landed estates
of Lord Selkirk, a British noble, of ancient lineage and political
prominence. On the estate of this nobleman Paul Jones was born, and
there he passed the few years of his life that elapsed before he
forsook the land for his favorite element.

Leaning against the rail on the quarter-deck of the "Ranger," Jones
could see through his spy-glass the turrets and spires of Lord
Selkirk's castle. As he gazed, there occurred to him the idea, that if
he could send a landing party ashore, seize the castle, capture the
peer, and bear him off into captivity, he would not only strike terror
into the hearts of the British, but would give the Americans a
prisoner who would serve as a hostage to secure good treatment for the
hapless Americans who had fallen into the hands of the enemy.

With Jones, the conception of a plan was followed by its swift
execution. Disdaining to wait for nightfall, he chose two boats' crews
of tried and trusty men, and landed. The party started up the broad
and open highway leading to the castle. They had gone but a few rods,
however, when they encountered two countrymen, who stared a moment at
the force of armed men, and then turned in fear to escape.

"Halt!" rang out the clear voice of the leader of the blue-jackets;
and the peasants fell upon their faces in abject terror. Jones
directed that they be brought to him; and he questioned them kindly,
setting their minds at rest, and learning from them much of the castle
and its inmates. Lord Selkirk was away from home. This to Jones was
bitter news. It seemed as though some evil genius was dogging his
footsteps, bringing failure upon his most carefully planned
enterprises. But he was not a man to repine over the inevitable, and
he promptly ordered his men to the right about, and made for the
landing-place again.

But the sailors were not so unselfish in their motives as their
captain. They had come ashore expecting to plunder the castle of the
earl, and they now murmured loudly over the abandonment of the
adventure. They saw the way clear before them. No guards protected the
house. The massive ancestral plate, with which all English landed
families are well provided, was unprotected by bolts or bars. They
felt that, in retreating, they were throwing away a chance to despoil
their enemy, and enrich themselves.

Jones felt the justice of the complaint of the sailors; but only after
a fierce struggle with his personal scruples could he yield the point.
The grounds of the Earl of Selkirk had been his early playground. A
lodge on the vast estate had been his childhood's home. Lady Selkirk
had shown his family many kindnesses. To now come to her house as a
robber and pillager, seemed the blackest ingratitude; but, on the
other hand, he had no right to permit his personal feelings to
interfere with his duty to the crew. The sailors had followed him into
danger many a time, and this was their first opportunity for financial
reward. And, even if it was fair to deny them this chance to make a
little prize-money, it would hardly be safe to sow the seeds of
discontent among the crew while on a cruise in waters infested with
the enemy's ships. With a sigh Jones abandoned his intention of
protecting the property of Lady Selkirk, and ordered his lieutenant to
proceed to the castle, and capture the family plate. Jones himself
returned to the ship, resolved to purchase the spoils at open sale,
and return them to their former owner.

The blue-jackets continued their way up the highway, and, turning
aside where a heavy gate opened into a stately grove, demanded of an
old man who came, wondering, out of the lodge, that he give them
instant admittance. Then, swinging into a trot, they ran along the
winding carriage-drive until they came out on the broad lawn that
extended in front of the castle. Here for the first time they were
seen by the inmates of the castle; and faint screams of fear, and
shouts of astonishment, came from the open windows of the stately
pile. The men-servants came rushing out to discover who the lawless
crowd that so violated the sanctity of an English earl's private park
could be; but their curiosity soon abated when a few stout
blue-jackets, cutlass and pistol in hand, surrounded them, and bade
them keep quiet. The lieutenant, with two stout seamen at his back,
then entered the castle, and sought out the mistress, who received him
with calm courtesy, with a trace of scorn, but with no sign of fear.

Briefly the lieutenant told his errand. The countess gave an order to
a butler, and soon a line of stout footmen entered, bearing the plate.
Heavy salvers engraved with the family arms of Lord Selkirk, quaint
drinking-cups and flagons curiously carved, ewers, goblets, platters,
covers, dishes, teapots, and all kinds of table utensils were there,
all of exquisitely artistic workmanship, and bearing the stamp of
antiquity. When all was ready, the lieutenant called in two of the
sailors from the lawn; and soon the whole party, bearing the captured
treasure, disappeared in the curves of the road.

This incident, simple enough in reality, the novelist Fenimore Cooper
has made the germ of one of his exquisite sea-tales, "The Pilot."
British historians have made of it an example by which to prove the
lawlessness and base ingratitude of Paul Jones. As may readily be
imagined, it stirred up at the time the most intense excitement in
England. Jones became the bugbear of timid people. His name was used
to frighten little children. He was called pirate, traitor,
free-booter, plunderer. It was indeed a most audacious act that he had
committed. Never before or since had the soil of England been trodden
by a hostile foot. Never had a British peer been forced to feel that
his own castle was not safe from the invader. Jones, with his handful
of American tars, had accomplished a feat which had never before been
accomplished, and which no later foeman of England has dared to
repeat. It is little wonder that the British papers described him as a
bloodthirsty desperado.

A few weeks later, the captured plate was put up for sale by the prize
agents. Capt. Jones, though not a rich man, bought it, and returned it
to the countess. Lord Selkirk, in acknowledging its receipt, wrote,--

"And on all occasions, both now and formerly, I have done you the
justice to tell that you made an offer of returning the plate very
soon after your return to Brest; and although you yourself were not
at my house, but remained at the shore with your boat, that you had
your officers and men in such extraordinary good discipline, that your
having given them the strictest orders to behave well,--to do no
injury of any kind, to make no search, but only to bring off what
plate was given them,--that in reality they did exactly as was
ordered; and that not one man offered to stir from his post on the
outside of the house, nor entered the doors, nor said an uncivil word;
that the two officers stayed not one-quarter of an hour in the parlor
and in the butler's pantry while the butler got the plate together,
behaved politely, and asked for nothing but the plate, and instantly
marched their men off in regular order; and that both officers and men
behaved in all respects so well, that it would have done credit to the
best-disciplined troops whatever."

But the British took little notice of the generous reparation made by
Capt. Jones, and continued to hurl abuse and hard names at him.

Jones was vastly disappointed at his failure to capture the person of
Lord Selkirk. The story of the sufferings of his countrymen in British
prisons worked upon his heart, and he longed to take captive a
personage whom he could hold as hostage. But, soon after leaving St.
Mary's Isle, he fell in again with the British man-of-war "Drake;" and
as a result of this encounter he had prisoners enough to exchange for
many hapless Americans languishing in hulks and prisons.

After the wind and tide had defeated the midnight attempt made by
Jones to capture the "Drake," that craft had remained quietly at her
anchorage, little suspecting that the bay of Carrickfergus had held so
dangerous a neighbor. But soon reports of the "Ranger's" depredations
began to reach the ears of the British captain. The news of the
desperate raid upon Whitehaven became known to him. He therefore
determined to leave his snug anchorage, and go in search of the
audacious Yankee. Just as the captain of the "Drake" had reached this
determination, and while he was making sail, the "Ranger" appeared off
the mouth of the harbor.

The "Drake" promptly sent out a boat to examine the strange craft, and
report upon her character. Jones saw her coming, and resolved to throw
her off the scent. Accordingly, by skilful seamanship, he kept the
stern of the "Ranger" continually presented to the prying eyes in the
British boat. Turn which way they might, be as swift in their
manoeuvres as they might, the British scouts could see nothing of the
"Ranger" but her stern, pierced with two cabin windows, as might be
the stern of any merchantman. Her sides, dotted with frowning ports,
were kept securely hidden from their eyes.

Though provided with spy-glasses, the people in the boat were totally
deceived. Unsuspectingly they came up under the stern of the "Ranger,"
and demanded to come on board. As the officer in command clambered up
a rope, and vaulted the taffrail to the quarter-deck, he saw Paul
Jones and his lieutenants, in full uniform, standing before him.

"Why,--why, what ship's this?" stammered the astonished officer.

"This is the American Continental ship 'Ranger,' and you are my
prisoner," responded Jones; and at the words a few sailors, with
cutlasses and pistols, called to the men in the boat alongside, to
come aboard and give themselves up.

From his captives Jones learned that the news of the Whitehaven raid
had reached the "Drake" only the night before; and that she had been
re-enforcing her crew with volunteers, preparatory to going out in
search of the "Ranger." As he stood talking to the captured British
naval officer, Jones noticed slender columns of smoke rising from the
woods on neighboring highlands, where he knew there were no houses.

"What does that mean?" he asked.

"Alarm fires, sir," answered the captive; "the news of your descent
upon Whitehaven is terrifying the whole country."

Soon, however, the attention of the Americans was diverted from the
signal-fires to the "Drake." An appearance of life and bustle was
observable about the boat. The shrill notes of the boatswain's
whistle, and the tramp of men about the capstan, came faintly over the
waters. The rigging was full of sailors, and the sails were being
quickly spread to catch the fresh breeze. Soon the ship began to move
slowly from her anchorage; she heeled a little to one side, and,
responsive to her helm, turned down the bay. She was coming out to
look after her lost boat.

Jones determined to hold his ground, and give battle to the
Englishman. He at once began to prepare for battle in every way
possible without alarming the enemy. The great guns were loaded and
primed. Cutlasses and pistols were brought up from the armorer's room,
and placed in convenient locations on the main deck, so that the
boarders might find them when needed. The powder-monkeys, stripped for
action, and the handlers and cartridge-makers entered the
powder-magazine, and prepared to hand out the deadly explosive. The
cook and his assistant strewed sawdust and ashes about the decks, to
catch the blood, and keep the men from slipping. Every one was busy,
from the captain down to the galley-boy.

There was plenty of time to prepare; for the tide was out, and the
"Drake," beating down a narrow channel, made but slow headway. The
delay was a severe strain upon the nerves of the men, who stood silent
and grim at their quarters on the American ship, waiting for the fight
to begin. At such a moment, even the most courageous must lose heart,
as he thinks upon the terrible ordeal through which he must pass.
Visions of home and loved ones flit before his misty eyes; and Jack
chokes down a sob as he hides his emotion in nervously fingering the
lock of his gun, or taking a squint through the port-holes at the
approaching enemy.

At length the "Drake" emerged from the narrow channel of the harbor,
and coming within hailing distance of the "Ranger," ran up the flag of
England, and hailed,--

"What ship is that?"

Paul Jones, himself standing on the taffrail, made answer,--

"This is the American Continental ship 'Ranger.' We are waiting for
you. The sun is but little more than an hour from setting. It is
therefore time to begin."

The "Drake" lay with her bow towards the "Ranger," and a little
astern. As Jones finished speaking, he turned to the man at the wheel,
and said, "Put your helm up. Up, I say!"

Quickly responsive to her helm, the vessel swung round; and, as her
broadside came to bear, she let fly a full broadside of solid shot
into the crowded decks and hull of the "Drake." Through timbers and
planks, flesh and bone, the iron hail rushed, leaving death, wounds,
and destruction in its path. The volunteers that the "Drake" had added
to her crew so crowded the decks, that the execution was fearful. It
seemed as though every shot found a human mark.

But the British were not slow to return the fire, and the roar of
their broadside was heard before the thunder of the American fire had
ceased to reverberate among the hills along the shore.

Then followed a desperate naval duel. The tide of victory flowed now
this way, and now that. Jones kept his ship at close quarters with the
enemy, and stood on the quarter-deck urging on his gunners, now
pointing out some vulnerable spot, now applauding a good shot, at one
time cheering, and at another swearing, watching every movement of his
foe, and giving quick but wise orders to his helmsman, his whole mind
concentrated upon the course of battle, and with never a thought for
his own safety.

For more than an hour the battle raged, but the superior gunnery of
the Americans soon began to tell. The "Drake" fought under no colors,
her ensign having been shot away early in the action. But the spirited
manner in which her guns were worked gave assurance that she had not
struck. The American fire had wrought great execution on the deck of
the Englishman. Her captain was desperately wounded early in the
fight; and the first lieutenant, who took his place, was struck down
by a musket-ball from the "Ranger's" tops. The cock-pit of the "Drake"
was like a butcher's shambles, so bespattered was it with blood. But
on the "Ranger" there was little execution. The brave Wallingford,
Jones's first lieutenant and right-hand man, was killed early in the
action, and one poor fellow accompanied him to his long account; but
beyond this there were no deaths. Six men only were wounded.

The sun was just dipping the lower edge of its great red circle
beneath the watery horizon, when the "Drake" began to show signs of
failing. First her fire slackened. A few guns would go off at a time,
followed by a long silence. That portion of her masts which was
visible above the clouds of gunpowder-smoke showed plainly the results
of American gunnery. The sails were shot to ribbons. The cordage cut
by the flying shot hung loosely down, or was blown out by the breeze.
The spars were shattered, and hung out of place. The main-mast canted
to leeward, and was in imminent danger of falling. The jib had been
shot away entirely, and was trailing in the water alongside the ship.

Gradually the fire of the "Drake" slackened, until at last it had
ceased altogether. Noticing this, Capt. Jones gave orders to cease
firing; and soon silence reigned over the bay that had for an hour
resounded with the thunder of cannon. As the smoke that enveloped the
two ships cleared away, the people on the "Ranger" could see an
officer standing on the rail of the "Drake" waving a white flag. At
the sight a mighty huzza went up from the gallant lads on the Yankee
ship, which was, however, quickly checked by Jones.

"Have you struck your flag?" he shouted through a speaking-trumpet.

"We have, sir," was the response.

"Then lay by until I send a boat aboard," directed Capt. Jones; and
soon after a cutter put off from the side of the "Ranger," and made
for the captured ship.

The boarding-officer clambered over the bulwarks of the "Drake," and,
veteran naval officer as he was, started in amazement at the scene of
bloodshed before him. He had left a ship on which were two dead and
six wounded men. He had come to a ship on which were forty men either
dead or seriously wounded. Two dismounted cannon lay across the deck,
one resting on the shattered and bleeding fragments of a man, torn to
pieces by a heavy shot. The deck was slippery with blood. The cock-pit
was not large enough to hold all the wounded; and many sufferers lay
on the deck crying piteously for aid, and surrounded by the mangled
bodies of their dead comrades. The body of the captain, who had died
of his wound, lay on the deserted quarter-deck.

Hastily the American officer noted the condition of the prize, and
returned to his own ship for aid. All the boats of the "Ranger" were
then lowered, and in the growing darkness the work of taking
possession of the prize began. Most of the prisoners were transferred
to the "Ranger." The dead were thrown overboard without burial service
or ceremony of any kind, such is the grim earnestness of war. Such of
the wounded as could not be taken care of in the sick-bay of the
"Drake" were transferred to the "Ranger." The decks were scrubbed,
holystoned, and sprinkled with hot vinegar to take away the smell of
the blood-soaked planks. Cordage was spliced, sails mended, shot-holes
plugged up; and, by the time morning came, the two ships were
sufficiently repaired to be ready to leave the bay.

But, before leaving, Capt. Jones set at liberty two fishermen, whom he
had captured several days before, and held prisoners lest they should
spread the news of his presence in those parts. While the fishermen
had been taken on board the "Ranger," and treated with the utmost
kindness, their boat had been made fast alongside. Unluckily, however,
the stormy weather had torn the boat from its fastenings; and it
foundered before the eyes of its luckless owners, who bitterly
bewailed their hard fate as they saw their craft disappear. But, when
they came to leave the "Ranger," their sorrow was turned to joy; for
Jones gave them money enough to buy for them a new boat and outfit,--a
bit of liberality very characteristic of the man.

When the "Drake" was in condition to sail, Jones put her in command of
Lieut. Simpson, and the two vessels left the bay. This choice of
commander proved to be an unfortunate one. Simpson was in many ways a
most eccentric officer. He was a violent advocate of equal rights of
all men, and even went so far as to disbelieve in the discipline
without which no efficiency can be obtained on ship-board. He was an
eighteenth-century Sir Joseph Porter. He believed that all questions
of importance on ship-board should be settled by a vote of the crew;
that the captain was, in a certain sense, only perpetual chairman of a
meeting, and should only execute the will of the sailors. Naturally,
this view of an officer's authority was little relished by Lieut.
Simpson's brother officers, and he had for some time been greatly
dissatisfied with his position.

When it came about, therefore, that the "Ranger," seeing a strange
sail in the offing, left the "Drake" to go in pursuit of the stranger,
Lieut. Simpson saw his chance to make off with the "Drake," and thus
rid himself of the disagreeable necessity of submitting to the orders
of a superior officer. This course he determined to adopt; and when
Jones, having overtaken the stranger and found her a neutral, turned
to rejoin his prize, he was vastly astounded at the evolutions of the
"Drake." The vessel which he had left in charge of one of his trusted
officers seemed to be trying to elude him. She was already hull down
on the horizon, and was carrying every stitch of sail. The "Ranger"
signalled to her colleague to return, but in vain. Several large ships
were in sight; but Jones, perplexed by the strange antics of his
consort, abandoned all thoughts of making captures, and made after the
rapidly vanishing "Drake."

As the "Ranger" cut through the ugly cross seas of the channel, Jones
revolved in his mind the causes which might lead to the inexplicable
flight of his consort. His chief fear was that the prisoners on the
"Drake" might have risen, overpowered their captors, and were then
endeavoring to take the ship into a British port. Convinced that this
was the true explanation of the matter, Jones made tremendous efforts
to overhaul the prize before the night should give her an opportunity
to elude pursuit. Every thing from jib-boom to main-truck, that would
draw, was set on the "Ranger;" and the gallant little vessel ploughed
along at a rate that almost belied her reputation as a slow craft.
After an hour's run, it became evident that the "Ranger" was gaining
ground. Nevertheless, darkness settled over the waters, and the
"Drake" was still far in the lead. It was not until the next day that
the runaway was overhauled. Upon boarding the "Drake," Jones found, to
his intense indignation, that not to the revolt of the captives, but
to the wilful and silly insubordination of Lieut. Simpson, the flight
of the captured vessel was due. This officer, feeling himself
aggrieved by something Jones had said or done, had determined to seize
upon the "Drake," repair her in some French port, and thenceforward to
cruise as a privateer. This plan was nipped in the bud by Jones, who
put the disobedient officer in irons, and carried the "Drake" into
Brest as a prize.

All Europe now rang with the praises of Paul Jones. Looked at in the
calm light of history, his achievements do not appear so very
remarkable. But it is none the less true that they have never been
paralleled. Before the day of Paul Jones, no hostile vessel had ever
swept the English Channel and Irish Sea clear of British merchantmen.
And since the day of Paul Jones the exploit has never been repeated,
save by the little American brig "Argus" in the War of 1812. But
neither before nor since the day of Paul Jones has the spectacle of a
British ship in an English port, blazing with fire applied by the
torches of an enemy, been seen. And no other man than Paul Jones has,
for several centuries, led an invading force down the level highways,
and across the green fields, of England.




CHAPTER VIII.

     THE CAREER OF PAUL JONES CONTINUED. -- HIS SEARCH FOR A
     SHIP. -- GIVEN COMMAND OF THE "BON HOMME RICHARD." --
     LANDAIS AND HIS CHARACTER. -- THE FRUSTRATED MUTINY. --
     LANDAIS QUARRELS WITH JONES. -- EDINBURGH AND LEITH
     THREATENED. -- THE DOMINIE'S PRAYER.


When Paul Jones arrived at Brest, bringing the captured Drake, he
found the situation of affairs materially altered. France had
acknowledged the independence of the American Colonies, and had openly
espoused their cause as against that of Great Britain. It was no
longer necessary to resort to cunning deceptions to buy a war-ship or
sell a prize in a French port. French vessels, manned by French crews
and commanded by French officers, were putting to sea to strike a blow
against the British. French troops were being sent to America. The
stars and stripes waved by the side of the _fleur de lys_; and
Benjamin Franklin, the American envoy, was the lion of French society,
and the idol of the Parisian mob.

Paul Jones saw in this friendship of France for the struggling
colonies his opportunity. Heretofore he had been condemned to command
only slow-going, weak ships. He had been hampered by a lack of funds
for the payment of his crew and the purchase of provisions. More than
once the inability of the impoverished Continental Congress to provide
the sinews of war had forced him to go down into his own purse for the
necessary funds. All this period of penury he now felt was past. He
could rely upon the king of France for a proper vessel, and the funds
with which to prosecute his work on the seas. Accordingly, when the
"Ranger" was again ready for sea, he turned her over to the
insubordinate Lieut. Simpson, while he himself remained in France with
the expectation of being provided with a better ship.

But the sturdy seaman soon found how vexatious is the lot of him who
depends upon the bounty of monarchs. Ship after ship was put in
commission, but no command was tendered to the distinguished American.
The French naval officers had first to be attended to. Jones made
earnest appeals to the minister of the marine. He brought every
possible influence to bear. His claims were urged by Dr. Franklin, but
all to no avail. At last an appointment came. It was to command an
English prize, lately captured and brought into Brest. Thither went
Jones to examine the craft. Much to his disappointment, he found her
very slow; and this determined him to decline the commission.

"I wish to have no connection with any ship that does not sail fast,"
he wrote to a gentleman who had secured for him the appointment; "for
I intend to go in harm's way. You know I believe that this is not
every one's intention. Therefore, buy a frigate that sails fast, and
that is sufficiently large to carry twenty-six or twenty-eight guns,
not less than twelve-pounders, on one deck. I would rather be shot
ashore than sent to sea in such things as the armed prizes I have
described."

Five months of waiting and ceaseless solicitation of the authorities
still left the sailor, who had won so many victories, stranded in
shameful inactivity. He had shrunk from a personal interview with the
king, trusting rather to the efforts of his friends, many of whom were
in high favor at Versailles. But one day he happened to light upon an
old copy of "Poor Richard's Almanac," that unique publication in which
Benjamin Franklin printed so many wise maxims and witty sayings. As
Jones listlessly turned its pages, his eye fell upon the maxim,--

"If you wish to have any business done faithfully and expeditiously,
go and do it yourself. Otherwise, send some one."

Shutting the book, and dashing it to the floor, Jones sprang to his
feet exclaiming, "I will go to Versailles this very day." Before night
he set out, and soon reached the royal court. His reputation easily
gained him an interview; and his frank, self-reliant way so impressed
the monarch, that in five days the American was tendered the command
of the ship "Daras," mounting forty guns.

Great was the exultation of the American seaman at this happy
termination of his labor. Full of gratitude to the distinguished
philosopher whose advice had proved so effective, he wrote to the
minister of marine, begging permission to change the name of the
vessel to the "Poor Richard," or, translated into French, the "Bon
Homme Richard." Permission was readily granted; and thereafter the
"Bon Homme Richard," with Paul Jones on the quarter-deck, did valiant
work for the cause of the young American Republic.

The "Bon Homme Richard" was lying in the harbor of L'Orient when Jones
visited her to examine his new ship. He found her a fairly well
modelled craft, giving promise of being a good sailer. She had one of
the high pitched poops that were so common in the early part of the
last century, and that gave to the sterns of ships of that period the
appearance of lofty towers. Originally she was a single-decked ship,
mounting her battery on one gun-deck, with the exception of a few
cannon on the quarter-deck and forecastle. The gun-deck mounted
twenty-eight guns, all twelve-pounders. On the quarter-deck and
forecastle were eight long nines. To this armament Jones at once added
six eighteen-pounders, which were mounted in the gun-room below.

To man this vessel, Jones was obliged to recruit a most motley crew.
Few American seamen were then in France, and he considered himself
fortunate to find enough to fill the stations of officers on the
quarter-deck and forward. For his crew proper he was forced to accept
an undisciplined crowd of Portuguese, Norwegians, Germans, Spaniards,
Swedes, Italians, Malays, Scotch, Irish, and even a few Englishmen.
About a hundred and thirty-five marines were put aboard to keep order
among this rabble; and, even with this aid to discipline, it is
wonderful that no disturbance ever broke out in a crew that was made
up of so many discordant elements.

While the "Bon Homme Richard" was being made ready for sea, the
vessels that were to sail with her as consorts were making for the
rendezvous at L'Orient. These vessels were the "Pallas," "Cerf,"
"Vengeance," and "Alliance." The three former were small vessels,
built in France, and manned wholly by Frenchmen. The "Alliance" was a
powerful, well-built American frigate, carrying an American crew, but
commanded by a French officer,--Capt. Landais. This vessel was the
last to arrive at the rendezvous, as she had a stormy and somewhat
eventful trip across the ocean.

The "Alliance" was a thirty-two gun frigate, built under the
supervision of the American Marine Committee, and which had come to
European waters, bringing as a passenger the distinguished Gen.
Lafayette. As has been stated, she was under the command of a French
naval officer, to whom the command had been offered as a compliment to
France. Unfortunately the jack tars of America were not so anxious to
compliment France, and looked with much disfavor upon the prospect of
serving under a Frenchman. Capt. Landais, therefore, found great
difficulty in getting a crew to man his frigate; and when Lafayette
reached Boston, ready to embark for France, the roster of the ship in
which he was to sail was still painfully incomplete. Great was the
mortification of the American authorities; and the government of
Massachusetts, desiring to aid the distinguished Frenchman in every
way, offered to complete by impressment. It is vastly to the credit of
Lafayette that he refused for a moment to countenance a method of
recruiting so entirely in opposition to those principles of liberty to
which he was devoted. But, though impressment was not resorted to, a
plan hardly less objectionable was adopted. The British man-of-war
"Somerset" had been wrecked on the New England coast some time before,
and many of her crew were then in Boston. These men volunteered to
join the crew of the "Alliance," though by so doing they knew that
they were likely to be forced to fight against their own flag and
countrymen. But the ties of nationality bear lightly upon sailors, and
these men were as ready to fight under the stars and stripes as under
the cross of St. George.

With a crew made up of Americans, Englishmen, and Frenchmen, the
"Alliance" put to sea in the early part of January, 1779. It was the
most stormy season of the year on the tempestuous Atlantic. But the
storms which racked the good ship from without were as nothing to the
turbulence within. In the forecastle were three different elements of
discord. British, French, and Americans quarrelled bitterly among
themselves, and the jackies went about their work with a sullen air
that betokened trouble brewing.

The officers suspected the impending trouble, but had little idea of
its extent. They were living over a volcano which was liable to burst
forth at any moment. The Englishmen in the crew, who numbered some
seventy or eighty, had determined to mutiny, and had perfected all
their plans for the uprising. Their intention was not only to seize
the ship, and take her into an English port, but they proposed to
wreak their hatred in the bloodiest form upon the officers. Capt.
Landais, as the special object of their hate, was to be put into an
open boat without food, water, oars, or sails. Heavy irons were to
bind his wrists and ankles, and he was to be set adrift to starve on
the open ocean. The fate of the surgeon and marine officer was to be
equally hard. They were to be hanged and quartered, and their bodies
cast into the sea. The sailing-master was to be seized up to the
mizzen-mast, stripped to the waist, and his back cut to pieces with
the cat-of-nine-tails; after which he was to be slowly hacked to
pieces with cutlasses, and thrown into the sea. The gunner, carpenter,
and boatswain were to be mercifully treated. No torture was prepared
for them, but they were to be promptly put to death. As to the
lieutenants, they were to be given the choice between navigating the
ship to the nearest British port, or walking the plank.

This sanguinary programme the mutineers discussed day and night. The
ringleaders were in the same watch, and in the silent hours of the
night matured their plans, and picked out men whom they thought would
join them. One by one they cautiously chose their associates. The
sailor whom the mutineers thought was a safe man would be led quietly
apart from his fellows to some secluded nook on the gun-deck; and
there, with many pledges to secrecy, the plot would be revealed, and
his assistance asked. Or perhaps of two men out on the end of a
tossing yard-arm, far above the raging waters, one would be a
mutineer, and would take that opportunity to try to win his fellow
sailor to the cause. So the mutiny spread apace; and the volcano was
almost ready to burst forth, when all was discovered, and the plans of
the mutineers were happily defeated.

The conspirators had succeeded in gaining the support of all the
Englishmen in the crew, as well as many of the sailors of other
nationalities. So numerous were their adherents, that they were well
able to capture the ship; but before so doing they sought to gain one
more recruit. This man was an American sailor, who had lived long in
Ireland, and spoke with a slight brogue, that led the conspirators to
think him a subject of the king, and an enemy to the revolted
colonies. This man was known to have some knowledge of navigation, and
the mutineers felt that his assistance would be essential to the
success of their plot. Though they had planned to force the
lieutenant, under penalty of death, to navigate the vessel into a
British port, they had no means of telling whether the lieutenant
should play them false. It would be an easy matter for an officer to
take the ship into a French port, where the lives of the conspirators
should pay the penalty of their misdeeds. Accordingly, it was highly
important for them to number among them some one versed in the science
of navigation; and, with this end in view, they turned to the young
Irish-American.

The young seaman proved to be possessed of the loyalty and shrewdness
of the Yankee, together with a touch of the blarney of the genuine
Irishman. He listened to the complaints of the mutineers, sympathized
with their grievances, entered heartily into their plans, and by his
apparent interest in the conspiracy soon became looked upon as one of
the chief ringleaders.

He learned that the plan of the conspirators was to assemble on deck
about daylight on a certain day when one of the conspirators should be
posted in the tops as lookout. This man was to raise the cry of "Sail,
ho!" when the officers and passengers would of course come to the
quarter-deck unarmed. The mutineers would commence operations by
seizing them in a body. Then, separating into four parties, the
conspirators would seize upon the ship. On the forecastle were mounted
four nine-pound guns. These were usually kept charged with blank
cartridge only; but a gunner's mate, who was one of the ringleaders,
had quietly slipped a charge of canister into each gun. Should the
officers show signs of resistance, these cannon were to be trained
aft, and the quarter-deck swept by their discharge. Discipline on a
man-of-war requires that the crew should be kept disarmed, except in
time of battle; the cutlasses, pikes, and pistols being given over to
the armorer. But a sergeant of marines had done the cause of the
mutineers good service, by purloining some muskets, and handing them
over to the ringleaders.

Having thus gained full knowledge of the plans of the mutineers, the
loyal seaman sought the first opportunity to warn the officers of the
ship. But not until three o'clock on the afternoon before the day set
for the mutiny could he manage to slip into the captain's cabin unseen
by the conspirators. Landais and Lafayette were seated there talking.

"Well, what's wanted now?" asked the captain in the peremptory tone
officers assume in speaking to a sailor.

The intruder stammered and looked confused, but finally managed to
tell the story. Landais was amazed. That so dangerous a conspiracy
should have been nurtured in his crew, astonished him beyond
expression. But he wasted no time in vain conjectures. Quietly the
word was passed to the officers and passengers to assemble in the
captain's cabin. Some trusty petty officers were given arms to
distribute among the American and French seamen who had not been
infected with the fever of mutiny. At a given signal the officers and
passengers rushed to the quarter-deck. The American and French seamen
joined them; and the conspirators suddenly found themselves confronted
by an angry body of determined men, fully armed.

The leading mutineers were pointed out by the informer, instantly
seized, and hurried below in irons. Then the work of arresting the
other conspirators began, and was continued until about forty of the
English were in irons. While the work was progressing, a square-rigged
ship hove in sight, and was soon made out to be one of the enemy's
twenty-gun ships. Under ordinary circumstances, the "Alliance" would
have sought to give battle to the enemy; but in the present instance,
with mutiny rife among his crew, Capt. Landais thought it his wisest
course to avoid the stranger. A few days later, the "Alliance" arrived
at Brest, where the mutineers were thrown into jail, and kept in close
confinement, until exchanged for American prisoners in the hands of
the British.

But to return to Paul Jones, whom we left with the "Bon Homme Richard"
lying at anchor in the harbor of L'Orient waiting for the arrival of
his allies. On the 19th of June, 1779, all were ready to sail, and
left the harbor with a few coasters and transports under convoy. The
"Bon Homme Richard" was the largest vessel of the little fleet; next
came the "Alliance," under command of Capt. Landais; then the
"Pallas," an old merchantman hastily remodelled, and mounting
thirty-two guns; then the "Cerf" with eighteen guns, and the
"Vengeance" with twelve. Though not a very formidable armada, this
little fleet might have done great good to the American cause, had
Paul Jones been given proper authority, and had his daring plans been
countenanced by the French authorities. But, though nominally
commander-in-chief, Jones soon found that he had no means of enforcing
his authority. He found that the three Frenchmen in command of the
other vessels of the squadron looked upon him as a partner in the
enterprise, rather than as a leader with absolute authority. They paid
no heed to the signals set at the fore of the flag-ship. They wilfully
disobeyed orders. Worse than all, they proved to be poor seamen; and
the squadron had hardly got into blue water before the "Alliance" was
run foul of the "Richard," losing her own mizzen-mast, and tearing
away the head and bowsprit of the flag-ship. Thus, after long months
of preparation for sea, Jones found himself forced to return to port
to refit. It has been charged that this accident was not altogether
accidental, so far as the "Alliance" was concerned. Landais, the
commander of that vessel, hated Jones, and was insanely jealous of the
man who outranked him. The collision was only the first of a series of
mishaps, all of which Landais ascribed to accident, but which
unprejudiced readers must confess seem to have been inspired by malice
or the results of gross incompetence.

A few days sufficed to repair all damage, and again the vessels sought
the open sea. When two days out, a strange sail was sighted. Jones
crowded all sail on the "Richard," and set out in hot pursuit, but
found, to his bitter disappointment, that his ship was a wretchedly
slow sailer. Therefore, signalling to the swift-sailing "Cerf" to
follow the stranger, he abandoned the chase to the smaller craft. All
night long the cutter followed in the wake of the stranger, and when
day broke the two vessels were near enough to each other to readily
make out each other's character. The stranger proved to be a small
English cruiser of fourteen guns. Her captain was no poltroon; for as
soon as he discovered that the ship from which he had been trying to
escape was but little larger than his own, he came about, and, running
down upon the "Cerf," opened fire. The action was a sharp one. The two
vessels were fairly matched and well fought. The thunder of their
broadsides resounded far and wide over the ocean. For an hour they
grappled in deadly strife. The tide of battle turned now to one side,
and now to the other. But at last the superior metal of the "Cerf" won
for her the victory. With her battered prize in tow, she sought to
rejoin the squadron, but unluckily fell in with a British frigate that
had been attracted by the sound of the cannonading. It was useless to
think of saving the prize: so the "Cerf" abandoned it, and after a
hard chase escaped, and put into the harbor of L'Orient.

In the mean time, the squadron had become separated; and, after a
fortnight's fruitless cruising, all the vessels returned to L'Orient.
Here they lay until the middle of August. More than three months had
passed since Jones had been given command of the "Richard." Most of
the time had been spent in port. The little cruising that had been
done had been unproductive of results. Dissension and jealousy made
the squadron absolutely ineffective. As for the "Bon Homme Richard,"
she had proved a failure; being unable to overhaul the enemy that she
wished to engage, or escape from the man-of-war she might wish to
avoid. Jones saw his reputation fast slipping away from him. Bitterly
he bewailed the fate that had put him at the mercy of a lot of
quarrelsome Frenchmen. He determined that when once again he got to
sea he would ignore his consorts, and fight the battles of his country
with his own ship only.

It was on the 14th of August that the squadron weighed anchor, and
left the harbor of L'Orient. The "Richard" was greatly strengthened by
the addition to her crew of about one hundred American seamen, who had
been sent to France from England in exchange for a number of English
prisoners. With her sailed the same vessels that had previously made
up the squadron, together with two French privateers,--the "Monsieur"
and the "Granville." Four days after sailing, a large French ship in
charge of a British prize-crew was sighted. The whole squadron gave
chase; and the "Monsieur," being the swiftest sailer of the fleet,
recaptured the prize. Then arose a quarrel. The privateersmen claimed
that the prize was theirs alone. They had captured it, and the regular
naval officers had no authority over them. To this Capt. Jones
vigorously demurred, and, taking the prize from its captors, sent it
to L'Orient to be disposed of in accordance with the laws. In high
dudgeon, the privateers vowed vengeance, and that night the "Monsieur"
left the squadron. She was a fine, fast vessel, mounting forty guns;
and her departure greatly weakened the fleet.

A few days later a second serious loss was encountered. The fleet was
lying off Cape Clear, only a few miles from the shore. The day was
perfectly calm. Not a breath of wind ruffled the calm surface of the
water. The sails flapped idly against the mast. The sailors lay about
the decks, trying to keep cool, and lazily watching the distant shore.
Far off in the distance a white sail glimmered on the horizon. It
showed no sign of motion, and was clearly becalmed. After some
deliberation, Capt. Jones determined to attempt to capture the
stranger by means of boats. The two largest boats, manned with crews
of picked men, were sent out to hail the vessel, and, if she proved to
be an enemy, to capture her. In this they were successful, and
returned next day, bringing the captured craft.

But, while the two boats were still out after the enemy's ship, the
tide changed; and Capt. Jones soon saw that his ship was in danger
from a powerful current, that seemed to be sweeping her on shore. A
few hundred yards from the ship, two dangerous reefs, known as the
Skallocks and the Blasketts, reared their black heads above the calm
surface of the sea. Toward these rocks the "Bon Homme Richard" was
drifting, when Jones, seeing the danger, ordered out two boats to tow
the ship to a less perilous position. As the best men of the crew had
been sent away to capture the brig, the crews of the two boats were
made up of the riff-raff of the crew. Many of them were Englishmen,
mere mercenary sailors, who had shipped on the Richard, secretly
intending to desert at the first opportunity. Therefore, when night
fell, as they were still in the boats trying to pull the "Richard's"
head around, they cut the ropes and made off for the shore.

The desertion was discovered immediately. The night was clear, and by
the faint light of the stars the course of the receding boats could be
traced. The sailing-master of the "Richard," a Mr. Trent, being the
first to discover the treachery, sprang into a boat with a few armed
men, and set out in hot pursuit. The bow-gun of the "Richard" was
hastily trained on the deserters, and a few cannon-shot sent after
them; but without effect. Before the pursuing boat could overhaul the
fugitives, a dense bank of gray fog settled over the water, and
pursued and pursuers were hidden from each other and from the gaze of
those on the man-of-war. All night long the fog, like a moist,
impenetrable curtain, rested on the ocean. The next day the "Cerf" set
out to find the missing boats. As she neared the shore, to avoid
raising an alarm, she hoisted British colors. Hardly had she done so
when she was seen by Trent and his companions. The fog made the
outlines of the cutter indistinct, and magnified her in the eyes of
the Americans, so that they mistook her for an English man-of-war. To
avoid what they thought would lead to certain capture on the water,
they ran their boat ashore, and speedily fell into the hands of the
British coast guard. They were at once thrown into prison, where the
unfortunate Trent soon died. The rest of the party were exchanged
later in the war.

The loss of the boats, and capture of Mr. Trent and his followers,
were not the only unfortunate results of this incident; for the "Cerf"
became lost in the fog, and before she could rejoin the fleet a
violent gale sprang up, and she was carried back to the coast of
France. She never again returned to join the fleet, and Jones found
his force again, depleted.

But the effective force of the squadron under the command of Paul
Jones was weakened far more by the eccentric and mutinous actions of
Capt. Landais of the "Alliance" than by any losses by desertion or
capture. When the news of the loss of two boats by desertion reached
the "Alliance," Landais straightway went to the "Richard," and
entering the cabin began to upbraid Jones in unmeasured terms for
having lost two boats through his folly in sending boats to capture a
brig.

"It is not true, Capt. Landais," answered Jones, "that the boats which
are lost are the two which were sent to capture the brig."

"Do you tell me I lie?" screamed the Frenchman, white with anger. His
officers strove to pacify him, but without avail; and he left the
"Richard" vowing that he would challenge Capt. Jones, and kill him.
Shortly thereafter the "Richard" captured a very valuable prize,--a
ship mounting twenty-two guns, and loaded with sails, rigging,
anchors, cables, and other essential articles for the navy Great
Britain was building on the Lakes. By desertion and other causes, the
crew of the "Richard" was greatly depleted, and not enough men could
be spared to man the prize. Jones applied to Landais for aid. In
response the Frenchman said,--

"If it is your wish that I should take charge of the prize, I shall
not allow any boat or any individual from the 'Bon Homme Richard' to
go near her."

To this absurd stipulation Jones agreed. Landais, having thus assumed
complete charge of the prize, showed his incompetence by sending her,
together with a prize taken by the "Alliance," to Bergen in Norway.
The Danish Government, being on friendly terms with England,
immediately surrendered the vessels to the British ambassador; and the
cause of the young republic was cheated of more than two hundred
thousand dollars through the insane negligence of the French captain.

Ever thereafter, Landais manifested the most insolent indifference to
the orders of Capt. Jones, to whom, as his superior officer, he should
render implicit obedience. He came and went as he saw fit. The
"Alliance" would disappear from the squadron, and return again after
two or three days' absence, without apology or explanation. Jones soon
learned to look with indifference upon the antics of his consort, and
considered his squadron as composed of the "Richard," "Vengeance," and
"Pallas" only.

On the 15th of September, the three vessels lay off the port of Leith,
a thriving city, which was then, as now, the seaport for the greater
city of Edinburgh, which stands a little farther inland. Jones had
come to this point cherishing one of those daring plans of which his
mind was so fertile. He had learned that the harbor was full of
shipping, and defended only by a single armed vessel of twenty guns.
Shore batteries there were none. The people of the town were resting
in fancied security, and had no idea that the dreaded Paul Jones was
at their very harbor's mouth. It would have been an easy matter for
the three cruisers to make a dash into the harbor, take some
distinguished prisoners, demand a huge ransom, fire the shipping, and
escape again to the open sea. Had Jones been in reality, as he was in
name, the commander of the little fleet, the exploit would have been
performed. But the lack of authority which had hampered him throughout
his cruise paralyzed him here. By the time he had overcome the timid
objections of the captains of the "Vengeance" and the "Pallas," all
Leith was aroused. Still Jones persevered. His arrangements were
carefully perfected. Troops were to be landed under command of
Lieut.-Col. Chamillard, who was to lay before the chief magistrate of
the town the following letter, written by Jones himself:--

"I do not wish to distress the poor inhabitants. My intention is only
to demand your contribution toward the reimbursement which Britain
owes to the much injured citizens of America. Savages would blush at
the unmanly violation and rapacity that have marked the tracks of
British tyranny in America, from which neither virgin innocence nor
helpless age has been a plea of protection or pity.

"Leith and its port now lay at our mercy. And did not the plea of
humanity stay the just hand of retaliation, I should without
advertisement lay it in ashes. Before I proceed to that stern duty as
an officer, my duty as a man induces me to propose to you, by means
of a reasonable ransom, to prevent such a scene of horror and
distress. For this reason, I have authorized Lieut.-Col. de Chamillard
to agree with you on the terms of ransom, allowing you exactly half an
hour's reflection before you finally accept or reject the terms which
he shall propose."

The landing parties having been chosen, the order of attack mapped
out, and part to be taken by each boat's-crew accurately defined, the
three vessels advanced to the attack. It was a bright Sunday morning.
A light breeze blowing on shore wafted the three vessels gently along
the smooth surface of the bay. It is said that as the invaders passed
the little town of Kirkaldy, the people were at church, but, seeing
the three men-of-war passing, deserted the sacred edifice for the
beach, where the gray-haired pastor, surrounded by his flock, offered
the following remarkable appeal to the Deity:--

"Now, dear Lord, dinna ye think it a shame for ye to send this vile
pirate to rob our folk o' Kirkaldy? Ye ken that they are puir enow
already, and hae naething to spare. The way the wind blaws, he'll be
here in a jiffy. And wha kens what he may do? He's nae too good for
ony thing. Mickles the mischief he has done already. He'll burn their
hooses, take their very claes, and strip them to the very sark. And
waes me, wha kens but that the bluidy villain might tak' their lives!
The puir weemin are most frightened out of their wits, and the bairns
screeching after them. I canna think of it! I canna think of it!

"I hae long been a faithful servant to ye, O Lord. But gin ye dinna
turn the wind about, and blaw the scoundrel out of our gate, I'll nae
stir a foot, but will just sit here till the tide comes. Sae tak' your
will o't."

Never was prayer more promptly answered. Hardly had the pastor
concluded his prayer, when the wind veered round, and soon a violent
gale was blowing off shore. In the teeth of the wind, the ships could
make no headway. The gale increased in violence until it rivalled in
fierceness a tornado. The sea was lashed into fury, and great waves
arose, on the crests of which the men-of-war were tossed about like
fragile shells. The coal-ship which had been captured was so racked
and torn by the heavy seas, that her seams opened, and she foundered
so speedily, that only by the most active efforts was her crew saved.
After several hours' ineffectual battling with the gale, the ships
were forced to come about and run out to sea; and Jones suffered the
mortification of witnessing the failure of his enterprise, after
having been within gunshot of the town that he had hoped to capture.
As for the good people of Kirkaldy, they were convinced that their
escape from the daring seamen was wholly due to the personal influence
of their pastor with the Deity; and the worthy parson lived long
afterward, ever held in the most mighty veneration by the people of
his flock.




CHAPTER IX.

     CAREER OF PAUL JONES CONCLUDED. -- THE BATTLE BETWEEN THE
     "BON HOMME RICHARD" AND THE "SERAPIS." -- TREACHERY OF
     LANDAIS. -- JONES'S GREAT VICTORY. -- LANDAIS STEALS THE
     "ALLIANCE." -- JONES IN COMMAND OF THE "ARIEL." -- THE
     "ARIEL" IN THE STORM. -- ARRIVAL IN AMERICA.


After this adventure, the three vessels continued their cruise along
the eastern coast of Scotland. Continued good fortune, in the way of
prizes, rather soothed the somewhat chafed feelings of Capt. Jones,
and he soon recovered from the severe disappointment caused by the
failure of his attack upon Leith. He found good reason to believe that
the report of his exploits had spread far and wide in England, and
that British sea-captains were using every precaution to avoid
encountering him. British vessels manifested an extreme disinclination
to come within hailing distance of any of the cruisers, although all
three were so disguised that it seemed impossible to make out their
warlike character. One fleet of merchantmen that caught sight of the
"Bon Homme Richard" and the "Pallas" ran into the River Humber, to the
mouth of which they were pursued by the two men-of-war. Lying at
anchor outside the bar, Jones made signal for a pilot, keeping the
British flag flying at his peak. Two pilot-boats came out; and Jones,
assuming the character of a British naval officer, learned from them,
that besides the merchantmen lying at anchor in the river, a British
frigate lay there waiting to convoy a fleet of merchantmen to the
north. Jones tried to lure the frigate out with a signal that the
pilots revealed to him; but, though she weighed anchor, she was driven
back by strong head-winds that were blowing. Disappointed in this
plan, Jones continued his cruise. Soon after he fell in with the
"Alliance" and the "Vengeance;" and, while off Flamborough Head, the
little squadron encountered a fleet of forty-one merchant ships, that,
at the sight of the dreaded Yankee cruisers, crowded together like a
flock of frightened pigeons, and made all sail for the shore; while
two stately men-of-war--the "Serapis, forty-four," and the "Countess
of Scarborough, twenty-two"--moved forward to give battle to the
Americans.

Jones now stood upon the threshold of his greatest victory. His bold
and chivalric mind had longed for battle, and recoiled from the less
glorious pursuit of burning helpless merchantmen, and terrorizing
small towns and villages. He now saw before him a chance to meet the
enemy in a fair fight, muzzle to muzzle, and with no overpowering odds
on either side. Although the Americans had six vessels to the
Englishmen's two, the odds were in no wise in their favor. Two of the
vessels were pilot-boats, which, of course, kept out of the battle.
The "Vengeance," though ordered to render the larger vessels any
possible assistance, kept out of the fight altogether, and even
neglected to make any attempt to overhaul the flying band of
merchantmen. As for the "Alliance," under the erratic Landais, she
only entered the conflict at the last moment; and then her broadsides,
instead of being delivered into the enemy, crashed through the already
shattered sides of the "Bon Homme Richard." Thus the actual combatants
were the "Richard" with forty guns, against the "Serapis" with
forty-four; and the "Pallas" with twenty-two guns, against the
"Countess of Scarborough" with twenty-two.

It was about seven o'clock in the evening of a clear September
day--the twenty-third--that the hostile vessels bore down upon each
other, making rapid preparations for the impending battle. The sea was
fast turning gray, as the deepening twilight robbed the sky of its
azure hue. A brisk breeze was blowing, that filled out the bellying
sails of the ships, and beat the waters into little waves capped with
snowy foam. In the west the rosy tints of the autumnal sunset were
still warm in the sky. Nature was in one of her most smiling moods, as
these men with set faces, and hearts throbbing with the mingled
emotions of fear and excitement, stood silent at their guns, or worked
busily at the ropes of the great war-ships.

As soon as he became convinced of the character of the two English
ships, Jones beat his crew to quarters, and signalled his consorts to
form in line of battle. The people on the "Richard" went cheerfully to
their guns; and though the ship was extremely short-handed, and
crowded with prisoners, no voice was raised against giving immediate
battle to the enemy. The actions of the other vessels of the American
fleet, however, gave little promise of any aid from that quarter. When
the enemy was first sighted, the swift-sailing "Alliance" dashed
forward to reconnoitre. As she passed the "Pallas," Landais cried out,
that, if the stranger proved to be a forty-four, the only course for
the Americans was immediate flight. Evidently the result of his
investigations convinced him that in flight lay his only hope of
safety; for he quickly hauled off, and stood away from the enemy. The
"Vengeance," too, ran off to windward, leaving the "Richard" and the
"Pallas" to bear the brunt of battle.

It was by this time quite dark, and the position of the ships was
outlined by the rows of open port-holes gleaming with the lurid light
of the battle-lanterns. On each ship rested a stillness like that of
death itself. The men stood at their guns silent and thoughtful. Sweet
memories of home and loved ones mingled with fearful anticipations of
death or of mangling wounds in the minds of each. The little lads
whose duty in time of action it was to carry cartridges from the
magazine to the gunners had ceased their boyish chatter, and stood
nervously at their stations. Officers walked up and down the decks,
speaking words of encouragement to the men, glancing sharply at
primers and breechings to see that all was ready, and ever and anon
stooping to peer through the porthole at the line of slowly moving
lights that told of the approach of the enemy. On the quarter-deck,
Paul Jones, with his officers about him, stood carefully watching the
movements of the enemy through a night glass, giving occasionally a
quiet order to the man at the wheel, and now and then sending an agile
midshipman below with orders to the armorer, or aloft with orders for
the sharp-shooters posted in the tops.

As the night came on, the wind died away to a gentle breeze, that
hardly ruffled the surface of the water, and urged the ships toward
each other but sluggishly. As they came within pistol-shot of each
other, bow to bow, and going on opposite tacks, a hoarse cry came from
the deck of the "Serapis,"--

"What ship is that?"

"What is that you say?"

"What ship is that? Answer immediately, or I shall fire into you."

Instantly with a flash and roar both vessels opened fire. The thunder
of the broadsides reverberated over the waters; and the bright flash
of the cannon, together with the pale light of the moon just rising,
showed Flamborough Head crowded with multitudes who had come out to
witness the grand yet awful spectacle of a naval duel.

The very first broadside seemed enough to wreck the fortunes of the
"Richard." In her gun-room were mounted six long eighteens, the only
guns she carried that were of sufficient weight to be matched against
the heavy ordnance of the "Serapis." At the very first discharge, two
of these guns burst with frightful violence. Huge masses of iron were
hurled in every direction, cutting through beams and stanchions,
crashing through floors and bulkheads, and tearing through the
agonized bodies of the men who served the guns. Hardly a man who was
stationed in the gun-room escaped unhurt in the storm of iron and
splinters. Several huge blocks of iron crashed through the upper deck,
injuring the people on the deck above, and causing the cry to be
raised, that the magazine had blown up. This unhappy calamity not only
rendered useless the whole battery of eighteen-pounders, thus forcing
Jones to fight an eighteen-pounder frigate with a twelve-pounder
battery, but it spread a panic among the men, who saw the dangers of
explosion added to the peril they were in by reason of the enemy's
continued fire.

Jones himself left the quarter-deck, and rushed forward among the men,
cheering them on, and arousing them to renewed activity by his
exertions. Now he would lend a hand at training some gun, now pull at
a rope, or help a lagging powder-monkey on his way. His pluck and
enthusiasm infused new life into the men; and they threw the heavy
guns about like playthings, and cheered loudly as each shot told.

The two ships were at no time separated by a greater distance than
half a pistol-shot, and were continually manoeuvring to cross each
others' bows, and get in a raking broadside. In this attempt, they
crossed from one to the other side of each other; so that now the port
and now the starboard battery would be engaged. From the shore these
evolutions were concealed under a dense cloud of smoke, and the
spectators could only see the tops of the two vessels moving slowly
about before the light breeze; while the lurid flashes of the cannon,
and constant thunder of the broadsides, told of the deadly work going
on. At a little distance were the "Countess of Scarborough" and the
"Pallas," linked in deadly combat, and adding the roar of their cannon
to the general turmoil. It seemed to the watchers on the heights that
war was coming very close to England.

The "Serapis" first succeeded in getting a raking position; and, as
she slowly crossed her antagonist's bow, her guns were fired, loaded
again, and again discharged,--the heavy bolts crashing into the
"Richard's" bow, and ranging aft, tearing the flesh of the brave
fellows on the decks, and cutting through timbers and cordage in their
frightful course. At this moment, the Americans almost despaired of
the termination of the conflict. The "Richard" proved to be old and
rotten, and the enemy's shot seemed to tear her timbers to pieces;
while the "Serapis" was new, with timbers that withstood the shock of
the balls like steel armor. Jones saw that in a battle with great guns
he was sure to be the loser. He therefore resolved to board.

Soon the "Richard" made an attempt to cross the bows of the "Serapis,"
but not having way enough failed; and the "Serapis" ran foul of her,
with her long bowsprit projecting over the stern of the American ship.
Springing from the quarter-deck, Jones with his own hands swung
grappling-irons into the rigging of the enemy, and made the ships
fast. As he bent to his work, he was a prominent target for every
sharp-shooter on the British vessel, and the bullets hummed thickly
about his ears; but he never flinched. His work done, he clambered
back to the quarter-deck, and set about gathering the boarders. The
two vessels swung alongside each other. The cannonading was redoubled,
and the heavy ordnance of the "Serapis" told fearfully upon the
"Richard." The American gunners were driven from their guns by the
flying cloud of shot and splinters. Each party thought the other was
about to board. The darkness and the smoke made all vision impossible;
and the boarders on each vessel were crouched behind the bulwarks,
ready to give a hot reception to their enemies. This suspense caused a
temporary lull in the firing, and Capt. Pearson of the "Serapis"
shouted out through the sulphurous blackness,--

"Have you struck your colors?"

"I have not yet begun to fight," replied Jones; and again the thunder
of the cannon awakened the echoes on the distant shore. As the firing
recommenced, the two ships broke away and drifted apart. Again the
"Serapis" sought to get a raking position; but by this time Jones had
determined that his only hope lay in boarding. Terrible had been the
execution on his ship. The cock-pit was filled with the wounded. The
mangled remains of the dead lay thick about the decks. The timbers of
the ship were greatly shattered, and her cordage was so badly cut that
skilful manoeuvring was impossible. Many shot-holes were beneath the
water-line, and the hold was rapidly filling. Therefore, Jones
determined to run down his enemy, and get out his boarders, at any
cost.

Soon the two vessels were foul again. Capt. Pearson, knowing that his
advantage lay in long-distance fighting, strove to break away. Jones
bent all his energies to the task of keeping the ships together.
Meantime the battle raged fiercely. Jones himself, in his official
report of the battle, thus describes the course of the fight:--

"I directed the fire of one of the three cannon against the main-mast
with double-headed shot, while the other two were exceedingly well
served with grape and canister shot, to silence the enemy's musketry,
and clear her decks, which was at last effected. The enemy were, as I
have since understood, on the instant for calling for quarter, when
the cowardice or treachery of three of my under officers induced them
to call to the enemy. The English commodore asked me if I demanded
quarter; and I having answered him in the negative, they renewed the
battle with double fury. They were unable to stand the deck; but the
fury of their cannon, especially the lower battery, which was entirely
formed of eighteen-pounders, was incessant. Both ships were set on
fire in various places, and the scene was dreadful beyond the reach of
language. To account for the timidity of my three under officers (I
mean the gunner, the carpenter, and the master-at-arms), I must
observe that the two first were slightly wounded; and as the ship had
received various shots under water, and one of the pumps being shot
away, the carpenter expressed his fear that she would sink, and the
other two concluded that she was sinking, which occasioned the gunner
to run aft on the poop, without my knowledge, to strike the colors.
Fortunately for me a cannon-ball had done that before by carrying away
the ensign staff: he was, therefore, reduced to the necessity of
sinking--as he supposed--or of calling for quarter; and he preferred
the latter."

Indeed, the petty officers were little to be blamed for considering
the condition of the "Richard" hopeless. The great guns of the
"Serapis," with their muzzles not twenty feet away, were hurling solid
shot and grape through the flimsy shell of the American ship. So close
together did the two ships come at times, that the rammers were
sometimes thrust into the port-holes of the opposite ship in loading.
When the ships first swung together, the lower ports of the "Serapis"
were closed to prevent the Americans boarding through them. But in the
heat of the conflict the ports were quickly blown off, and the iron
throats of the great guns again protruded, and dealt out their
messages of death. How frightful was the scene! In the two great ships
were more than seven hundred men, their eyes lighted with the fire of
hatred, their faces blackened with powder or made ghastly by streaks
of blood. Cries of pain, yells of rage, prayers, and curses rose
shrill above the thunderous monotone of the cannonade. Both ships were
on fire; and the black smoke of the conflagration, mingled with the
gray gunpowder smoke, and lighted up by the red flashes of the
cannonade, added to the terrible picturesqueness of the scene.

The "Richard" seemed like a spectre ship, so shattered was her
framework. From the main-mast to the stern post, her timbers above the
water-line were shot away, a few blackened posts alone preventing the
upper deck from falling. Through this ruined shell swept the shot of
the "Serapis," finding little to impede their flight save human flesh
and bone. Great streams of water were pouring into the hold. The
pitiful cries of nearly two hundred prisoners aroused the compassion
of an officer, who ran below and liberated them. Driven from the hold
by the inpouring water, these unhappy men ran to the deck, only to be
swept down by the storm of cannon-shot and bullets. Fire, too,
encompassed them; and the flames were so fast sweeping down upon the
magazine, that Capt. Jones ordered the powder-kegs to be brought up
and thrown into the sea. At this work, and at the pumps, the prisoners
were kept employed until the end of the action.

But though the heavy guns of the "Serapis" had it all their own way
below, shattering the hull of the "Richard," and driving the Yankee
gunners from their quarters, the conflict, viewed from the tops, was
not so one-sided. The Americans crowded on the forecastle and in the
tops, where they continued the battle with musketry and hand-grenades,
with such murderous effect that the British were driven entirely from
the upper deck. Once a party of about one hundred picked men, mustered
below by Capt. Pearson, rushed to the upper deck of the "Serapis," and
thence made a descent upon the deck of the "Richard," firing pistols,
brandishing cutlasses, and yelling like demons. But the Yankee tars
were ready for them at that game, and gave the boarders so spirited a
reception with pikes and cutlasses, that they were ready enough to
swarm over the bulwarks, and seek again the comparative safety of
their own ship.

But all this time, though the Americans were making a brave and
desperate defence, the tide of battle was surely going against them
Though they held the deck of the "Richard" secure against all comers,
yet the Englishmen were cutting the ship away from beneath them, with
continued heavy broadsides. Suddenly the course of battle was changed,
and victory took her stand with the Americans, all through the daring
and coolness of one man,--no officer, but an humble jacky.

The rapid and accurate fire of the sharp-shooters on the "Richard" had
driven all the riflemen of the "Serapis" from their posts in the tops.
Seeing this, the Americans swarmed into the rigging of their own ship,
and from that elevated station poured down a destructive fire of
hand-grenades upon the decks of the enemy. The sailors on the deck of
the "Richard" seconded this attack, by throwing the same missiles
through the open ports of the enemy.

At last one American topman, filling a bucket with grenades, and
hanging it on his left arm, clambered out on the yard-arm of the
"Richard," that stretched far out over the deck of the British ship.
Cautiously the brave fellow crept out on the slender spar. His
comrades below watched his progress, while the sharp-shooters kept a
wary eye on the enemy, lest some watchful rifleman should pick off the
adventurous blue-jacket. Little by little the nimble sailor crept out
on the yard, until he was over the crowded gun-deck of the "Serapis."
Then, lying at full length on the spar, and somewhat protected by it,
he began to shower his missiles upon the enemy's gun-deck. Great was
the execution done by each grenade; but at last, one better aimed
than the rest fell through the main hatch to the main deck. There was
a flash, then a succession of quick explosions; a great sheet of flame
gushed up through the hatchway, and a chorus of cries told of some
frightful tragedy enacted below.

It seemed that the powder-boys of the "Serapis" had been too active in
bringing powder to the guns, and, instead of bringing cartridges as
needed, had kept one charge in advance of the demand; so that behind
every gun stood a cartridge, making a line of cartridges on the deck
from bow to stern. Several cartridges had been broken, so that much
loose powder lay upon the deck. This was fired by the discharge of the
hand-grenade, and communicated the fire to the cartridges, which
exploded in rapid succession, horribly burning scores of men. More
than twenty men were killed instantly; and so great was the flame and
the force of the explosion, that many of them were left with nothing
on but the collars and wristbands of their shirts and the waistbands
of their trousers. It is impossible to conceive of the horror of the
sight.

Capt. Pearson in his official report of the battle, speaking of this
occurrence, says, "A hand-grenade being thrown in at one of the lower
ports, a cartridge of powder was set on fire, the flames of which,
running from cartridge to cartridge all the way aft, blew up the whole
of the people and officers that were quartered abaft the main-mast;
from which unfortunate circumstance those guns were rendered useless
for the remainder of the action, and I fear that the greater part of
the people will lose their lives."

This event changed the current of the battle. The English were hemmed
between decks by the fire of the American topmen, and they found that
not even then were they protected from the fiery hail of
hand-grenades. The continual pounding of double-headed shot from a gun
which Jones had trained upon the main-mast of the enemy had finally
cut away that spar; and it fell with a crash upon the deck, bringing
down spars and rigging with it. Flames were rising from the tarred
cordage, and spreading to the framework of the ship. The Americans saw
victory within their grasp.

But at this moment a new and most unsuspected enemy appeared upon the
scene. The "Alliance," which had stood aloof during the heat of the
conflict, now appeared, and, after firing a few shots into the
"Serapis," ranged slowly down along the "Richard," pouring a murderous
fire of grape-shot into the already shattered ship. Jones thus tells
the story of this treacherous and wanton assault:--

"I now thought that the battle was at an end. But, to my utter
astonishment, he discharged a broadside full into the stern of the
'Bon Homme Richard.' We called to him for God's sake to forbear. Yet
he passed along the off-side of the ship, and continued firing. There
was no possibility of his mistaking the enemy's ship for the 'Bon
Homme Richard,' there being the most essential difference in their
appearance and construction. Besides, it was then full moonlight; and
the sides of the 'Bon Homme Richard' were all black, and the sides of
the enemy's ship were yellow. Yet, for the greater security, I showed
the signal for our reconnoissance, by putting out three lanterns,--one
at the bow, one at the stern, and one at the middle, in a horizontal
line.

"Every one cried that he was firing into the wrong ship, but nothing
availed. He passed around, firing into the 'Bon Homme Richard,' head,
stern, and broadside, and by one of his volleys killed several of my
best men, and mortally wounded a good officer of the forecastle. My
situation was truly deplorable. The 'Bon Homme Richard' received
several shots under the water from the 'Alliance.' The leak gained on
the pumps, and the fire increased much on board both ships. Some
officers entreated me to strike, of whose courage and sense I
entertain a high opinion. I would not, however, give up the point."

Fortunately Landais did not persist in his cowardly attack upon his
friends in the almost sinking ship, but sailed off, and allowed the
"Richard" to continue her life-and-death struggle with her enemy. The
struggle was not now of long duration; for Capt. Pearson, seeing that
his ship was a perfect wreck, and that the fire was gaining head way,
hauled down his colors with his own hands, since none of his men could
be persuaded to brave the fire from the tops of the "Richard."

As the proud emblem of Great Britain fluttered down, Lieut. Richard
Dale turned to Capt. Jones, and asked permission to board the prize.
Receiving an affirmative answer, he jumped on the gunwale, seized the
mainbrace-pendant, and swung himself upon the quarter-deck of the
captured ship. Midshipman Mayrant, with a large party of sailors,
followed. So great was the confusion on the "Serapis," that few of
the Englishmen knew that the ship had been surrendered. As Mayrant
came aboard, he was mistaken for the leader of a boarding-party, and
run through the thigh with a pike.

Capt. Pearson was found standing alone upon the quarter-deck,
contemplating with a sad face the shattered condition of his once
noble ship, and the dead bodies of his brave fellows lying about the
decks. Stepping up to him, Lieut. Dale said,--

"Sir, I have orders to send you on board the ship alongside."

At this moment, the first lieutenant of the "Serapis" came up hastily,
and inquired,--

"Has the enemy struck her flag?"

"No, sir," answered Dale. "On the contrary, you have struck to us."

Turning quickly to his commander, the English lieutenant asked,--

"Have you struck, sir?"

"Yes, I have," was the brief reply.

"I have nothing more to say," remarked the officer, and turning about
was in the act of going below, when Lieut. Dale stopped him, saying,--

"It is my duty to request you, sir, to accompany Capt. Pearson on
board the ship alongside."

"If you will first permit me to go below," responded the other, "I
will silence the firing of the lower deck guns."

"This cannot be permitted," was the response; and, silently bowing his
head, the lieutenant followed his chief to the victorious ship, while
two midshipmen went below to stop the firing.

Lieut. Dale remained in command of the "Serapis." Seating himself on
the binnacle, he ordered the lashings which had bound the two ships
throughout the bloody conflict to be cut. Then the head-sails were
braced back, and the wheel put down. But, as the ship had been
anchored at the beginning of the battle, she refused to answer either
helm or canvas. Vastly astounded at this, Dale leaped from the
binnacle; but his legs refused to support him, and he fell heavily to
the deck. His followers sprang to his aid; and it was found that the
lieutenant had been severely wounded in the leg by a splinter, but had
fought out the battle without ever noticing his hurt.

So ended this memorable battle. But the feelings of pride and
exultation so natural to a victor died away in the breast of the
American captain as he looked about the scene of wreck and carnage. On
all sides lay the mutilated bodies of the gallant fellows who had so
bravely stood to their guns amid the storm of death-dealing missiles.
There they lay, piled one on top of the other,--some with their
agonized writhings caught and fixed by death; others calm and
peaceful, as though sleeping. Powder-boys, young and tender, lay by
the side of grizzled old seamen. Words cannot picture the scene. In
his journal Capt. Jones wrote:--

"A person must have been an eye-witness to form a just idea of the
tremendous scene of carnage, wreck, and ruin that everywhere appeared.
Humanity cannot but recoil from the prospect of such finished horror,
and lament that war should produce such fatal consequences."

But worse than the appearance of the main deck was the scene in the
cock-pit and along the gun-deck, which had been converted into a
temporary hospital. Here lay the wounded, ranged in rows along the
deck. Moans and shrieks of agony were heard on every side. The
surgeons were busy with their glittering instruments. The tramp of men
on the decks overhead, and the creaking of the timbers of the
water-logged ship, added to the cries of the wounded, made a perfect
bedlam of the place.

[Illustration: The Action Between The "Bon Homme Richard" And The
"Serapis," September 23, 1779.]

It did not take long to discover that the "Bon Homme Richard" was a
complete wreck, and in a sinking condition. The gallant old craft had
kept afloat while the battle was being fought; but now, that the
victory had remained with her, she had given up the struggle against
the steadily encroaching waves. The carpenters who had explored the
hold came on deck with long faces, and reported that nothing could be
done to stop the great holes made by the shot of the "Serapis."
Therefore Jones determined to remove his crew and all the wounded to
the "Serapis," and abandon the noble "Richard" to her fate.
Accordingly, all available hands were put at the pumps, and the work
of transferring the wounded was begun. Slings were rigged over the
side; and the poor shattered bodies were gently lowered into the boats
awaiting them, and, on reaching the "Serapis," were placed tenderly in
cots ranged along the main deck. All night the work went on; and by
ten o'clock the next morning there were left on the "Richard" only a
few sailors, who alternately worked at the pumps, and fought the
steadily encroaching flames.

For Jones did not intend to desert the good old ship without a
struggle to save her, even though both fire and water were warring
against her. Not until the morning dawned did the Americans fully
appreciate how shattered was the hulk that stood between them and a
watery grave. Fenimore Cooper, the pioneer historian of the United
States navy, writes:--

"When the day dawned, an examination was made into the situation of
the 'Richard.' Abaft on a line with those guns of the 'Serapis' that
had not been disabled by the explosion, the timbers were found to be
nearly all beaten in, or beaten out,--for in this respect there was
little difference between the two sides of the ship,--and it was said
that her poop and upper decks would have fallen into the gun-room, but
for a few buttocks that had been missed. Indeed, so large was the
vacuum, that most of the shot fired from this part of the 'Serapis,'
at the close of the action, must have gone through the 'Richard'
without touching any thing. The rudder was cut from the stern post,
and the transoms were nearly driven out of her. All the after-part of
the ship, in particular, that was below the quarter-deck was torn to
pieces; and nothing had saved those stationed on the quarter-deck but
the impossibility of sufficiently elevating guns that almost touched
their object."

Despite the terribly shattered condition of the ship, her crew worked
manfully to save her. But, after fighting the flames and working the
pumps all day, they were reluctantly forced to abandon the good ship
to her fate. It was nine o'clock at night, that the hopelessness of
the task became evident. The "Richard" rolled heavily from side to
side. The sea was up to her lower port-holes. At each roll the water
gushed through her port-holes, and swashed through the hatchways. At
ten o'clock, with a last dying surge, the shattered hulk plunged to
her final resting-place, carrying with her the bodies of her dead.
They had died the noblest of all deaths,--the death of a patriot
killed in doing battle for his country. They receive the grandest of
all burials,--the burial of a sailor who follows his ship to her
grave, on the hard, white sand, in the calm depths of the ocean.

How many were there that went down with the ship? History does not
accurately state. Capt. Jones himself was never able to tell how great
was the number of dead upon his ship. The most careful estimate puts
the number at forty-two. Of the wounded on the American ship, there
were about forty. All these were happily removed from the "Richard"
before she sunk.

On the "Serapis" the loss was much greater; but here, too, history is
at fault, in that no official returns of the killed and wounded have
been preserved. Capt. Jones's estimate, which is probably nearly
correct, put the loss of the English ship at about a hundred killed,
and an equal number wounded.

The sinking of the "Richard" left the "Serapis" crowded with wounded
of both nations, prisoners, and the remnant of the crew of the sunken
ship. No time was lost in getting the ship in navigable shape, and in
clearing away the traces of the battle. The bodies of the dead were
thrown overboard. The decks were scrubbed and sprinkled with hot
vinegar. The sound of the hammer and the saw was heard on every hand,
as the carpenters stopped the leaks, patched the deck, and rigged new
spars in place of those shattered by the "Richard's" fire. All three
of the masts had gone by the board. Jury masts were rigged; and with
small sails stretched on these the ship beat about the ocean, the
plaything of the winds. Her consorts had left her. Landais, seeing no
chance to rob Jones of the honor of the victory, had taken the
"Alliance" to other waters. The "Pallas" had been victorious in her
contest with the "Countess of Scarborough;" and, as soon as the issue
of the conflict between the "Bon Homme Richard" and the "Serapis" had
become evident, she made off with her prize, intent upon gaining a
friendly port. The "Richard," after ten days of drifting, finally ran
into Texel, in the north of Holland.

The next year was one of comparative inactivity for Jones. He enjoyed
for a time the praise of all friends of the revolting colonies. He was
the lion of Paris. Then came the investigation into the action of
Landais at the time of the great battle. Though his course at that
time was one of open treachery, inspired by his wish to have Jones
strike to the "Serapis," that he might have the honor of capturing
both ships, Landais escaped any punishment at the hands of his French
compatriots. But he was relieved of the command of the "Alliance,"
which was given to Jones. Highly incensed at this action, the erratic
Frenchman incited the crew of the "Alliance" to open mutiny, and,
taking command of the ship himself, left France and sailed for
America, leaving Commodore Jones in the lurch. On his arrival at
Philadelphia, Landais strove to justify his action by blackening the
character of Jones, but failed in this, and was dismissed the service.
His actions should be regarded with some charity, for the man was
doubtless of unsound mind. His insanity became even more evident after
his dismissal from the navy; and from that time, until the time of his
death, his eccentricities made him generally regarded as one mentally
unsound.

Jones, having lost the "Alliance" by the mutiny of Landais, remained
abroad, waiting for another ship. He travelled widely on the
Continent, and was lavishly entertained by the rich and noble of every
nation. Not until October, 1780, did he again tread the deck of a
vessel under his own command.

The ship which the French Government finally fitted out and put in
command of Paul Jones was the "Ariel," a small twenty-gun ship. This
vessel the adventurous sailor packed full of powder and cannon-balls,
taking only provisions enough for nine weeks, and evidently expecting
to live off the prizes he calculated upon taking. He sailed from
L'Orient on a bright October afternoon, under clear skies, and with a
fair wind, intending to proceed directly to the coast of America. But
the first night out there arose a furious gale. The wind howled
through the rigging, tore the sails from the ring-bolts, snapped the
spars, and seriously wrecked the cordage of the vessel. The great
waves, lashed into fury by the hurricane, smote against the sides of
the little craft as though they would burst through her sheathing. The
ship rolled heavily; and the yards, in their grand sweep from side to
side, often plunged deep into the foaming waves. At last so great
became the strain upon the vessel, that the crew were set to work with
axes to cut away the foremast. Balancing themselves upon the tossing,
slippery deck, holding fast to a rope with one hand, while with the
other they swung the axe, the gallant fellows finally cut so deep into
the heart of the stout spar, that a heavy roll of the ship made it
snap off short, and it fell alongside, where it hung by the cordage.
The wreck was soon cleared away; and as this seemed to ease the ship
somewhat, and as she was drifting about near the dreaded rock of
Penmarque, the anchors were got out. But in the mean time the violent
rolling of the "Ariel" had thrown the heel of the main-mast from the
step; and the heavy mast was reeling about, threatening either to
plough its way upward through the gun-deck, or to crash through the
bottom of the ship. It was determined to cut away this mast; but,
before this could be done, it fell, carrying with it the mizzen-mast,
and crushing in the deck on which it fell. Thus dismasted, the "Ariel"
rode out the gale. All night and all the next day she was tossed about
on the angry waters. Her crew thought that their last hour had surely
come. Over the shrieking of the gale, and the roaring of the waves,
rose that steady, all-pervading sound, which brings horror to the mind
of the sailor,--the dull, monotonous thunder of the breakers on the
reef of Penmarque. But the "Ariel" was not fated to be ground to
pieces on the jagged teeth of the cruel reef. Though she drifted
about, the plaything of the winds and the waves, she escaped the jaws
of Penmarque. Finally the gale subsided; and, with hastily devised
jury-masts, the shattered ship was taken back to L'Orient to refit.

Two months were consumed in the work of getting the shattered vessel
ready for sea. When she again set out, she met with no mishap, until,
when near the American coast, she fell in with a British vessel to
which she gave battle. A sharp action of a quarter of an hour forced
the Englishman to strike his colors; but, while the Americans were
preparing to board the prize, she sailed away, vastly to the chagrin
and indignation of her would-be captors.

The short cruise of the "Ariel" was the last service rendered by Paul
Jones to the American Colonies. On his arrival at Philadelphia, he was
dined and feted to his heart's desire; he received a vote of thanks
from Congress; he became the idol of the populace. But the necessities
of the struggling colonies were such that they were unable to build
for him a proper war-ship, and he remained inactive upon shore until
the close of the Revolution, when he went abroad, and took service
with Russia. He is the one great character in the naval history of the
Revolution. He is the first heroic figure in American naval annals.
Not until years after his death did men begin to know him at his true
worth. He was too often looked upon as a man of no patriotism, but
wholly mercenary; courageous, but only with the daring of a pirate.
Not until he had died a lonely death, estranged from the country he
had so nobly served, did men come to know Paul Jones as a model naval
officer, high-minded in his patriotism, pure in his life, elevated in
his sentiments, and as courageous as a lion.




CHAPTER X.

     CAREER OF NICHOLAS BIDDLE. -- HIS EXPLOIT AT LEWISTON JAIL.
     -- CRUISE IN THE "RANDOLPH." -- BATTLE WITH THE "YARMOUTH."
     -- THE FATAL EXPLOSION. -- SAMUEL TUCKER. -- HIS BOYHOOD. --
     ENCOUNTER WITH CORSAIRS. -- CRUISING IN THE "FRANKLIN." --
     IN COMMAND OF THE "BOSTON." -- ANECDOTES OF CAPT. TUCKER.


In the career of Paul Jones is to be found the record of the most
stirring events of the Revolution; but there were other commanders in
the young American navy no less daring than he. As the chief naval
representative of the Colonies who cruised in European waters, Jones
achieved a notoriety somewhat out of proportion to his actual
achievements. But other brave seamen did gallant service along the
Atlantic coast for the cause of the struggling nation, and, by their
daring and nautical skill, did much to bring the war of the Revolution
to its happy conclusion.

We abandoned our consideration of the general naval events of the war,
to turn to a recountal of the exploits of Paul Jones at the close of
the year 1776. Hostilities on the water during that year were confined
to sharp, but short, actions between small men-of-war or privateers.
The Americans lacked the discipline and experience necessary to win
for themselves any great reputation on the water. Though they showed
themselves full of dash and spirit, they were deficient in discipline
and staying qualities. Nevertheless, the record of the year was by no
means discreditable to so young a naval organization.

Aside from the naval operations on the ocean, the year 1776 had seen
the thick clouds of gunpowder-smoke floating across the placid surface
of Lake Champlain, while the wooded hills that surrounded that lake
and Lake George more than once resounded with thunderous tones of
cannon. The hostile meetings of the English and Americans on the
interior lakes are hardly to be classed as naval engagements. The
vessels were chiefly gondolas and galleys, and many of their crews had
never seen salt water. On the British side the forces were more
considerable. In October, 1776, the British had on Lake Champlain at
least one full-rigged ship; and their schooners and galleys were all
manned by trained sailors, drafted from men-of-war laid up in the St.
Lawrence. This force was under the command of Capt. Douglass of the
frigate "Isis." The Americans, on the contrary, had manned their fleet
with recruits from the army; and the forces were under the command of
an army-officer, Gen. Benedict Arnold, the story of whose later
treachery is familiar to every American. It was late in October that
the two hostile fleets met in deadly conflict, and a few short hours
were enough to prove to the Americans that they were greatly
overmatched. Such of their vessels as were not sunk were captured and
burned by the enemy; while their crews escaped into the woods, and
ultimately rejoined Arnold's army, from which they had been drafted.

We pass thus hastily over the so-called naval operations on Lake
Champlain, because they were properly not naval operations at all, but
merely incidents in the shore campaign. The fact that a few soldiers
hastily build a small flotilla, and with it give battle to an enemy on
the water, does not in any sense constitute a naval battle.

The year 1777 witnessed many notable naval events. Hostilities along
the seaboard became more lively. New vessels were put into commission.
England despatched a larger naval armament to crush her rebellious
colonies. The records of the admiralty show, that at the beginning of
that year Parliament voted to the navy forty-five thousand men. The
Americans were able to array against this huge force only some four
thousand, scattered upon thirteen small vessels-of-war.

One of the first ships to get to sea in this year was the "Randolph:"
a new frigate commanded by Nicholas Biddle, who thus early in the war
had won the confidence of the people and the naval authorities. In
command of the little cruiser "Andrea Doria," Biddle had cruised off
the coast of Newfoundland in 1776. His success upon that cruise has
already been noted.

Biddle was a man possessing to the fullest degree that primary
qualification of a good naval officer,--an indomitable will. In
illustration of his determination, a story is related concerning an
incident that occurred just as the "Andrea Doria" had left the Capes
of the Delaware. Two of her crew had deserted, and, being apprehended
by the authorities on shore, were lodged in Lewiston jail. But the
sheriff and his deputies found it easier to turn the key on the
fugitive tars, than to keep them in control while they lay in durance
vile. Gathering all the benches, chairs, and tables that lay about the
jail,--for the lockup of those days was not the trim affair of steel
and iron seen to-day,--the unrepentant jackies built for themselves a
barricade, and, snugly entrenched behind it, shouted out bold defiance
to any and all who should come to take them. The jail authorities had
committed the foolish error of neglecting to disarm the prisoners when
they were captured; and, as each had a brace of ugly pistols in his
belt, the position of the two behind their barricade was really one of
considerable strength. The prison officials dared not attempt to
dislodge the warlike tars. The militia company of the town was ordered
to the scene, but even this body of soldiery dared not force the
prison door. Accordingly they determined to let time do the work, and
starve the rogues out of their retreat. At this juncture Capt. Biddle
came ashore. He had no intention of letting his trim ship lie idly in
the offing while two mutinous blue-jackets were slowly starved into
subjection. The "Andrea Doria" needed the men, and there must be no
more delay. A captain in the American navy was not to be defied by two
of his own people.

Therefore, seizing a loaded pistol in each hand, Capt. Biddle walked
to the prison, accompanied only by a young midshipman. As the two
pounded upon the heavy barred door, the crowd outside fell back,
expecting the bullets to fly.

"Open this door, Green," shouted Biddle to one of the prisoners, whom
he knew by name.

"Try to open it yourself," came the reply from within, with an
accompanying oath. "The first man that shows his head inside this door
gets a bullet."

Green was known as a bold, desperate man; but Biddle did not hesitate
a moment. Ordering the bystanders to break down the door, he waited
quietly, until a crash, and the sudden scattering of the crowd, gave
notice that the way into the prison was clear. Then gripping his
pistols tightly, but with his arms hanging loosely at his sides, he
advanced upon the deserters. Behind the barricade stood Green, his
eyes blazing with rage, his pistol levelled. Biddle faced him quietly.

"Now, Green, if you don't take a good aim, you are a dead man," said
he.

With a muttered curse, the mutineer dropped his weapon. The cool
determination of the captain awed him. In a few minutes he, with his
companion, was on his way to the ship in irons.

It was in February, 1777, that the stanch new frigate "Randolph," with
Biddle in command, set sail from Philadelphia. Hardly had she reached
the high seas when a terrific gale set in, from which the "Randolph"
emerged, shorn of her tapering masts. As she lay a helpless wreck
tossing on the waves, the hard work necessary to put her in decent
shape again induced Biddle to accede to the request of a number of
British prisoners on board, who wished to be enrolled among the crew
of the "Randolph." This proved to be an unfortunate move; for the
Englishmen were no sooner enrolled on the ship's list than they began
plotting mutiny, and the uprising reached such a stage that they
assembled on the gun-deck, and gave three cheers. But the firm and
determined stand of the captain and his officers overawed the
mutineers, and they returned to their places after the ringleaders had
been made to suffer at the gratings. But the spirit of disaffection
rife amid his crew, and the crippled condition of his ship, determined
Biddle to proceed forthwith to Charleston to refit.

But a few days were spent in port. Getting to sea again, the
"Randolph" fell in with the "True Briton," a twenty-gun ship, flying
the British colors. Though the captain of the "True Briton" had often
boasted of what he would do should he encounter the "Randolph," his
courage then failed him, and he fled. The "Randolph" gave chase, and,
proving to be a speedy ship, soon overhauled the prize, which struck
without waiting for a volley. Three other vessels that had been
cruising with the "True Briton" were also captured, and with her rich
prizes the "Randolph" returned proudly to Charleston. Here her
usefulness ceased for a time; for a superior force of British
men-of-war appeared off the harbor, and by them the "Randolph" was
blockaded for the remainder of the season.

Early in 1778 Biddle again took the sea with the "Randolph," supported
this time by four small vessels, fitted out by the South Carolina
authorities. They were the "Gen. Moultrie," eighteen guns; the
"Polly," sixteen; the "Notre Dame," sixteen; and the "Fair American,"
sixteen. With this force Capt. Biddle set out in search of a British
squadron known to be cruising thereabouts, and probably the same
vessels that had kept him a prisoner during so much of the previous
year.

On the 7th of March, 1778, the lookouts on the smaller vessels saw a
signal thrown out from the masthead of the "Randolph," which announced
a sail in sight. Chase was at once given; and by four o'clock she was
near enough for the Americans to see that she was a large ship, and
apparently a man-of-war. About eight o'clock the stranger was near
enough the squadron for them to make out that she was a heavy frigate.

The Englishman was not slow to suspect the character of the vessels
with which he had fallen in, and firing a shot across the bows of the
"Moultrie," demanded her name.

"The 'Polly' of New York," was the response.

Leaving the "Moultrie" unmolested, the stranger ranged up alongside
the "Randolph," and ordered her to show her colors. This Biddle
promptly did; and as the American flag went fluttering to the fore,
the ports of the "Randolph" were thrown open, and a broadside poured
into the hull of the Englishman. The stranger was not slow in
replying, and the action became hot and deadly. Capt. Biddle was
wounded in the thigh early in the battle. As he fell to the deck, his
officers crowded about him, thinking that he was killed; but he
encouraged them to return to their posts, and, ordering a chair to be
placed on the quarter-deck, remained on deck, giving orders, and
cheering on his men. It is said that Capt. Biddle was wounded by a
shot from the "Moultrie," which flew wide of its intended mark.

For twenty minutes the battle raged, and there was no sign of
weakening on the part of either contestant. Suddenly the sound of the
cannonade was deadened by a thunderous roar. The people on the other
ships saw a huge column of fire and smoke rise where the "Randolph"
had floated. The English vessel was thrown violently on her beam-ends.
The sky was darkened with flying timbers and splinters, which fell
heavily into the sea. The "Randolph" had blown up. A spark, a red-hot
shot, some fiery object, had penetrated her magazine, and she was
annihilated.

The horrible accident which destroyed the "Randolph" came near being
the end of the "Yarmouth," her antagonist. The two battling ships were
close together; so close, in fact, that after the explosion Capt.
Morgan of the "Fair American" hailed the "Yarmouth" to ask how Capt.
Biddle was. The English ship was fairly covered with bits of the
flying wreck. Some heavy pieces of timber falling from the skies badly
shattered her main-deck. An American ensign, closely rolled up, fell
on her forecastle, not even singed by the fiery ordeal through which
it had passed.

The "Yarmouth" wasted little time in wonder over the fate of her late
antagonist. In all the mass of floating wreckage that covered the sea,
there appeared to be no living thing. The four smaller American
vessels, dismayed by the fate of their consort, were making good their
escape. Without more ado, the "Yarmouth" set out in chase.

Four days later, the Americans having escaped, the "Yarmouth" was
again cruising near the scene of the action. A raft was discovered on
the ocean, which seemed to support some living creatures. Running down
upon it, four wretched, emaciated men were discovered clinging to a
piece of wreckage, and wildly waving for assistance. They were taken
aboard the British man-of-war, and given food and drink, of both of
which they partook greedily; for their sole sustenance during the four
days for which they clung to their frail raft was rain-water sucked
from a piece of blanket.

So died Capt. Nicholas Biddle, blown to atoms by the explosion of his
ship in the midst of battle. Though but a young officer, not having
completed his twenty-seventh year, he left an enduring name in the
naval annals of his country. Though his service was short, the fame he
won was great.

Among the more notable commanders who did good service on the sea was
Capt. Samuel Tucker, who was put in command of the frigate "Boston" in
the latter part of the year 1777. Tucker was an old and tried seaman,
and is furthermore one of the most picturesque figures in the naval
history of the Revolution. He first showed his love for the sea in the
way that Yankee boys from time immemorial have shown it,--by running
away from home, and shipping as a cabin-boy. The ship which he chose
was the British sloop-of-war "Royal George," and the boy found himself
face to face with the rigid naval discipline of the British service at
that time. But he stuck manfully to the career he had chosen, and
gradually mastered not only the details of a seaman's duty, but much
of the art of navigation; so that when finally he got his discharge
from the "Royal George," he shipped as second mate on a Salem
merchantman. It was on his first voyage in this capacity that he first
showed the mettle that was in him. Two Algerine corsairs, their decks
crowded with men, their long low hulls cleaving the waves like
dolphins, had given chase to the merchantman. The captain of the
threatened ship grew faint-hearted: he sought courage in liquor, and
soon became unable to manage his vessel. Tucker took the helm. He saw
that there was no chance of escape in flight, for the corsairs were
too fleet. There was no hope of victory in a battle, for the pirates
were too strong. But the trim New England schooner minded her helm
better than her lanteen-rigged pursuers, and this fact Tucker put to
good account.

Putting his helm hard down, he headed the schooner directly for the
piratical craft. By skilful manoeuvring, he secured such a position
that either pirate, by firing upon him, was in danger of firing into
his fellow corsair. This position he managed to maintain until
nightfall, when he slipped away, and by daylight was snugly at anchor
in the port of Lisbon.

For some time after this episode, the record of Tucker's seafaring
life is lost. Certain it is that he served in the British navy as an
officer for some time, and was master of a merchantman for several
years.

When the Revolution broke out, Samuel Tucker was in London. Being
offered by a recruiting officer a commission in either the army or
navy, if he would consent to serve "his gracious Majesty," Tucker very
rashly responded, "Hang his gracious Majesty! Do you think I would
serve against my country?"

Soon a hue and cry was out for Tucker. He was charged with treason,
and fled into the country to the house of a tavern-keeper whom he
knew, who sheltered him until he could make his escape from England.

Hardly had he arrived in America, when Gen. Washington commissioned
him captain of the "Franklin," and instructed him to proceed directly
to sea. An express with the commission and instructions was hurried
off to Marblehead, then a straggling little city. He was instructed to
find the "Hon. Samuel Tucker," and to deliver to him the packets in
his charge. When the messenger arrived, Tucker was working in his
yard. The messenger saw a rough-looking person, roughly clad, with a
tarpaulin hat, and his neck bound with a flaming red bandanna
handkerchief. Never once thinking this person could be the man he
sought, he leaned from his horse, and shouted out roughly,--

"I say, fellow, I wish you would tell me whether the Hon. Samuel
Tucker lives hereabouts."

Tucker looked up with a quizzical smile, and surveyed the speaker from
under the wide rim of his tarpaulin, as he answered,--

"Honorable, honorable! There's none of that name in Marblehead. He
must be one of the Tuckers in Salem. I'm the only Samuel Tucker here."

"Capt. Glover told me he knew him," responded the messenger, "and
described his house, gable-end on the seaside, none near it. Faith,
this looks like the very place!"

With a laugh, Tucker then confessed his identity, and asked the
messenger his business. Receiving the commission and instructions, he
at once began his preparations for leaving home, and at daybreak the
next morning was on his way to Beverly, where lay anchored the first
ship he was to command in the service of his country.

In the "Franklin" Capt. Tucker did some most efficient work. His name
appears constantly in the letters of Gen. Washington, and in the State
papers making up the American archives, as having sent in valuable
prizes. At one time we read of the capture of "a brigantine from
Scotland, worth fifteen thousand pounds sterling;" again, of six
gunboats, and of brigs laden with wine and fruit. During the year
1776, he took not less than thirty--and probably a few more--ships,
brigs, and smaller vessels. Nor were all these vessels taken without
some sharp fighting.

Of one battle Tucker himself speaks in one of his letters. First
telling how his wife made the colors for his ship, "the field of which
was white, and the union was green, made of cloth of her own
purchasing, and at her own expense," he goes on to write of one of his
battles:--

"Those colors I wore in honor of the country,--which has so nobly
rewarded me for my past services,--and the love of their maker, until
I fell in with Col. Archibald Campbell in the ship "George," and brig
"Arabella," transports with about two hundred and eighty Highland
troops on board, of Gen. Frazer's corps. About ten P.M. a severe
conflict ensued, which held about two hours and twenty minutes. I
conquered them with great carnage on their side, it being in the
night, and my small bark, about seventy tons burden, being very low in
the water, I received no damage in loss of men, but lost a complete
set of new by the passing of their balls; then the white field and
pine-tree union were riddled to atoms. I was then immediately supplied
with a new suit of sails, and a new suit of colors, made of canvas and
bunting of my own prize-goods."

Another time, during the same year, Tucker took two British ships near
Marblehead. So near was the scene of action to the house of Capt.
Tucker, that his wife and her sister, hearing the sound of
cannonading, ascended a high hill in the vicinity, and from that point
viewed the action through a spy-glass.

Capt. Tucker kept the sea in the "Franklin" until late in the winter.
When finally the cold weather and high winds forced him to put his
ship out of commission, he went to his home at Marblehead. He remained
there but a short time; for in March, 1777, he was put in command of
the "Boston," a frigate of twenty-four guns. In this vessel he cruised
during the year with varying success.

Feb. 10, 1778, Capt. Tucker was ordered to carry the Hon. John Adams
to France, as envoy from the United States. The voyage was full of
incidents. Feeling impressed with the gravity of the charge laid upon
him, Capt. Tucker chose a course which he hoped would enable him to
steer clear of the horde of British men-of-war which then infested
the American coast. But in so doing he fell in with a natural enemy,
which came near proving fatal. A terrific thunderstorm, gradually
growing into a tornado, crossed the path of the ship. The ocean was
lashed into waves mountain high. The crash of the thunder rent the
sky. A stroke of lightning struck the main-mast, and ripped up the
deck, narrowly missing the magazine. The ship sprung a leak; and the
grewsome sound of the pumps mingled with the roar of the waves, and
the shrieking of the winds. For several days the stormy weather
continued. Then followed a period of calm, which the captain well
employed in repairing the rigging, and exercising the men with the
guns and small-arms. Many ships had been sighted, and some, evidently
men-of-war, had given chase; but the "Boston" succeeded in showing
them all a clean pair of heels.

"What would you do," said Mr. Adams one day, as he stood with the
captain watching three ships that were making desperate efforts to
overhaul the "Boston," "if you could not escape, and they should
attack you?"

"As the first is far in advance of the others, I should carry her by
boarding, leading the boarders myself," was the response. "I should
take her; for no doubt a majority of her crew, being pressed men,
would turn to and join me. Having taken her, I should be matched, and
could fight the other two."

Such language as this coming from many men would be considered mere
foolhardy boasting. But Tucker was a man not given to brag. Indeed, he
was apt to be very laconic in speaking of his exploits. A short time
after his escape from the three ships, he fell in with an English
armed vessel of no small force, and captured her. His only comment on
the action in his journal reads, "I fired a gun, and they returned
three; and down went the colors."

John Adams, however, told a more graphic story of this capture.
Tucker, as soon as he saw an armed vessel in his path, hastily called
his crew to order, and bore down upon her. When the roll of the drum,
calling the people to quarters, resounded through the ship, Mr. Adams
seized a musket, and took his stand with the marines. Capt. Tucker,
seeing him there, requested him to go below, and upon his desire being
disregarded, put his hand upon the envoy's shoulder, and in a tone of
authority said,--

"Mr. Adams, I am commanded by the Continental Congress to deliver you
safe in France, and you must go below."

The envoy smilingly complied, and just at that moment the enemy let
fly her broadside. The shot flew through the rigging, doing but little
damage. Though the guns of the "Boston" were shotted, and the gunners
stood at their posts with smoking match-stocks, Capt. Tucker gave no
order to fire, but seemed intent upon the manoeuvres of the ships. The
eager blue-jackets begun to murmur, and the chorus of questions and
oaths was soon so great that the attention of Tucker was attracted. He
looked at the row of eager faces on the gun-deck, and shouted out,--

"Hold on, my men! I wish to save that egg without breaking the shell."

Soon after, Tucker brought his broadside to bear on the stern of the
enemy, and she struck without more ado. She proved to be an armed
ship, the "Martha."

After this encounter, nothing more of moment occurred on the voyage;
and the "Boston" reached Bordeaux, and landed her distinguished
passenger in safety. Two months later she left Bordeaux, in company
with a fleet of twenty sail, one of which was the "Ranger," formerly
commanded by Paul Jones. With these vessels he cruised for a time in
European waters, but returned to the American coast in the autumn. His
services for the rest of that year, and the early part of 1779, we
must pass over hastily, though many were the prizes that fell into his
clutches.

Many anecdotes are told of Tucker. His shrewdness, originality, and
daring made him a favorite theme for story-tellers. But, unhappily,
the anecdotes have generally no proof of their truth. One or two,
however, told by Capt. Tucker's biographer, Mr. John H. Sheppard, will
not be out of place here.

In one the story is told that Tucker fell in with a British frigate
which he knew to be sent in search of him. Showing the English flag,
he sailed boldly towards the enemy, and in answer to her hail said he
was Capt. Gordon of the English navy, out in search of the "Boston,"
commanded by the rebel Tucker.

"I'll carry him to New York, dead or alive," said Tucker.

"Have you seen him?" was asked.

"Well, I've heard of him," was the response; "and they say he is a
hard customer."

All this time Tucker had been manoeuvring to secure a raking
position. Behind the closed ports of the "Boston," the men stood at
their guns, ready for the word of command. Just as the American had
secured the position desired, a sailor in the tops of the British
vessel cried out,--

"That is surely Tucker; we shall have a devil of a smell directly."

Hearing this, Tucker ordered the American flag hoisted, and the ports
thrown open. Hailing his astonished foe, he cried,--

"The time I proposed talking with you is ended. This is the 'Boston,'
frigate. I am Samuel Tucker, but no rebel. Fire, or strike your flag."

The Englishman saw he had no alternative but to strike. This he did
without firing a gun. The vessel, though not named in the anecdote,
was probably the "Pole," of the capture of which Tucker frequently
speaks in his letters.

Of the part Tucker played in the siege of Charleston, of his capture
there by the British, and of his exchange, we shall speak later. At
that disaster four American frigates were lost: so many of the best
naval officers were thrown out of employment. Among them was Tucker;
but ever anxious for active service, he obtained the sloop-of-war
"Thorn," which he himself had captured, and went out as a privateer.
In this vessel he saw some sharp service. One engagement was thus
described to Mr. Sheppard by a marine named Everett who was on
board:--

"We had been cruising about three weeks when we fell in with an
English packet of twenty-two guns and one hundred men. Not long after
she was discovered, the commodore called up his crew, and said, 'She
means to fight us; and if we go alongside like men, she is ours in
thirty minutes, but if we can't go as men we have no business here.'
He then told them he wanted no cowards on deck, and requested those
who were willing to fight to go down the starboard, and those who were
unwilling the larboard gangway. Every man and boy took the first,
signifying his willingness to meet the enemy.

"As Mr. Everett was passing by, the commodore asked him,--

"'Are you willing to go alongside of her?'

"'Yes, sir,' was the reply.

"In mentioning this conversation, however, Mr. Everett candidly
confessed, 'I did not tell him the truth, for I would rather have been
in my father's cornfield.'

"After the commanders of these two vessels, as they drew near, had
hailed each other in the customary way when ships meet at sea, the
captain of the English packet cried out roughly from the
quarter-deck,--

"'Haul down your colors, or I'll sink you!'

"'Ay, ay, sir; directly,' answered Tucker calmly. And he then ordered
the helmsman to steer the 'Thorn' right under the stern of the packet,
luff up under her lee quarters, and range alongside of her. The order
was promptly executed. The two vessels were laid side by side, within
pistol shot of each other. While the 'Thorn' was getting into
position, the enemy fired a full broadside at her which did but little
damage. As soon as she was brought completely alongside her adversary,
Tucker thundered out to his men to fire, and a tremendous discharge
followed; and, as good aim had been taken, a dreadful carnage was seen
in that ill-fated vessel. It was rapidly succeeded by a fresh volley
of artillery, and in twenty-seven minutes a piercing cry was heard
from the English vessel: 'Quarters, for God's sake! Our ship is
sinking. Our men are dying of their wounds.'

"To this heart-rending appeal Capt. Tucker exclaimed,--

"'How can you expect quarters while that British flag is flying?'

"The sad answer came back, 'Our halliards are shot away.'

"'Then cut away your ensign staff, or ye'll all be dead men.'

"It was done immediately. Down came the colors, the din of cannonading
ceased, and only the groans of the wounded and dying were heard.

"Fifteen men, with carpenters, surgeon, and their leader, were quickly
on the deck of the prize. Thirty-four of her crew, with her captain,
were either killed or wounded. Her decks were besmeared with blood,
and in some places it stood in clotted masses to the tops of the
sailors' slippers. The gloomy but needful work of amputating limbs,
and laying out the dead, was begun; and every effort was made to
render the wounded prisoners as comfortable as possible."

Here we must take leave of Commodore Tucker and his exploits. As a
privateersman, he continued to do daring work to the end of the war.
He fought at least one more bloody action. He was captured once and
escaped. But the recountal of his romantic career must now yield to
our chronological survey of the lesser naval events of the Revolution.




CHAPTER XI.

     HOSTILITIES IN 1777. -- AMERICAN REVERSES. -- THE BRITISH IN
     PHILADELPHIA. -- THE ATTACK UPON FORT MIFFLIN. -- CRUISE OF
     THE "RALEIGH" AND THE "ALFRED." -- TORPEDO WARFARE. -- THE
     BATTLE OF THE KEGS.


We have now heard of the exploits of some of the chief naval leaders
of the war of the Revolution. But there were many dashing engagements
in which the great commanders took no part, and many important
captures made by vessels sailing under the flags of the individual
colonies, which deserve attention.

The American cause on the water suffered some rather severe reverses
in the early part of 1777. In March, the brig "Cabot" fell in with the
British frigate "Milford," and was so hard pressed that she was run
ashore on the coast of Nova Scotia. The crew had hardly time to get
ashore before the British took possession of the stranded craft. The
Americans were left helpless, in a wild and little settled country,
but finally made their way through the woods to a harbor. Here they
found a coasting schooner lying at anchor, upon which they promptly
seized, and in which they escaped to Portsmouth. In the mean time, the
British had got the "Cabot" afloat again.

Two months later, or in the early part of May, two United States
vessels, the "Hancock" thirty-two, Capt. Manly, and the "Boston"
twenty-four, Capt. Hector McNeil, sailed in company from Boston. When
a few days out, a strange sail was sighted, and proved to be a
British frigate. The "Hancock" soon came near enough to her to
exchange broadsides, as the two vessels were going on opposite tacks.
The enemy, however, seemed anxious to avoid a conflict, and exerted
every effort to escape. Manly, having great confidence in the speed of
his ship, gave chase. Calling the people from the guns, he bade them
make a leisurely breakfast, and get ready for the work before them.
The "Hancock" soon overhauled the chase, which began firing her guns
as fast as they would bear. The Americans, however, made no response
until fairly alongside, when they let fly a broadside with ringing
cheers. The action lasted for an hour and a half before the enemy
struck. She proved to be the "Fox," twenty-eight. She was badly cut up
by the American fire, and had thirty-two dead and wounded men on
board. The loss on the "Hancock" amounted to only eight men. In this
running fight the "Boston" was hopelessly distanced, coming up just in
time to fire a gun as the British ensign came fluttering from the
peak.

Putting a prize crew on the "Fox," the three vessels continued their
cruise. A week passed, and no sail was seen. Somewhat rashly Capt.
Manly turned his ship's prow toward Halifax, then, as now, the chief
British naval station on the American coast. When the three ships
appeared off the entrance to the harbor of Halifax, the British
men-of-war inside quickly spied them, raised anchor, and came crowding
out in hot pursuit. There was the "Rainbow" forty-four, the "Flora"
thirty-two, and the "Victor" eighteen, besides two others whose names
could not be ascertained. The Americans saw that they had stirred up a
nest of hornets, and sought safety in flight. The three British
vessels whose names are given gave chase. The "Boston," by her swift
sailing, easily kept out of the reach of the enemy. The "Fox,"
however, was quickly overhauled by the "Flora," and struck her flag
after exchanging a few broadsides. The "Hancock" for a time seemed
likely to escape, but at last the "Rainbow" began gradually to
overhaul her. Capt. Manly, finding escape impossible, began
manoeuvring with the intention of boarding his powerful adversary; but
the light winds made this impossible, and he suddenly found himself
under the guns of the "Rainbow," with the "Victor" astern, in a raking
position. Seeing no hope for success in so unequal a conflict, Manly
struck his flag. In the mean time the "Boston" had calmly proceeded
upon her way, leaving her consorts to their fate. For having thus
abandoned his superior officer, Capt. McNeil was dismissed the service
upon his return to Boston.

These losses were to some degree offset by the good fortune of the
"Trumbull," twenty-eight, in command of Capt. Saltonstall. She left
New York in April of this year, and had been on the water but a few
days when she fell in with two British armed vessels of no
inconsiderable force. The Englishmen, confident of their ability to
beat off the cruiser, made no effort to avoid a conflict. Capt.
Saltonstall, by good seamanship, managed to put his vessel between the
two hostile ships, and then worked both batteries with such vigor,
that, after half-an-hour's fighting, the enemy was glad to strike. In
this action the Americans lost seven men killed, and eight wounded.
The loss of the enemy was not reported. This capture was of the
greatest importance to the American cause, for the two prizes were
loaded with military and naval stores.

During the year 1777, the occupation of Philadelphia by the British
army, under Gen. Howe, led to some activity on the part of the
American navy. While Philadelphia had been in the possession of the
Continentals, it had been a favorite naval rendezvous. Into the broad
channel of the Delaware the American cruisers had been accustomed to
retreat when the British naval force along the coast became
threateningly active. At the broad wharves of Philadelphia, the
men-of-war laid up to have necessary repairs made. In the rope-walks
of the town, the cordage for the gallant Yankee ships was spun. In the
busy shipyards along the Delaware, many of the frigates, provided for
by the Act of 1775, were built.

In the summer of 1777 all this was changed. Sir William Howe, at the
head of an irresistible army, marched upon Philadelphia; and,
defeating the American army at Brandywine, entered the city in
triumph. The privateers and men-of-war scattered hastily, to avoid
capture. Most of them fled down the Delaware; but a few, chiefly
vessels still uncompleted, ascended the river.

To cut off these vessels, the British immediately commenced the
erection of batteries to command the channel of the river, and prevent
any communication between the American vessels above and below
Philadelphia. To check the erection of these batteries, the American
vessels "Delaware" twenty-four, and "Andrea Doria" fourteen, together
with one or two vessels flying the Pennsylvania flag, took up a
position before the incomplete earthworks, and opened a heavy fire
upon the soldiers employed in the trenches. So accurate was the aim of
the American gunners, that work on the batteries was stopped. But,
unluckily, the commander of the "Delaware," Capt. Alexander, had
failed to reckon on the swift outflowing of the tide; and just as the
sailors on that ship were becoming jubilant over the prospect of a
victory, a mighty quiver throughout the ship told that she had been
left on a shoal by the ebb tide. The enemy was not long in discovering
the helpless condition of the "Delaware;" and field-pieces and
siege-guns were brought down to the river-bank, until the luckless
Americans saw themselves commanded by a heavy battery. In this unhappy
predicament there was no course remaining but to strike their flag.

Though the British had possession of Philadelphia, and virtually
controlled the navigation of the river at that point, the Americans
still held powerful positions at Red Bank and at Fort Mifflin, lower
down the river. Against the former post the British sent an
unsuccessful land expedition of Hessians, but against Fort Mifflin a
naval expedition was despatched.

Fort Mifflin was built on a low marshy island near the mouth of the
Schuylkill. Its very situation, surrounded as it was by mud and water,
made it impregnable to any land attack. While the fort itself was a
fairly strong earthwork, laid out upon approved principles of
engineering, its outer works of defence added greatly to its strength.
In the main channels of the river were sunk heavy, sharp-pointed
_chevaux de frise_, or submarine palisades, with sharp points
extending just above the surface of the water. In addition to this
obstacle, the enemy advancing by water upon the fort would have to
meet the American flotilla, which, though composed of small craft
only, was large enough to prove very annoying to an enemy. In this
flotilla were thirteen galleys, one carrying a thirty-two pounder, and
the rest with varying weight of ordnance; twenty-six half-galleys,
each carrying a four-pounder; two xebecs, each with two
twenty-four-pounders in the bow, two eighteen-pounders in the stern,
and four nine-pounders in the waist; two floating batteries, fourteen
fire-ships, one schooner-galley, one brig-galley, one provincial ship,
and the brig "Andrea Doria." It was no small naval force that the
British had to overcome before attacking the mud ramparts and bastions
of Fort Mifflin.

Against this armament the British brought a number of vessels, with
the "Augusta," sixty-four, in the lead. The battle was begun late in
the afternoon of the 22d of October, 1777. The attack of the Hessians
upon the American fortifications at Red Bank, and the opening of the
action between the British and American fleets, were simultaneous. The
Hessians were beaten back with heavy loss, some of the American
vessels opening fire upon them from the river. The naval battle lasted
but a short time that night, owing to the darkness. When the battle
ended for the night, the "Augusta," and the "Merlin," sloop-of-war,
were left hard and fast aground.

The next morning the British advanced again to the attack. The
skirmish of the night before had shown them that the Yankee flotilla
was no mean adversary; and they now brought up re-inforcements, in the
shape of the "Roebuck" forty-four, "Isis" thirty-two, "Pearl"
thirty-two, and "Liverpool" twenty-eight. No sooner had the British
squadron come within range than a heavy fire was opened upon the fort.
The American flotilla was prompt to answer the challenge, and soon the
action became general. Time and time again the Americans sent huge
fire-ships, their well-tarred spars and rigging blazing fiercely, down
among the enemy. But the skill and activity of the British sailors
warded off this danger. Thereupon the Americans, seeing that they
could not rely upon their fire-ships, changed their plan of action.
Any one of the British vessels was more than a match for the largest
American craft, so the Yankees saw they must rely upon force of
numbers. Accordingly their larger vessels were each assigned to attack
one of the enemy; while the swift-sailing galleys plied to and fro in
the battle, lending aid where needed, and striking a blow wherever the
opportunity offered itself. This course of action soon began to tell
upon the British. All of their vessels began to show the effects of
the American fire. The "Augusta" was in flames, owing to some pressed
hay that had been packed upon her quarter having been set on fire.
Despite the efforts of her crew, the flames spread rapidly. Seeing no
chance to save the vessel, the crew abandoned her, and sought to gain
the protection of other vessels of the British fleet. But the other
ships, seeing the flames on the "Augusta" drawing closer and closer
to the magazine, and knowing that her explosion in that narrow and
crowded channel would work dreadful damage among them, determined to
abandon the attack upon Fort Mifflin, and withdrew. The "Merlin,"
which was hard and fast aground, was fired, and the British fled. As
they turned their ships' prows down the Delaware, the dull sullen roar
of an explosion told that the "Augusta" had met her end. Soon after
the "Merlin" blew up, and the defeat of the British was complete.

But, though worsted in this attack upon Fort Mifflin, the British did
not wholly abandon their designs upon it. Immediately upon their
repulse, they began their preparations for a second attack. This time
they did not propose to rely upon men-of-war alone. Batteries were
built upon every point of land within range of Fort Mifflin. Floating
batteries were built, and towed into position. By the 10th of November
all was ready, and upon that day a tremendous cannonade was opened
upon the American works. After two days of ceaseless bombardment, the
garrison of the fort was forced to surrender. Since the fall of Fort
Mifflin gave the control of the Delaware to the British, the Americans
immediately put the torch to the "Andrea Doria" fourteen, the "Wasp"
eight, and the "Hornet" ten; while the galleys skulked away along the
Jersey coast, in search of places of retreat.

While the Yankee tars on river and harbor duty were thus getting their
share of fighting, there was plenty of daring work being done on the
high seas. One of the most important cruises of the year was that of
the "Raleigh" and the "Alfred." The "Raleigh" was one of the
twelve-pounder frigates built under the naval Act of 1775. With her
consort the "Alfred," she left the American coast in the summer of
1777, bound for France, in search of naval stores that were there
awaiting transportation to the United States. Both vessels were
short-handed.

On the 2d of September the two vessels overhauled and captured the
snow "Nancy," from England, bound for the West Indies. Her captain
reported that he had sailed from the West Indies with a fleet of sixty
merchantmen, under the convoy of four small men-of-war, the "Camel,"
the "Druid," the "Weasel," and the "Grasshopper." The poor sailing
qualities of the "Nancy" had forced her to drop behind, and the fleet
was then about a day in advance of her.

Crowding on all canvas, the two American ships set out in hot pursuit.
From the captain of the "Nancy" Capt. Thompson of the "Raleigh" had
obtained all the signals in use in the fleet of Indiamen. The next
morning the fleet was made out; and the "Raleigh" and the "Alfred"
exchanged signals, as though they were part of the convoy. They hung
about the outskirts of the fleet until dark, planning, when the night
should fall, to make a dash into the enemy's midst, and cut out the
chief armed vessel.

But at nightfall the wind changed, so that the plan of the Americans
was defeated. At daylight, however, the wind veered round and
freshened, so that the "Raleigh," crowding on more sail, was soon in
the very centre of the enemy's fleet. The "Alfred," unfortunately,
being unable to carry so great a spread of canvas, was left behind;
and the "Raleigh" remained to carry out alone her daring adventure.

The "Raleigh" boldly steered straight into the midst of the British
merchantmen, exchanging signals with some, and hailing others. Her
ports were lowered, and her guns on deck housed, so that there
appeared about her nothing to indicate her true character. Having
cruised about amid the merchantmen, she drew up alongside the nearest
man-of-war, and when within pistol-shot, suddenly ran up her flag,
threw open her ports, and commanded the enemy to strike.

All was confusion on board the British vessel. Her officers had never
for a moment suspected the "Raleigh" of being other than one of their
own fleet. While they stood aghast, not even keeping the vessel on her
course, the "Raleigh" poured in a broadside. The British responded
faintly with a few guns. Deliberately the Americans let fly another
broadside, which did great execution. The enemy were driven from their
guns, but doggedly refused to strike, holding out, doubtless, in the
hope that the cannonade might draw to their assistance some of the
other armed ships accompanying the fleet.

While the unequal combat was raging, a heavy squall came rushing over
the water. The driving sheets of rain shut in the combatants, and only
by the thunders of the cannonade could the other vessels tell that a
battle was being fought in their midst.

When the squall had passed by, the affrighted merchantmen were seen
scudding in every direction, like a school of flying-fish into whose
midst some rapacious shark or dolphin has intruded himself. But the
three men-of-war, with several armed West-Indiamen in their wake, were
fast bearing down upon the combatants, with the obvious intention of
rescuing their comrade, and punishing the audacious Yankee.

The odds against Thompson were too great; and after staying by his
adversary until the last possible moment, and pouring broadside after
broadside into her, he abandoned the fight and rejoined the "Alfred."
The two ships hung on the flanks of the fleet for some days, in the
hopes of enticing two of the men-of-war out to join in battle. But all
was to no avail, and the Americans were forced to content themselves
with the scant glory won in the incomplete action of the "Raleigh."
Her adversary proved to be the "Druid," twenty, which suffered
severely from the "Raleigh's" repeated broadsides, having six killed,
and twenty-six wounded; of the wounded, five died immediately after
the battle.

It was during the year 1777 that occurred the first attempt to use
gunpowder in the shape of a submarine torpedo. This device, which
to-day threatens to overturn all established ideas of naval
organization and architecture, originated with a clever Connecticut
mechanic named David Bushnell. His invention covered not only
submarine torpedoes, to be launched against a vessel, but a submarine
boat in which an adventurous navigator might undertake to go beneath
the hull of a man-of-war, and affix the torpedoes, so that failure
should be impossible. This boat in shape was not unlike a turtle. A
system of valves, air-pumps, and ballast enabled the operator to
ascend or descend in the water at will. A screw-propeller afforded
means of propulsion, and phosphorescent gauges and compasses enabled
him to steer with some accuracy.

Preliminary tests made with this craft were uniformly successful.
After a skilled operator had been obtained, the boat perfectly
discharged the duties required of her. But, as is so often the case,
when the time for action came she proved inadequate to the emergency.
Let her inventor tell the story in his own words:--

"After various attempts to find an operator to my wish, I sent one,
who appeared to be more expert than the rest, from New York, to a
fifty-gun ship, lying not far from Governor's Island. He went under
the ship, and attempted to fix the wooden screw to her bottom, but
struck, as he supposes, a bar of iron, which passes from the rudder
hinge, and is spiked under the ship's quarter. Had he moved a few
inches, which he might have done without rowing, I have no doubt he
would have found wood where he might have fixed the screw; or, if the
ship were sheathed with copper, he might easily have pierced it. But
not being well skilled in the management of the vessel, in attempting
to move to another place, he lost the ship. After seeking her in vain
for some time, he rowed some distance, and rose to the surface of the
water, but found daylight had advanced so far that he durst not renew
the attempt. He says that he could easily have fastened the magazine
under the stern of the ship above water, as he rowed up to the stern
and touched it before he descended. Had he fastened it there, the
explosion of a hundred and fifty pounds of powder (the quantity
contained in the magazine) must have been fatal to the ship. In his
return from the ship to New York, he passed near Governor's Island,
and thought he was discovered by the enemy on the island. Being in
haste to avoid the danger he feared, he cast off the magazine, as he
imagined it retarded him in the swell, which was very considerable.
After the magazine had been cast off one hour the time the internal
apparatus was set to run, it blew up with great violence.

"Afterwards there were two attempts made in Hudson's River, above the
city; but they effected nothing. One of them was by the aforementioned
person. In going toward the ship, he lost sight of her, and went a
great distance beyond her. When he at length found her, the tide ran
so strong, that, as he descended under water, for the ship's bottom,
it swept him away. Soon after this, the enemy went up the river, and
pursued the boat which had the submarine vessel on board, and sunk it
with their shot."

So it appears, that, so far as this submarine vessel was concerned,
Bushnell's great invention came to naught. And, indeed, it was but the
first of a long line of experiments which have been terribly costly in
human life, and which as yet have not been brought to a successful
end. In every war there comes forward the inventor with the submarine
boat, and he always finds a few brave men ready to risk their lives in
the floating coffin. Somewhere in Charleston Harbor to-day lies a
submarine boat, enclosing the skeletons of eight men, who went out in
it to break the blockade of the port during the civil war. And
although there are to-day several types of submarine boat, each of
which is claimed to make practicable the navigation of the ocean's
depths, yet it is doubtful whether any of them are much safer than
Bushnell's primitive "turtle."

But Bushnell's experiments in torpedo warfare were not confined to
attempts to destroy hostile vessels by means of his submarine vessel.
He made several attacks upon the enemy by means of automatic
torpedoes, none of which met with complete success. One of these
attacks, made at Philadelphia in December, 1777, furnished the
incident upon which is founded the well-known ballad of the "Battle of
the Kegs."

It was at a time when the Delaware was filled with British shipping,
that Bushnell set adrift upon its swift-flowing tide a number of small
kegs, filled with gunpowder, and provided with percussion apparatus,
so that contact with any object would explode them. The kegs were
started on their voyage at night. But Bushnell had miscalculated the
distance they had to travel; so that, instead of reaching the British
fleet under cover of darkness, they arrived early in the morning.
Great was the wonder of the British sentries, on ship and shore, to
see the broad bosom of the river dotted with floating kegs. As the
author of the satirical ballad describes it,--

           "Twas early day, as poets say,
              Just as the sun was rising;
            A soldier stood on a log of wood
              And saw the sun a-rising.

            As in amaze he stood to gaze
              (The truth can't be denied, sir),
            He spied a score of kegs, or more,
              Come floating down the tide, sir.

            A sailor, too, in jerkin blue,
              The strange appearance viewing,
            First d----d his eyes in great surprise,
              Then said, 'Some mischief's brewing.'

            These kegs, I'm told, the rebels hold,
              Packed up like pickled herring;
            And they've come down to attack the town
              In this new way of ferrying."

The curiosity of the British at this inexplicable spectacle gave place
to alarm, when one of the kegs, being picked up, blew up a boat, and
seriously injured the man whose curiosity had led him to examine it
too closely. Half panic-stricken, the British got out their guns,
great and small; and all day every small object on the Delaware was
the target for a lively fusillade.

            "The cannons roar from shore to shore,
              The small arms loud did rattle.
            Since wars began, I'm sure no man
              E'er saw so strange a battle.

            The fish below swam to and fro,
              Attacked from every quarter.
            'Why sure' (thought they), 'the devil's to pay,
              'Mong folk above the water.'"

But in the end the kegs all floated by the city, and only the
ammunition stores of the British suffered from the attack.

Another attempt was made by Bushnell to destroy the British frigate
"Cerberus," lying at anchor off the Connecticut coast. A torpedo, with
the usual percussion apparatus, was drawn along the side of the
frigate by a long line, but fouled with a schooner lying astern. The
explosion occurred with frightful force, and the schooner was wholly
demolished. Three men who were on board of her were blown to pieces;
and a fourth was thrown high into the air, and was picked out of the
water in an almost dying condition.

These experiments of the Connecticut mechanic in the Revolutionary war
were the forerunner of a movement which took almost a hundred years to
become generally accepted. We have been accustomed to say that
Ericsson's armor-clad monitor revolutionized naval warfare; but the
perfection of the torpedo is forcing the armor-clad ships into disuse,
as they in their day thrust aside the old wooden frigates. The wise
nation to-day, seeing how irresistible is the power of the torpedo, is
abandoning the construction of cumbrous iron-clads, and building
light, swift cruisers, that by speed and easy steering can avoid the
submarine enemy. And if the torpedo cannot be said to be the ideal
weapon of chivalric warfare, it may at least in time be credited with
doing away with the custom of cooping men up in wrought-iron boxes, to
fight with machine guns. Farragut, who hated iron-clads, liked
torpedoes little better; but had he foreseen their effects upon naval
tactics, he might have hailed them as the destroyers of the iron-clad
ships.




CHAPTER XII.

     NAVAL EVENTS OF 1778. -- RECRUITING FOR THE NAVY. -- THE
     DESCENT UPON NEW PROVIDENCE. -- OPERATIONS ON THE DELAWARE.
     -- CAPT. BARRY'S EXPLOITS. -- DESTRUCTION OF THE AMERICAN
     FRIGATES. -- AMERICAN REVERSES. -- THE CAPTURE OF THE
     "PIGOT." -- FRENCH NAVAL EXPLOITS.


The year 1778 opened with the brightest prospects for the American
cause. The notable success of the American arms on land, and
particularly the surrender of Burgoyne, had favorably disposed France
toward an alliance with the United States; and, in fact, this alliance
was soon formed. Furthermore, the evidence of the prowess of the
Americans on shore had stirred up the naval authorities to vigorous
action, and it was determined to make the year 1778 a notable one upon
the ocean.

Much difficulty was found, at the very outset, in getting men to ship
for service on the regular cruisers. Privateers were being fitted out
in every port; and on them the life was easy, discipline slack, danger
to life small, and the prospects for financial reward far greater than
on the United States men-of-war. Accordingly, the seafaring men as a
rule preferred to ship on the privateers. At no time in the history
of the United States has the barbaric British custom of getting
sailors for the navy by means of the "press-gang" been followed.
American blue-jackets have never been impressed by force. It is
unfortunately true that unfair advantages have been taken of their
simplicity, and sometimes they have even been shipped while under the
influence of liquor; but such cases have been rare. It is safe to say
that few men have ever trod the deck of a United States man-of-war, as
members of the crew, without being there of their own free will and
accord.

But in 1777 it was sometimes hard to fill the ships' rosters. Then the
ingenuity of the recruiting officers was called into play. A sailor
who served on the "Protector" during the Revolution thus tells the
story of his enlistment:--

"All means were resorted to which ingenuity could devise to induce men
to enlist. A recruiting officer, bearing a flag, and attended by a
band of martial music, paraded the streets, to excite a thirst for
glory and a spirit of military ambition. The recruiting officer
possessed the qualifications necessary to make the service appear
alluring, especially to the young. He was a jovial, good-natured
fellow, of ready wit and much broad humor. When he espied any large
boys among the idle crowd around him, he would attract their attention
by singing in a comical manner the following doggerel,--

            'All you that have bad masters,
              And cannot get your due,
            Come, come, my brave boys,
              And join our ship's crew.'

[Illustration: Commodore Barry.]

"A shout and a huzza would follow, and some would join in the ranks.
My excitable feelings were aroused. I repaired to the rendezvous,
signed the ship's papers, mounted a cockade, and was, in my own
estimation, already more than half a sailor. Appeals continued to be
made to the patriotism of every young man, to lend his aid, by his
exertions on sea or land, to free his country from the common enemy.
About the last of February the ship was ready to receive her crew, and
was hauled off into the channel, that the sailors might have no
opportunity to run away after they were got on board. Upward of three
hundred and thirty men were carried, dragged, and driven on board,
of all kinds, ages, and descriptions, in all the various stages of
intoxication, from that of sober tipsiness to beastly drunkenness,
with an uproar and clamor that may be more easily imagined than
described."

But, whatever the methods adopted to secure recruits for the navy, the
men thus obtained did admirable service; and in no year did they win
more glory than in 1778.

As usual the year's operations were opened by an exploit of one of the
smaller cruisers. This was the United States sloop-of-war
"Providence," a trig little vessel, mounting only twelve
four-pounders, and carrying a crew of but fifty men. But she was in
command of a daring seaman Capt. Rathburne, and she opened the year's
hostilities with an exploit worthy of Paul Jones.

Off the south-eastern coast of Florida, in that archipelago or
collection of groups of islands known collectively as the West Indies,
lies the small island of New Providence. Here in 1778 was a small
British colony. The well-protected harbor, and the convenient location
of the island, made it a favorite place for the rendezvous of British
naval vessels. Indeed, it bid fair to become, what Nassau is to-day,
the chief British naval station on the American coast. In 1778 the
little seaport had a population of about one thousand people.

With his little vessel, and her puny battery of four-pounders, Capt.
Rathburne determined to undertake the capture of New Providence. Only
the highest daring, approaching even recklessness, could have
conceived such a plan. The harbor was defended by a fort of no mean
power. There was always one British armed vessel, and often more,
lying at anchor under the guns of the fort. Two hundred of the people
of the town were able-bodied men, able to bear arms. How, then, were
the Yankees, with their puny force, to hope for success? This query
Rathburne answered, "By dash and daring."

It was about eleven o'clock on the night of the 27th of January, 1778,
that the "Providence" cast anchor in a sheltered cove near the
entrance to the harbor of New Providence. Twenty-five of her crew were
put ashore, and being re-enforced by a few American prisoners kept
upon the island, made a descent upon Fort Nassau from its landward
side. The sentries dozing at their posts were easily overpowered, and
the garrison was aroused from its peaceful slumbers by the cheers of
the Yankee blue-jackets as they came tumbling in over the ramparts. A
rocket sent up from the fort announced the victory to the
"Providence," and she came in and cast anchor near the fort.

When morning broke, the Americans saw a large sixteen-gun ship lying
at anchor in the harbor, together with five sail that looked
suspiciously like captured American merchantmen. The proceedings of
the night had been quietly carried on, and the crew of the armed
vessel had no reason to suspect that the condition of affairs on shore
had been changed in any way during the night. But at daybreak a boat
carrying four men put off from the shore, and made for the armed ship;
and at the same time a flag was flung out from the flagstaff of the
fort,--not the familiar scarlet flag of Great Britain, but the almost
unknown stars and stripes of the United States.

The sleepy sailors on the armed vessel rubbed their eyes; and while
they were staring at the strange piece of bunting, there came a hail
from a boat alongside, and an American officer clambered over the
rail. He curtly told the captain of the privateer that the fort was in
the hands of the Americans, and called upon him to surrender his
vessel forthwith. Resistance was useless; for the heavy guns of Fort
Nassau were trained upon the British ship, and could blow her out of
the water. The visitor's arguments proved to be unanswerable; and the
captain of the privateer surrendered his vessel, which was taken
possession of by the Americans; while her crew of forty-five men was
ordered into confinement in the dungeons of the fort which had so
lately held captive Americans. Other boarding parties were then sent
to the other vessels in the harbor, which proved to be American craft,
captured by the British sloop-of-war "Grayton."

At sunrise the sleeping town showed signs of reviving life, and a
party of the audacious Yankees marched down to the house of the
governor. That functionary was found in bed, and in profound ignorance
of the events of the night. The Americans broke the news to him none
too gently, and demanded the keys of a disused fortress on the
opposite side of the harbor from Fort Nassau. For a time the governor
was inclined to demur; but the determined attitude of the Americans
soon persuaded him that he was a prisoner, though in his own house,
and he delivered the keys. Thereupon the Americans marched through the
streets of the city, around the harbor's edge to the fort, spiked the
guns, and carrying with them the powder and small-arms, marched back
to Fort Nassau.

But by this time it was ten o'clock, and the whole town was aroused.
The streets were crowded with people eagerly discussing the invasion.
The timid ones were busily packing up their goods to fly into the
country; while the braver ones were hunting for weapons, and
organizing for an attack upon the fort held by the Americans. Fearing
an outbreak, Capt. Rathburne sent out a flag of truce, making
proclamation to all the inhabitants of New Providence, that the
Americans would do no damage to the persons or property of the people
of the island unless compelled so to do in self-defence. This pacified
the more temperate of the inhabitants; but the hotheads, to the number
of about two hundred, assembled before Fort Nassau, and threatened to
attack it. But, when they summoned Rathburne to surrender, that
officer leaped upon the parapet, and coolly told the assailants to
come on.

"We can beat you back easily," said he. "And, by the Eternal, if you
fire a gun at us, we'll turn the guns of the fort on your town, and
lay it in ruins."

This bold defiance disconcerted the enemy; and, after some
consultation among themselves, they dispersed.

About noon that day, the British sloop-of-war "Grayton" made her
appearance, and stood boldly into the harbor where lay the
"Providence." The United States colors were quickly hauled down from
the fort flagstaff, and every means was taken to conceal the true
state of affairs from the enemy. But the inhabitants along the
water-side, by means of constant signalling and shouting, at last
aroused the suspicion of her officers; and she hastily put about, and
scudded for the open sea. The guns at Fort Nassau opened on her as she
passed, and the aim of the Yankee gunners was accurate enough to make
the splinters fly. The exact damage done her has, however, never been
ascertained.

All that night the daring band of blue-jackets held the fort
unmolested. But on the following morning the townspeople again plucked
up courage, and to the number of five hundred marched to the fort, and
placing several pieces of artillery in battery, summoned the garrison
to surrender. The flag of truce that bore the summons carried also the
threat, that, unless the Americans laid down their arms without
resistance, the fort would be stormed, and all therein put to the
sword without mercy.

For answer to the summons, the Americans nailed their colors to the
mast, and swore that while a man of them lived the fort should not be
surrendered. By this bold defiance they so awed the enemy that the day
passed without the expected assault; and at night the besiegers
returned to their homes, without having fired a shot.

All that night the Americans worked busily, transferring to the
"Providence" all the ammunition and stores in the fort; and the next
morning the prizes were manned, the guns of the fort spiked, and the
adventurous Yankees set sail in triumph. For three days they had held
possession of the island, though outnumbered tenfold by the
inhabitants; they had captured large quantities of ammunition and
naval stores; they had freed their captured countrymen; they had
retaken from the British five captured American vessels, and in the
whole affair they had lost not a single man. It was an achievement of
which a force of triple the number might have been proud.

In February, 1778, the Delaware, along the water-front of
Philadelphia, was the scene of some dashing work by American sailors,
under the command of Capt. John Barry. This officer was in command of
the "Effingham," one of the vessels which had been trapped in the
Delaware by the unexpected occupation of Philadelphia by the British.
The inactivity of the vessels, which had taken refuge at Whitehall,
was a sore disappointment to Barry, who longed for the excitement and
dangers of actual battle. With the British in force at Philadelphia,
it was madness to think of taking the frigates down the stream. But
Barry rightly thought that what could not be done with a heavy ship
might be done with a few light boats.

Philadelphia was then crowded with British troops. The soldiers were
well provided with money, and, finding themselves quartered in a city
for the winter, led a life of continual gayety. The great accession to
the population of the town made it necessary to draw upon the country
far and near for provisions; and boats were continually plying upon
the Delaware, carrying provisions to the city. To intercept some of
these boats, and to give the merry British officers a taste of
starvation, was Barry's plan.

Accordingly four boats were manned with well-armed crews, and with
muffled oars set out on a dark night to patrol the river. Philadelphia
was reached, and the expedition was almost past the city, when the
sentries on one of the British men-of-war gave the alarm. A few
scattering shots were fired from the shore; but the jackies bent to
their oars, and the boats were soon lost to sight in the darkness.
When day broke, Barry was far down the river.

Opposite the little post held by the American army, and called Fort
Penn, Barry spied a large schooner, mounting ten guns, and flying the
British flag. With her were four transport ships, loaded with forage
for the enemy's forces. Though the sun had risen, and it was broad
day, Barry succeeded in running his boats alongside the schooner; and
before the British suspected the presence of any enemy, the
blue-jackets were clambering over the rail, cutlass and pistol in
hand. There was no resistance. The astonished Englishmen threw down
their arms, and rushed below. The victorious Americans battened down
the hatches, ordered the four transports to surrender, on pain of
being fired into, and triumphantly carried all five prizes to the
piers of Fort Penn. There the hatches were removed; and, the Yankee
sailors being drawn up in line, Barry ordered the prisoners to come on
deck. When all appeared, it was found that the Yankees had bagged one
major, two captains, three lieutenants, ten soldiers, and about a
hundred sailors and marines,--a very respectable haul for a party of
not more than thirty American sailors.

The next day a British frigate and sloop-of-war appeared down the bay.
They were under full sail, and were apparently making for Fort Penn,
with the probable intention of recapturing Barry's prizes. Fearing
that he might be robbed of the fruits of his victory, Barry put the
four transports in charge of Capt. Middleton, with instructions to
fire them should the enemy attempt to cut them out. In the mean time,
he took the ten-gun schooner, and made for the Christiana River, in
the hopes of taking her into shallow waters, whither the heavier
British vessels could not follow. But, unluckily for his plans, the
wind favored the frigate; and she gained upon him so rapidly, that
only by the greatest expedition could he run his craft ashore and
escape. Two of the guns were pointed down the main hatch, and a few
rounds of round-shot were fired through the schooner's bottom. She
sunk quickly; and the Americans pushed off from her side, just as the
British frigate swung into position, and let fly her broadside at her
escaping foes.

The schooner being thus disposed of, the British turned their
attention to the four captured transports at Fort Penn. Capt.
Middleton and Capt. McLane, who commanded the American militia on
shore, had taken advantage of the delay to build a battery of bales of
hay near the piers. The British sloop-of-war opened the attack, but
the sharp-shooters in the battery and on the transports gave her so
warm a reception that she retired. She soon returned to the attack,
but was checked by the American fire, and might have been beaten off,
had not Middleton received a mortal wound while standing on the
battery and cheering on his men. Dismayed by the fall of their leader,
the Americans set fire to the transport and fled to the woods, leaving
the British masters of the field.

Barry's conduct in this enterprise won for him the admiration of
friend and foe alike. Sir William Howe, then commander-in-chief of the
British forces in America, offered the daring American twenty thousand
guineas and the command of a British frigate, if he would desert the
service of the United States.

"Not the value and command of the whole British fleet," wrote Barry in
reply, "can seduce me from the cause of my country."

After this adventure, Barry and his followers made their way through
the woods back to Whitehall, where his ship the "Effingham" was lying
at anchor. Here he passed the winter in inactivity. At Whitehall, and
near that place, were nearly a dozen armed ships, frigates, sloops,
and privateers. All had fled thither for safety when the British took
possession of Philadelphia, and now found themselves caught in a trap.
To run the blockade of British batteries and men-of-war at
Philadelphia, was impossible; and there was nothing to do but wait
until the enemy should evacuate the city.

But the British were in no haste to leave Philadelphia; and when they
did get ready to leave, they determined to destroy the American
flotilla before departing. Accordingly on the 4th of May, 1778, the
water-front of the Quaker City was alive with soldiers and citizens
watching the embarkation of the troops ordered against the American
forces at Whitehall. On the placid bosom of the Delaware floated the
schooners "Viper" and "Pembroke," the galleys "Hussar," "Cornwallis,"
"Ferret," and "Philadelphia," four gunboats, and eighteen flat-boats.
Between this fleet and the shore, boats were busily plying, carrying
off the soldiers of the light infantry, seven hundred of whom were
detailed for the expedition. It was a holiday affair. The British
expected little fighting; and with flags flying, and bands playing,
the vessels started up stream, the cheers of the soldiers on board
mingling with those on the shore.

Bristol, the landing-place chosen, was soon reached; and the troops
disembarked without meeting with any opposition. Forming in solid
column, the soldiers took up the march for Whitehall; but, when within
five miles of that place, a ruddy glare in the sky told that the
Americans had been warned of their coming, and had set the torch to
the shipping. When the head of the British column entered Whitehall,
the two new American frigates "Washington" and "Effingham" were
wrapped in flames. Both were new vessels, and neither had yet taken on
board her battery. Several other vessels were lying at the wharves;
and to these the British set the torch, and continued their march,
leaving the roaring flames behind them. A little farther up the
Delaware, at the point known as Crosswise Creek, the large privateer
"Sturdy Beggar" was found, together with several smaller craft. The
crews had all fled, and the deserted vessels met the fate of the other
craft taken by the invaders. Then the British turned their steps
homeward, and reached Philadelphia, after having burned almost a score
of vessels, and fired not a single shot.

On the high seas during 1778 occurred several notable naval
engagements. Of the more important of these we have spoken in our
accounts of the exploits of Tucker, Biddle, and Paul Jones. The less
important ones must be dismissed with a hasty word.

It may be said, that, in general, the naval actions of 1778 went
against the Americans. In February of that year the "Alfred" was
captured by a British frigate, and the "Raleigh" narrowly escaped. In
March, the new frigate "Virginia," while beating out of Chesapeake Bay
on her very first cruise, ran aground, and was captured by the enemy.
In September, the United States frigate "Raleigh," when a few days out
from Boston, fell in with two British vessels,--one a frigate, and the
other a ship-of-the-line. Capt. Barry, whose daring exploits on the
Delaware we have chronicled, was in command of the "Raleigh," and
gallantly gave battle to the frigate, which was in the lead. Between
these two vessels the conflict raged with great fury for upwards of
two hours, when the fore-topmast and mizzen top-gallant-mast of the
American having been shot away Barry attempted to close the conflict
by boarding. The enemy kept at a safe distance, however; and his
consort soon coming up, the Americans determined to seek safety in
flight. The enemy pursued, keeping up a rapid fire; and the running
conflict continued until midnight. Finally Barry set fire to his ship,
and with the greater part of his crew escaped to the nearest land, an
island near the mouth of the Penobscot. The British immediately
boarded the abandoned ship, extinguished the flames, and carried their
prize away in triumph.

To offset these reverses to the American arms, there were one or two
victories for the Americans, aside from those won by Paul Jones, and
the exploits of privateers and colonial armed vessels, which we shall
group together in a later chapter. The first of these victories was
won by an army officer, who was later transferred to the navy, and won
great honor in the naval service.

In an inlet of Narragansett Bay, near Newport, the British had
anchored a powerful floating battery, made of the dismasted hulk of
the schooner "Pigot," on which were mounted twelve eight-pounders and
ten swivel guns. It was about the time that the fleet sent by France
to aid the United States was expected to arrive; and the British had
built and placed in position this battery, to close the channel
leading to Newport. Major Silas Talbot, an army officer who had won
renown earlier in the war by a daring but unsuccessful attempt to
destroy two British frigates in the Hudson River, by means of
fire-ships, obtained permission to lead an expedition for the capture
of the "Pigot." Accordingly, with sixty picked men, he set sail from
Providence in the sloop "Hawk," mounting three three-pounders. When
within a few miles of the "Pigot," he landed, and, borrowing a horse,
rode down and reconnoitred the battery. When the night set in, he
returned to the sloop, and at once weighed anchor and made for the
enemy. As the "Hawk" drew near the "Pigot," the British sentinels
challenged her, and receiving no reply, fired a volley of musketry,
which injured no one. On came the "Hawk," under a full spread of
canvas. A kedge-anchor had been lashed to the end of her bowsprit;
and, before the British could reload, this crashed through the
boarding-nettings of the "Pigot," and caught in the shrouds. The two
vessels being fast, the Americans, with ringing cheers, ran along the
bowsprit, and dropped on the deck of the "Pigot." The surprise was
complete. The British captain rushed on deck, clad only in his shirt
and drawers, and strove manfully to rally his crew. But as the
Americans, cutlass and pistol in hand, swarmed over the taffrail, the
surprised British lost heart, and fled to the hold, until at last the
captain found himself alone upon the deck. Nothing was left for him
but to surrender with the best grace possible; and soon Talbot was on
his way back to Providence, with his prize and a shipful of prisoners.

But perhaps the greatest naval event of 1778 in American waters was
the arrival of the fleet sent by France to co-operate with the
American forces. Not that any thing of importance was ever
accomplished by this naval force: the French officers seemed to find
their greatest satisfaction in manoeuvring, reconnoitring, and
performing in the most exact and admirable manner all the
preliminaries to a battle. Having done this, they would sail away,
never firing a gun. The Yankees were prone to disregard the nice
points of naval tactics. Their plan was to lay their ships alongside
the enemy, and pound away until one side or the other had to yield or
sink. But the French allies were strong on tactics, and somewhat weak
in dash; and, as a result, there is not one actual combat in which
they figured to be recorded.

It was a noble fleet that France sent to the aid of the struggling
Americans,--twelve ships-of-the-line and three frigates. What dashing
Paul Jones would have done, had he ever enjoyed the command of such a
fleet, almost passes imagination. Certain it is that he would have
wasted little time in formal evolutions. But the fleet was commanded
by Count d'Estaing, a French naval officer of honorable reputation.
What he accomplished during his first year's cruise in American
waters, can be told in a few words. His intention was to trap Lord
Howe's fleet in the Delaware, but he arrived too late. He then
followed the British to New York, but was baffled there by the fact
that his vessels were too heavy to cross the bar. Thence he went to
Newport, where the appearance of his fleet frightened the British into
burning four of their frigates, and sinking two sloops-of-war. Lord
Howe, hearing of this, plucked up courage, and, gathering together all
his ships, sailed from New York to Newport, to give battle to the
French. The two fleets were about equally matched. On the 10th of
August the enemies met in the open sea, off Newport. For two days they
kept out of range of each other, manoeuvring for the weather-gage;
that is, the French fleet, being to windward of the British, strove to
keep that position, while the British endeavored to take it from them.
The third day a gale arose; and when it subsided the ships were so
crippled, that, after exchanging a few harmless broadsides at long
range, they withdrew, and the naval battle was ended.

Such was the record of D'Estaing's magnificent fleet during 1778.
Certainly the Americans had little to learn from the representatives
of the power that had for years contended with England for the mastery
of the seas.




CHAPTER XIII.

     LAST YEARS OF THE WAR. -- DISASTROUS EXPEDITION TO THE
     PENOBSCOT. -- WHOLESALE CAPTURES ON THE NEWFOUNDLAND BANKS.
     -- FRENCH SHIPS IN AMERICAN WATERS. -- TAKING OF CHARLESTON.
     -- THE "TRUMBULL'S" VICTORY AND DEFEAT. -- CAPT. BARRY AND
     THE "ALLIANCE." -- CLOSE OF THE WAR.


The year 1779 is chiefly known in American naval history as the year
in which Paul Jones did his most brilliant service in the "Bon Homme
Richard." The glory won by the Americans was chiefly gained in
European waters. Along the coast of the United States, there were some
dashing actions; but the advantage generally remained with the
British.

Perhaps the most notable naval event of this year, aside from the
battle between the "Bon Homme Richard" and the "Serapis," was the
expedition sent by the State of Massachusetts against the British post
at Castine, on the banks of the Penobscot River. At this unimportant
settlement in the wilds of Maine, the British had established a
military post, with a garrison of about a thousand men, together with
four armed vessels. Here they might have been permitted to remain in
peace, so far as any danger from their presence was to be apprehended
by the people of New England. But the sturdy citizens of Massachusetts
had boasted, that, since the evacuation of Boston, no British soldier
had dared to set foot on Massachusetts soil; and the news of this
invasion caused the people of Boston to rise as one man, and demand
that the invaders should be expelled.

Accordingly a joint naval and military expedition was fitted out under
authority granted by the Legislature of the State. Congress detailed
the United States frigate "Warren," and the sloops-of-war "Diligence"
and "Providence," to head the expedition. The Massachusetts cruisers
"Hazard," "Active," and "Tyrannicide" represented the regular naval
forces of the Bay State; and twelve armed vessels belonging to private
citizens were hired, to complete the armada. The excitement among
seafaring men ran high. Every man who had ever swung a cutlass or
sighted a gun was anxious to accompany the expedition. Ordinarily it
was difficult to ship enough men for the navy; now it was impossible
to take all the applicants. It is even recorded that the list of
common sailors on the armed ship "Vengeance" included thirty masters
of merchantmen, who waived all considerations of rank, in order that
they might join the expedition.

To co-operate with the fleet, a military force was thought necessary;
and accordingly orders were issued for fifteen hundred of the militia
of the district of Maine to assemble at Townsend. Brig.-Gen. Sullivan
was appointed to the command of the land forces, while Capt.
Saltonstall of the "Warren" was made commodore of the fleet.

Punctually on the day appointed the white sails of the American ships
were seen by the militiamen at the appointed rendezvous. But when the
ships dropped anchor, and the commodore went ashore to consult with
the officers of the land forces, he found that but nine hundred of the
militiamen had responded to the call. Nevertheless, it was determined,
after a brief consultation, to proceed with the expedition, despite
the sadly diminished strength of the militia battalions.

On the 23d of July, the fleet set sail from the harbor of Townsend. It
was an extraordinary and impressive spectacle. The shores of the
harbor were covered with unbroken forests, save at the lower end where
a little hamlet of scarce five hundred people gave a touch of
civilization to the wild scene. But the water looked as though the
commerce of a dozen cities had centred there. On the placid bosom of
the little bay floated forty-four vessels. The tread of men about the
capstans, the hoarse shouts of command, the monotonous songs of the
sailors, the creaking of cordage, and the flapping of sails gave an
unwonted turbulence to the air which seldom bore a sound other than
the voices of birds or the occasional blows of a woodman's axe.
Nineteen vessels-of-war and twenty-five transports imparted to the
harbor of Townsend an air of life and bustle to which it had been a
stranger, and which it has never since experienced.

The weather was clear, and the wind fair; so that two days after
leaving Townsend the fleet appeared before the works of the enemy.
Standing on the quarter-deck of the "Warren," the commodore and the
general eagerly scanned the enemy's defences, and after a careful
examination were forced to admit that the works they had to carry were
no mean specimens of the art of fortification. The river's banks rose
almost perpendicularly from the water-side, and on their crest were
perched the enemy's batteries, while on a high and precipitous hill
was built a fort or citadel. In the river were anchored the four armed
vessels.

Two days were spent by the Americans in reconnoitring the enemy's
works; and on the 28th of July the work of disembarking the troops
began, under a heavy fire from the enemy's batteries. The "Warren" and
one of the sloops-of-war endeavored to cover the landing party by
attacking the batteries; and a spirited cannonade followed, in which
the American flag-ship suffered seriously. At last all the militia,
together with three hundred marines, were put on shore, and at once
assaulted the batteries. They were opposed by about an equal number of
well-drilled Scotch regulars, and the battle raged fiercely; the
men-of-war in the river covering the advance of the troops by a
spirited and well-directed fire. More than once the curving line of
men rushed against the fiery front of the British ramparts, and
recoiled, shattered by the deadly volleys of the Scotch veterans. Here
and there, in the grass and weeds, the forms of dead men began to be
seen. The pitiable spectacle of the wounded, painfully crawling to the
rear, began to make the pulse of the bravest beat quicker. But the men
of Massachusetts, responsive to the voices of their officers,
re-formed their shattered ranks, and charged again and again, until at
last, with a mighty cheer, they swept over the ramparts, driving the
British out. Many of the enemy surrendered; more fled for shelter to
the fort on the hill. The smoke and din of battle died away. There
came a brief respite in the bloody strife. The Americans had won the
first trick in the bloody game of war.

Only a short pause followed; then the Americans moved upon the fort.
But here they found themselves overmatched. Against the towering
bastions of the fortress they might hurl themselves in vain. The
enemy, safe behind its heavy parapets, could mow down their advancing
ranks with a cool and deliberate fire. The assailants had already
sacrificed more than a hundred men. Was it wise now to order an
assault that might lead to the loss of twice that number?

The hotheads cried out for the immediate storming of the fort; but
cooler counsels prevailed, and a siege was decided upon. Trenches were
dug, the guns in the outlying batteries were turned upon the fort, and
the New Englanders sat down to wait until the enemy should be starved
out or until re-enforcements might be brought from Boston.

So for three weeks the combatants rested on their arms, glaring at
each other over the tops of their breastworks, and now and then
exchanging a shot or a casual volley, but doing little in the way of
actual hostilities. Provisions were failing the British, and they
began to feel that they were in a trap from which they could only
emerge through a surrender, when suddenly the situation was changed,
and the fortunes of war went against the Americans.

One morning the "Tyrannicide," which was stationed on the lookout down
the bay, was seen beating up the river, under a full press of sail.
Signals flying at her fore indicated that she had important news to
tell. Her anchor had not touched the bottom before a boat pushed off
from her side, and made straight for the commodore's flag-ship.
Reaching the "Warren," a lieutenant clambered over the side, and
saluted Commodore Saltonstall on the quarter-deck.

"Capt. Cathcart's compliments, sir," said he, "and five British
men-of-war are just entering the bay. The first one appears to be the
'Rainbow,' forty-four."

Here was news indeed. Though superior in numbers, the Americans were
far inferior in weight of metal. After a hasty consultation, it was
determined to abandon the siege, and retreat with troops and vessels
to the shallow waters of the Penobscot, whither the heavy men-of-war
of the enemy would be unable to follow them. Accordingly the troops
were hastily re-embarked, and a hurried flight began, which was
greatly accelerated by the appearance of the enemy coming up the
river.

The chase did not continue long before it became evident the enemy
would overhaul the retreating ships. Soon he came within range, and
opened fire with his bow-guns, in the hopes of crippling one of the
American ships. The fire was returned; and for several hours the
wooded shores of the Penobscot echoed and re-echoed the thunders of
the cannonade, as the warring fleets swept up the river.

At last the conviction forced itself on the minds of the Americans,
that for them there was no escape. The British were steadily gaining
upon them, and there was no sign of the shoal water in which they had
hoped to find a refuge. It would seem that a bold dash might have
carried the day for the Americans, so greatly did they outnumber their
enemies. But this plan does not appear to have suggested itself to
Capt. Saltonstall, who had concentrated all his efforts upon the
attempt to escape. When escape proved to be hopeless, his only thought
was to destroy his vessels. Accordingly his flag-ship, the "Warren,"
was run ashore, and set on fire. The action of the commodore was
imitated by the rest of the officers, and soon the banks of the river
were lined with blazing vessels. The "Hunter," the "Hampden," and one
transport fell into the hands of the British. The rest of the
forty-nine vessels--men-of-war, privateers, and transports--that made
up the fleet were destroyed by flames.

It must indeed have been a stirring spectacle. The shores of the
Penobscot River were then a trackless wilderness; the placid bosom of
the river itself had seldom been traversed by a heavier craft than the
slender birch-bark canoe of the red man; yet here was this river
crowded with shipping, the dark forests along its banks lighted up by
the glare of twoscore angry fires. Through the thickets and underbrush
parties of excited men broke their way, seeking for a common point of
meeting, out of range of the cannon of the enemy. The British,
meantime, were striving to extinguish the flames, but with little
success; and before the day ended, little remained of the great
Massachusetts flotilla, except the three captured ships and sundry
heaps of smouldering timber.

The hardships of the soldiers and marines who had escaped capture,
only to find themselves lost in the desolate forest, were of the
severest kind. Separating into parties they plodded along,
half-starved, with torn and rain-soaked clothing, until finally,
footsore and almost perishing, they reached the border settlements,
and were aided on their way to Boston. The disaster was complete, and
for months its depressing effect upon American naval enterprise was
observable.

In observing the course of naval events in 1779, it is noticeable that
the most effective work was done by the cruisers sent out by the
individual States, or by privateers. The United States navy, proper,
did little except what was done in European waters by Paul Jones.
Indeed, along the American coast, a few cruises in which no actions of
moment occurred, although several prizes were taken, make up the
record of naval activity for the year.

The first of these cruises was that made in April by the ships
"Warren," "Queen of France," and "Ranger." They sailed from Boston,
and were out but a few days when they captured a British privateer of
fourteen guns. From one of the sailors on this craft it was learned
that a large fleet of transports and storeships had just sailed from
New York, bound for Georgia. Crowding on all sail, the Americans set
out in pursuit, and off Cape Henry overhauled the chase. Two fleets
were sighted, one to windward numbering nine sail, and one to leeward
made up of ten sail. The pursuers chose the fleet to windward for
their prey, and by sharp work succeeded in capturing seven vessels in
eight hours. Two of the ships were armed cruisers of twenty-nine and
sixteen guns respectively, and all the prizes were heavy laden with
provisions, ammunition, and cavalry accoutrements. All were safely
taken into port.

In June, another fleet of United States vessels left Boston in search
of British game. The "Queen of France" and the "Ranger" were again
employed; but the "Warren" remained in port, fitting out for her
ill-fated expedition to the Penobscot. Her place was taken by the
"Providence," thirty-two. For a time the cruisers fell in with nothing
of importance. But one day about the middle of July, as the three
vessels lay hove to off the banks of Newfoundland, in the region of
perpetual fog, the dull booming of a signal gun was heard. Nothing was
to be seen on any side. From the quarter-deck, and from the
cross-trees alike, the eager eyes of the officers and seamen strove in
vain to penetrate the dense curtain of gray fog that shut them in. But
again the signal gun sounded, then another; and tone and direction
alike told that the two reports had not come from the same cannon.
Then a bell was heard telling the hour,--another, still another; then
a whole chorus of bells. Clearly a large fleet was shut in the fog.

[Illustration: Shortening Sail On The "Lancaster"--the Oldest U. S.
Cruiser In Commission.]

About eleven o'clock in the morning the fog lifted, and to their
intense surprise the crew of the "Queen of France" found themselves
close alongside of a large merchant-ship. As the fog cleared away more
completely, ships appeared on every side; and the astonished Yankees
found themselves in the midst of a fleet of about one hundred and
fifty sail under convoy of a British ship-of-the-line, and several
frigates and sloops-of-war. Luckily the United States vessels had no
colors flying, and nothing about them to betray their nationality: so
Capt. Rathburn of the "Queen" determined to try a little masquerading.

Bearing down upon the nearest merchantman, he hailed her; and the
following conversation ensued,--

"What fleet is this?"

"British merchantmen from Jamaica, bound for London. Who are you?"

"His Majesty's ship 'Arethusa,'" answered Rathburn boldly, "from
Halifax on cruise. Have you seen any Yankee privateers?"

"Ay, ay, sir," was the response. "Several have been driven out of the
fleet."

"Come aboard the 'Arethusa,' then. I wish to consult with you."

Soon a boat put off from the side of the merchantman, and a jolly
British sea-captain confidently clambered to the deck of the "Queen."
Great was his astonishment to be told that he was a prisoner, and to
see his boat's crew brought aboard, and their places taken by American
jackies. Back went the boat to the British ship; and soon the
Americans were in control of the craft, without in the least alarming
the other vessels, that lay almost within hail. The "Queen" then made
up to another ship, and captured her in the same manner.

But at this juncture Commodore Whipple, in the "Providence," hailed
the "Queen," and directed Rathburn to edge out of the fleet before the
British men-of-war should discover his true character. Rathburn
protested vigorously, pointing out the two vessels he had captured,
and urging Whipple to follow his example, and capture as many vessels
as he could in the same manner. Finally Whipple overcame his fears,
and adopted Rathburn's methods, with such success that shortly after
nightfall the Americans left the fleet, taking with them eleven rich
prizes. Eight of these they succeeded in taking safe to Boston, where
they were sold for more than a million dollars.

In May, 1779, occurred two unimportant engagements,--one off Sandy
Hook, in which the United States sloop "Providence," ten guns,
captured the British sloop "Diligent," after a brief but spirited
engagement; the second action occurred off St. Kitts, where the United
States brig "Retaliation" successfully resisted a vigorous attack by a
British cutter and a brig. The record of the regular navy for the year
closed with the cruise of the United States frigates "Deane" and
"Boston," that set sail from the Delaware late in the summer. They
kept the seas for nearly three months, but made only a few bloodless
captures.

The next year opened with a great disaster to the American cause. The
Count d'Estaing, after aimlessly wandering up and down the coast of
the United States with the fleet ostensibly sent to aid the Americans,
suddenly took himself and his fleet off to the West Indies. Sir Henry
Clinton soon learned of the departure of the French, and gathered an
expedition for the capture of Charleston. On the 10th of February,
Clinton with five thousand troops, and a British fleet under Admiral
Arbuthnot, appeared off Edisto Inlet, about thirty miles from
Charleston, and began leisurely preparations for an attack upon the
city. Had he pushed ahead and made his assault at once, he would have
met but little resistance; but his delay of over a month gave the
people of Charleston time to prepare for a spirited resistance.

The approach of the British fleet penned up in Charleston harbor
several United States men-of-war and armed vessels, among them the
"Providence," "Queen of France," "Boston," "Ranger," "Gen. Moultrie,"
and "Notre Dame." These vessels took an active part in the defence of
the harbor against Arbuthnot's fleet, but were beaten back. The
"Queen," the "Gen. Moultrie," and the "Notre Dame" were then sunk in
the channel to obstruct the progress of the enemy; their guns being
taken ashore, and mounted in the batteries on the sea-wall. Then
followed days of terror for Charleston. The land forces of the enemy
turned siege guns on the unhappy city, and a constant bombardment was
kept up from the hostile fleet. Fort Sumter, the batteries along the
water front, and the ships remaining to the Americans answered boldly.
But the defence was hopeless. The city was hemmed in by an iron
cordon. The hot-shot of the enemy's batteries were falling in the
streets, and flames were breaking out in all parts of the town. While
the defence lasted, the men-of-war took an active part in it; and,
indeed, the sailors were the last to consent to a surrender. So
noticeable was the activity of the frigate "Boston" in particular,
that, when it became evident that the Americans could hold out but a
little longer, Admiral Arbuthnot sent her commander a special order to
surrender.

"I do not think much of striking my flag to your present force,"
responded bluff Samuel Tucker, who commanded the "Boston;" "for I have
struck more of your flags than are now flying in this harbor."

But, despite this bold defiance, the inevitable capitulation soon
followed. Charleston fell into the hands of the British; and with the
city went the three men-of-war, "Providence," "Boston," and "Ranger."

It will be noticed that this disaster was the direct result of the
disappearance of Count d'Estaing and the French fleet. To the student
of history who calmly considers the record of our French naval allies
in the Revolution, there appears good reason to believe that their
presence did us more harm than good. Under De Grasse, the French fleet
did good service in co-operation with the allied armies in the
Yorktown campaign; but, with this single exception, no instance can be
cited of any material aid rendered by it to the American cause. The
United States navy, indeed, suffered on account of the French
alliance; for despite the loss of many vessels in 1779 and 1780,
Congress refused to increase the navy in any way, trusting to France
to care for America's interests on the seas. The result of this policy
was a notable falling-off in the number and spirit of naval actions.

The ship "Trumbull," twenty-eight, one of the exploits of which we
have already chronicled, saw a good deal of active service during the
last two years of the war; and though she finally fell into the hands
of the enemy, it was only because the odds against her were not to be
overcome by the most spirited resistance. It was on the 2d of June,
1780, that the "Trumbull," while cruising far out in the Atlantic
Ocean in the path of British merchantmen bound for the West Indies,
sighted a strange sail hull down to windward. The "Trumbull" was then
in command of Capt. James Nicholson, an able and plucky officer.
Immediately on hearing the report of the lookout, Nicholson ordered
all the canvas furled, in order that the stranger might not catch
sight of the "Trumbull." It is, of course, obvious that a ship under
bare poles is a far less conspicuous object upon the ocean, than is
the same ship with her yards hung with vast clouds of snowy canvas.
But apparently the stranger sighted the "Trumbull," and had no desire
to avoid her; for she bore down upon the American ship rapidly, and
showed no desire to avoid a meeting. Seeing this, Nicholson made sail,
and was soon close to the stranger. As the two ships drew closer
together, the stranger showed her character by firing three guns, and
hoisting the British colors.

Seeing an action impending, Nicholson called his crew aft and
harangued them, as was the custom before going into battle. It was not
a promising outlook for the American ship. She was but recently out of
port, and was manned largely by "green hands." The privateers had so
thoroughly stripped the decks of able seamen, that the "Trumbull" had
to ship men who knew not one rope from another; and it is even said,
that, when the drums beat to quarters the day of the battle, many of
the sailors were suffering from the landsman's terror, seasickness.
But what they lacked in experience, they made up in enthusiasm.

With the British flag at the peak, the "Trumbull" bore down upon the
enemy. But the stranger was not to be deceived by so hackneyed a
device. He set a private signal, and, as the Americans did not answer
it, let fly a broadside at one hundred yards distance. The "Trumbull"
responded with spirit, and the stars and stripes went fluttering to
the peak in the place of the British ensign. Then the thunder of
battle continued undiminished for two hours and a half. The wind was
light, and the vessels rode on an even keel nearly abreast of each
other, and but fifty yards apart. At times their yard-arms
interlocked; and still the heavy broadsides rang out, and the flying
shot crashed through beam and stanchion, striking down the men at
their guns, and covering the decks with blood. Twice the flying wads
of heavy paper from the enemy's guns set the "Trumbull" a-fire, and
once the British ship was endangered by the same cause.

At last the fire of the enemy slackened, and the Americans, seeing
victory within their grasp, redoubled their efforts; but at this
critical moment one of the gun-deck officers came running to
Nicholson, with the report that the main-mast had been repeatedly hit
by the enemy's shot, and was now tottering. If the main-mast went by
the board, the fate of the "Trumbull" was sealed. Crowding sail on
the other masts, the "Trumbull" shot ahead, and was soon out of the
line of fire, the enemy being apparently too much occupied with his
own injuries to molest her. Hardly had she gone the distance of a
musket-shot, when her main and mizzen top-masts went by the board; and
before the nimble jackies could cut away the wreck the other spars
followed, until nothing was left but the foremast. When the crashing
and confusion was over, the "Trumbull" lay a pitiable wreck, and an
easy prey for her foe.

But the Briton showed a strange disinclination to take advantage of
the opportunity. The Yankee sailors worked like mad in cutting away
the wreck; then rushed to their guns, ready to make a desperate, if
hopeless, resistance in case of an attack. But the attack never came.
Without even a parting shot the enemy went off on her course; and
before she was out of sight her main topmast was seen to fall, showing
that she too had suffered in the action.

Not for months after did the crew of the "Trumbull" learn the name of
the vessel they had fought. At last it was learned that she was a
heavy letter-of-marque, the "Watt." Her exact weight of metal has
never been ascertained, though Capt. Nicholson estimated it at
thirty-four or thirty-six guns. The "Trumbull" mounted thirty-six
guns. The captain of the "Watt" reported his loss to have been
ninety-two in killed and wounded; the loss of the "Trumbull" amounted
to thirty-nine, though two of her lieutenants were among the slain.
This action, in severity, ranked next to the famous naval duel between
the "Bon Homme Richard" and the "Serapis."

As the "Trumbull" fought her last battle under the flag of the United
States a year later, and as our consideration of the events of the
Revolution is drawing to a close, we may abandon chronological order,
and follow Nicholson and his good ship to the end of their career. In
August, 1781, the "Trumbull" left the Delaware, convoying twenty-eight
merchantmen, and accompanied by one privateer. Again her crew was
weakened by the scarcity of good seamen, and this time Nicholson had
adopted the dangerous and indefensible expedient of shipping British
prisoners-of-war. There were fifty of these renegades in the crew; and
naturally, as they were ready to traitorously abandon their own
country, they were equally ready for treachery to the flag under which
they sailed. There were many instances during the Revolution of
United States ships being manned largely by British prisoners. Usually
the crews thus obtained were treacherous and insubordinate. Even if it
had been otherwise, the custom was a bad one, and repugnant to
honorable men.

So with a crew half-trained and half-disaffected, the "Trumbull" set
out to convoy a fleet of merchantmen through waters frequented by
British men-of-war. Hardly had she passed the capes when three British
cruisers were made out astern. One, a frigate, gave chase. Night fell,
and in the darkness the "Trumbull" might have escaped with her
charges, but that a violent squall struck her, carrying away her
fore-topmast and main-top-gallant-mast. Her convoy scattered in all
directions, and by ten o'clock the British frigate had caught up with
the disabled American.

The night was still squally, with bursts of rain and fitful flashes of
lightning, which lighted up the decks of the American ship as she
tossed on the waves. The storm had left her in a sadly disabled
condition. The shattered top hamper had fallen forward, cumbering up
the forecastle, and so tangling the bow tackle that the jibs were
useless. The foresail was jammed and torn by the fore-topsail-yard.
There was half a day's work necessary to clear away the wreck, and the
steadily advancing lights of the British ship told that not half an
hour could be had to prepare for the battle.

There was no hope that resistance could be successful, but the brave
hearts of Nicholson and his officers recoiled from the thought of
tamely striking the flag without firing a shot. So the drummers were
ordered to beat the crew to quarters; and soon, by the light of the
battle-lanterns, the captains of the guns were calling over the names
of the sailors. The roll-call had proceeded but a short time when it
became evident that most of the British renegades were absent from
their stations. The officers and marines went below to find them.
While they were absent, others of the renegades, together with about
half of the crew whom they had tainted with their mutinous plottings,
put out the battle-lanterns, and hid themselves deep in the hold. At
this moment the enemy came up, and opened fire.

Determined to make some defence, Nicholson sent the few faithful
jackies to the guns, and the officers worked side by side with the
sailors. The few guns that were manned were served splendidly, and the
unequal contest was maintained for over an hour, when a second British
man-of-war came up, and the "Trumbull" was forced to strike. At no
time had more than forty of her people been at the guns. To this fact
is due the small loss of life; for, though the ship was terribly cut
up, only five of her crew were killed, and eleven wounded.

The frigate that had engaged the "Trumbull" was the "Iris," formerly
the "Hancock" captured from the Americans by the "Rainbow." She was
one of the largest of the American frigates, while the "Trumbull" was
one of the smallest. The contest, therefore, would have been unequal,
even had not so many elements of weakness contributed to the
"Trumbull's" discomfiture.

Taking up again the thread of our narrative of the events of 1780, we
find that for three months after the action between the "Trumbull" and
the "Watt" there were no naval actions of moment. Not until October
did a United States vessel again knock the tompions from her guns, and
give battle to an enemy. During that month the cruiser "Saratoga" fell
in with a hostile armed ship and two brigs. The action that followed
was brief, and the triumph of the Americans complete. One broadside
was fired by the "Saratoga;" then, closing with her foe, she threw
fifty men aboard, who drove the enemy below. But the gallant Americans
were not destined to profit by the results of their victory; for, as
they were making for the Delaware, the British seventy-four "Intrepid"
intercepted them, and recaptured all the prizes. The "Saratoga"
escaped capture, only to meet a sadder fate; for, as she never
returned to port, it is supposed that she foundered with all on board.

The autumn and winter passed without any further exploits on the part
of the navy. The number of the regular cruisers had been sadly
diminished, and several were kept blockaded in home ports. Along the
American coast the British cruisers fairly swarmed; and the only
chance for the few Yankee ships afloat was to keep at sea as much as
possible, and try to intercept the enemy's privateers, transports, and
merchantmen, on their way across the ocean.

One United States frigate, and that one a favorite ship in the navy,
was ordered abroad in February, 1781, and on her voyage did some
brave work for her country. This vessel was the "Alliance," once
under the treacherous command of the eccentric Landais, and since his
dismissal commanded by Capt. John Barry, of whose plucky fight in the
"Raleigh" we have already spoken. The "Alliance" sailed from Boston,
carrying an army officer on a mission to France. She made the voyage
without sighting an enemy. Having landed her passenger, she set out
from L'Orient, with the "Lafayette," forty, in company. The two
cruised together for three days, capturing two heavy privateers. They
then parted, and the "Alliance" continued her cruise alone.

On the 28th of May the lookout reported two sail in sight; and soon
the strangers altered their course, and bore down directly upon the
American frigate. It was late in the afternoon, and darkness set in
before the strangers were near enough for their character to be made
out. At dawn all eyes on the "Alliance" scanned the ocean in search of
the two vessels, which were then easily seen to be a sloop-of-war and
a brig. Over each floated the British colors.

A dead calm rested upon the waters. Canvas was spread on all the
ships, but flapped idly against the yards. Not the slightest motion
could be discerned, and none of the ships had steerage-way. The enemy
had evidently determined to fight; for before the sun rose red and
glowing from beneath the horizon, sweeps were seen protruding from the
sides of the two ships, and they gradually began to lessen the
distance between them and the American frigate. Capt. Barry had no
desire to avoid the conflict; though in a calm, the lighter vessels,
being manageable with sweeps, had greatly the advantage of the
"Alliance," which could only lie like a log upon the water. Six hours
of weary work with the sweeps passed before the enemy came near enough
to hail. The usual questions and answers were followed by the roar of
the cannon, and the action began. The prospects for the "Alliance"
were dreary indeed; for the enemy took positions on the quarters of
the helpless ship, and were able to pour in broadsides, while she
could respond only with a few of her aftermost guns. But, though the
case looked hopeless, the Americans fought on, hoping that a wind
might spring up, that would give the good ship "Alliance" at least a
fighting chance.

As Barry strode the quarter-deck, watching the progress of the fight,
encouraging his men, and looking out anxiously for indications of a
wind, a grape-shot struck him in the shoulder, and felled him to the
deck. He was on his feet again in an instant; and though weakened by
the pain, and the rapid flow of blood from the wound, he remained on
deck. At last, however, he became too weak to stand, and was carried
below. At this moment a flying shot carried away the American colors;
and, as the fire of the "Alliance" was stopped a moment for the
loading of the guns, the enemy thought the victory won, and cheered
lustily. But their triumph was of short duration; for a new ensign
soon took the place of the vanished one, and the fire of the
"Alliance" commenced again.

The "Alliance" was now getting into sore straits. The fire of the
enemy had told heavily upon her, and her fire in return had done but
little visible damage. As Capt. Barry lay on his berth, enfeebled by
the pain of his wound, and waiting for the surgeon's attention, a
lieutenant entered.

"The ship remains unmanageable, sir," said he. "The rigging is badly
cut up, and there is danger that the fore-topmast may go by the board.
The enemy's fire is telling on the hull, and the carpenter reports two
leaks. Eight or ten of the people are killed, and several officers
wounded. Have we your consent to striking the colors?"

"No, sir," roared out Barry, sitting bolt upright. "And, if this ship
can't be fought without me, I will be carried on deck."

The lieutenant returned with his report; and, when the story became
known to the crew, the jackies cheered for their dauntless commander.

"We'll stand by the old man, lads," said one of the petty officers.

"Ay, ay, that we will! We'll stick to him right manfully," was the
hearty response.

But now affairs began to look more hopeful for the "Alliance." Far
away a gentle rippling of the water rapidly approaching the ship gave
promise of wind. The quick eye of an old boatswain caught sight of it.
"A breeze, a breeze!" he cried; and the jackies took up the shout, and
sprang to their stations at the ropes, ready to take advantage of the
coming gust. Soon the breeze arrived, the idly flapping sails filled
out, the helmsman felt the responsive pressure of the water as he
leaned upon the wheel, the gentle ripple of the water alongside
gladdened the ears of the blue-jackets, the ship keeled over to
leeward, then swung around responsive to her helm, and the first
effective broadside went crashing into the side of the nearest
British vessel. After that, the conflict was short. Though the enemy
had nearly beaten the "Alliance" in the calm, they were no match for
her when she was able to manoeuvre. Their resistance was plucky; but
when Capt. Barry came on deck, with his wound dressed, he was just in
time to see the flags of both vessels come fluttering to the deck.

The two prizes proved to be the "Atlanta" sixteen, and the "Trepassy"
fourteen. Both were badly cut up, and together had suffered a loss of
forty-one men in killed and wounded. On the "Alliance" were eleven
dead, and twenty-one wounded. As the capture of the two vessels threw
about two hundred prisoners into the hands of the Americans, and as
the "Alliance" was already crowded with captives, Capt. Barry made a
cartel of the "Trepassy," and sent her into an English port with all
the prisoners. The "Atlanta" he manned with a prize crew, and sent to
Boston; but she unluckily fell in with a British cruiser in
Massachusetts Bay, and was retaken.

Once more before the cessation of hostilities between Great Britain
and the United States threw her out of commission, did the "Alliance"
exchange shots with a hostile man-of-war. It was in 1782, when the
noble frigate was engaged in bringing specie from the West Indies. She
had under convoy a vessel loaded with supplies, and the two had hardly
left Havana when some of the enemy's ships caught sight of them, and
gave chase. While the chase was in progress, a fifty-gun ship hove in
sight, and was soon made out to be a French frigate. Feeling that he
had an ally at hand, Barry now wore ship, and attacked the leading
vessel, and a spirited action followed, until the enemy, finding
himself hard pressed, signalled for his consorts, and Barry, seeing
that the French ship made no sign of coming to his aid, drew off.

Irritated by the failure of the French frigate to come to his
assistance, Barry bore down upon her and hailed. The French captain
declared that the manoeuvres of the "Alliance" and her antagonist had
made him suspect that the engagement was only a trick to draw him into
the power of the British fleet. He had feared that the "Alliance" had
been captured, and was being used as a decoy; but now that the matter
was made clear to him, he would join the "Alliance" in pursuit of the
enemy. This he did; but Barry soon found that the fifty was so slow a
sailer, that the "Alliance" might catch up with the British fleet, and
be knocked to pieces by their guns, before the Frenchman could get
within range. Accordingly he abandoned the chase in disgust, and
renewed his homeward course. Some years later, an American gentleman
travelling in Europe met the British naval officer who commanded the
frigate which Barry had engaged. This officer, then a vice-admiral,
declared that he had never before seen a ship so ably fought as was
the "Alliance," and acknowledged that the presence of his consorts
alone saved him a drubbing.

This engagement was the last fought by the "Alliance" during the
Revolution, and with it we practically complete our narrative of the
work of the regular navy during that war. One slight disaster to the
American cause alone remains to be mentioned. The "Confederacy," a
thirty-two-gun frigate built in 1778, was captured by the enemy in
1781. She was an unlucky ship, having been totally dismasted on her
first cruise, and captured by an overwhelming force on her second.

Though this chapter completes the story of the regular navy during the
Revolution, there remain many important naval events to be described
in an ensuing chapter. The work of the ships fitted out by Congress
was aided greatly by the armed cruisers furnished by individual
States, and privateers. Some of the exploits of these crafts and some
desultory maritime hostilities we shall describe in the next chapter.
And if the story of the United States navy, as told in these few
chapters, seems a record of events trivial as compared with the
gigantic naval struggles of 1812 and 1861, it must be remembered that
not only were naval architecture and ordnance in their infancy in
1776, but that the country was young, and its sailors unused to the
ways of war. But that country, young as it was, produced Paul Jones;
and it is to be questioned whether any naval war since has brought
forth a braver or nobler naval officer, or one more skilled in the
handling of a single ship-of-war.

The result of the war of the Revolution is known to all. A new nation
was created by it. These pages will perhaps convince their readers
that to the navy was due somewhat the creation of that nation. And if
to-day, in its power and might, the United States seems inclined to
throw off the navy and belittle its importance, let the memory of Paul
Jones and his colleagues be conjured up, to awaken the old enthusiasm
over the triumphs of the stars and stripes upon the waves.




CHAPTER XIV.

     WORK OF THE PRIVATEERS. -- THE "GEN. HANCOCK" AND THE
     "LEVANT." -- EXPLOITS OF THE "PICKERING." -- THE "REVENGE."
     -- THE "HOLKAR." -- THE "CONGRESS" AND THE "SAVAGE." -- THE
     "HYDER ALI" AND THE "GEN. MONK." -- THE WHALE-BOAT
     HOSTILITIES. -- THE OLD JERSEY PRISON-SHIP.


To chronicle in full the myriad exploits and experiences of the
privateers and armed cruisers in the service of individual states
during the Revolution, would require a volume thrice the size of this.
Moreover, it is difficult and well-nigh impossible to obtain authentic
information regarding the movements of this class of armed craft. An
immense number of anecdotes of their prowess is current, and some few
such narratives will be repeated in this chapter; but, as a rule, they
are based only upon tradition, or the imperfect and often incorrect
reports in the newspapers of the day.

The loss inflicted upon Great Britain by the activity of American
privateers was colossal. For the first year of the war the Continental
Congress was unwilling to take so belligerent a step as to encourage
privateering; but, in the summer of 1776, the issuing of letters of
marque and reprisal was begun, and in a short time all New England had
gone to privateering. The ocean fairly swarmed with trim Yankee
schooners and brigs, and in the two years that followed nearly eight
hundred merchantmen were taken.

Discipline on the privateers was lax, and the profits of a successful
cruise were enormous. Often a new speedy craft paid her whole cost of
construction on her first cruise. The sailors fairly revelled in money
at the close of such a cruise; and, like true jack-tars, they made
their money fly as soon as they got ashore. A few days would generally
suffice to squander all the earnings of a two-months' cruise; and,
penniless but happy, Jack would ship for another bout with fortune.

A volume could be written dealing with the exploits of the privateers,
but for our purpose a few instances of their dash and spirit will be
enough. Though the purpose of the privateers was purely mercenary,
their chief end and aim being to capture defenceless merchantmen, yet
they were always ready to fight when fighting was necessary, and more
than once made a good showing against stronger and better disciplined
naval forces. In many cases audacity and dash more than made up for
the lack of strength.

In 1777 two American privateers hung about the British Isles, making
captures, and sending their prizes into French ports. The exploits of
Paul Jones were equalled by these irregular cruisers. One of them,
being in need of provisions, put into the little Irish port of
Beerhaven, and lay at anchor for ten hours, while her crew scoured the
town in search of the needed stores. A second privateer boldly entered
a harbor on the Island of Guernsey. A castle at the entrance of the
harbor opened fire upon her, whereupon she came about, and, keeping
out of range of the castle guns, captured a large brig that was making
for the port. When night fell, the privateer sent a boat's crew
ashore, and took captive two officers of the local militia.

In 1778 occurred an action between a private armed ship and a British
frigate, in which the privateer was signally successful. On the 19th
of September of that year, the "Gen. Hancock," a stout-built, well
armed and manned privateer, fell in with the "Levant," a British
frigate of thirty-two guns. The "Hancock" made no attempt to avoid a
conflict, and opened with a broadside without answering the enemy's
hail. The action was stubbornly contested upon both sides. After an
hour of fighting, the captain of the Yankee ship, peering through the
smoke, saw that the colors no longer waved above his adversary.

"Have you struck?" he shouted.

"No. Fire away," came the response faintly through the roar of the
cannon. Two hours longer the combat raged, with the ships lying
yard-arm to yard-arm. A ball struck Capt. Hardy of the "Hancock" in
the neck, and he was carried below, while the first lieutenant took
command of the ship. A few minutes later there arose a deafening roar
and blinding flash; a terrific shock threw the men on the American
ship to the deck. Stifling smoke darkened the atmosphere; and pieces
of timber, cordage, and even horribly torn bits of human flesh began
to fall upon the decks. When the smoke cleared away, the Americans
looked eagerly for their enemy. Where she had floated a minute or two
before, was now a shattered, blackened hulk fast sinking beneath the
waves. The surface of the sea for yards around was strewn with
wreckage, and here and there men could be seen struggling for life. As
ready to save life as they had been to destroy it, the Americans
lowered their boats and pulled about, picking up the survivors of the
explosion. The boatswain of the ill-fated ship and seventeen of the
crew were thus saved, but more than fourscore brave fellows went down
with her. The American vessel herself was damaged not a little by the
violence of the explosion.

This was not the only case during this year in which a British
man-of-war met defeat at the guns of a Yankee privateer. The
"Hinchinbrooke," sloop-of-war fourteen; the "York," tender twelve; and
the "Enterprise," ten guns,--all struck their colors to private armed
vessels flying the stars and stripes.

By 1778 the privateers under the British flag were afloat in no small
number. America had no commerce on which they might prey, and they
looked forward only to recapturing those British vessels that had been
taken by Yankee privateers and sent homeward. That so many British
vessels should have found profitable employment in this pursuit, is in
itself a speaking tribute to the activity of the American private
armed navy.

During the Revolution, as during the second war with Great Britain in
1812, Salem, Mass., and Baltimore, Md., were the principal points from
which privateers hailed. In all the early wars of the United States,
the term "Salem privateer" carried with it a picture of a fleet
schooner, manned with a picked crew of able seamen, commanded by a
lanky Yankee skipper who knew the byways of old ocean as well as the
highways of trade, armed with eight, four, or six pounders, and a
heavy "Long Tom" amidships. Scores of such craft sailed from Salem
during the Revolution; and hardly a week passed without two or three
returning privateers entering the little port and discharging their
crews, to keep the little village in a turmoil until their prize money
was spent, or, to use the sailors' phrase, until "no shot was left in
the locker."

One of the most successful of the Salem privateers was the
"Pickering," a craft carrying a battery of sixteen guns, and a crew of
forty-seven men. On one cruise she fought an engagement of an hour and
a half with a British cutter of twenty guns; and so roughly did she
handle the enemy, that he was glad to sheer off. A day of two later,
the "Pickering" overhauled the "Golden Eagle," a large schooner of
twenty-two guns and fifty-seven men. The action which followed was
ended by the schooner striking her flag. A prize crew was then put
aboard the "Golden Eagle," and she was ordered to follow in the wake
of her captor. Three days later the British sloop-of-war "Achilles"
hove in sight, and gave chase to the privateer and her prize. After a
fifteen hours' chase the prize was overhauled; and the sloop-of-war,
after taking possession of her, continued in pursuit of the privateer.
But while the privateersmen had preferred flight to fighting while
nothing was at stake, they did not propose to let their prize be taken
from them without a resistance, however great the odds against them.
Accordingly they permitted the "Achilles" to overhaul them, and a
sharp action followed. The British tried to force the combat by
boarding; but the Americans, with pikes and cutlasses, drove them back
to their own ship. Then the two vessels separated, and during the rest
of the conflict came no nearer each other than the length of a
pistol-shot. At this distance they carried on a spirited cannonade for
upwards of three hours; when the "Achilles," concluding that she had
had enough, sheered off. Thereupon, the "Pickering" coolly ran back to
her late prize, took possession of her, captured the lieutenant and
prize crew that the "Achilles" had put in charge of her, and continued
her cruise.

A good example of the Baltimore privateers was the "Revenge," mounting
eighteen guns, with a crew of fifty men. In 1780 this vessel was
commanded by Capt. Alexander Murray of the regular navy. She was
engaged by a large number of Baltimore merchants to convoy a fleet of
merchantmen, but had hardly started to sea with her charges when she
fell in with a fleet of British vessels, and was forced to retreat up
the Patuxent River. While there, the American fleet was strengthened
by several privateers and armed merchant-vessels which joined it, so
that it was felt safe to try again to get to sea. Accordingly the
attempt was made; but, though the captains of the fleet had signed a
solemn compact to stand together in case of the danger, the sudden
appearance of a fleet of hostile armed vessels sent all scurrying up
the Patuxent again, except one brig and a schooner. The British fleet
consisted of a ship of eighteen guns, a brig of sixteen, and three
privateer schooners. Leaving the schooners to his two faithful
consorts, Murray threw himself between the two larger vessels and the
flying merchantmen. Seeing themselves thus balked of their prey, the
enemy turned fiercely upon the "Revenge," but were met with so
spirited a resistance, that they hauled off after an hour's fighting.
The other American vessels behaved equally well, and the discomfiture
of the British was complete.

Philadelphia, though not looked upon as a centre of privateering
activity, furnished one privateer that made a notable record. This was
the "Holkar," sixteen guns. In April, 1780, she captured a British
schooner of ten guns, and in May of the same year she fought a
desperate action with a British privateer brig, the name of which has
never been ascertained. Twice the Briton sheered off to escape the
telling fire of the American; but the "Holkar" pressed him closely,
and only the appearance of a second British armed vessel at the scene
of the action saved the Englishman from capture. This battle was one
of the most sanguinary ever fought by private armed vessels; for of
the crew of the "Holkar" six were killed and sixteen wounded,
including the captain and first lieutenant, while of the enemy there
were about the same number killed and twenty wounded. Three months
later this same privateer fell in with the British sixteen-gun cutter
"Hypocrite," and captured her after a sharp conflict.

Perhaps the most audacious privateering exploit was that of the
privateers "Hero," "Hope," and "Swallow," in July, 1782. The captains
of these craft, meeting after an unprofitable season upon the high
seas, conceived the idea of making a descent upon the Nova Scotian
town of Lunenberg, some thirty-five miles from Halifax. Little time
was wasted in discussion. Privateers are not hampered by official red
tape. So it happened that early in the month the three privateers
appeared off the harbor of the threatened town, having landed a shore
party of ninety men. Before the invaders the inhabitants retreated
rapidly, making some slight resistance. Two block-houses, garrisoned
by British regulars, guarded the town. One of these fortresses the
Americans burned, whereupon the British established themselves in the
second, and prepared to stand a siege. Luckily for the Americans, the
block-house was within range of the harbor; so that the three
privateers took advantageous positions, and fired a few rounds of
solid shot into the enemy's wooden citadel. The besieged then made
haste to raise the white flag, and surrendered themselves
prisoners-of-war. When the Yankee ships left the harbor, they took
with them a large quantity of merchandise and provisions, and a
thousand pounds sterling by way of ransom.

One more conflict, in which the irregular naval forces of the United
States did credit to themselves, must be described before dismissing
the subject of privateering. In September, 1781, the British
sloop-of-war "Savage" was cruising off the southern coast of the
United States. Her officers and men were in a particularly good humor,
and felt a lively sense of self-satisfaction; for they had just
ascended the Potomac, and plundered Gen. Washington's estate,--an
exploit which would make them heroes in the eyes of their admiring
countrymen.

Off Charleston the "Savage" encountered the American privateer
"Congress," of about the same strength as herself,--twenty guns and
one hundred and fifty men. In one respect the "Congress" was the
weaker; for her crew was composed largely of landsmen, and her marines
were a company of militia, most of whom were sadly afflicted with
seasickness. Nevertheless, the Yankee craft rushed boldly into action,
opening fire with her bow-chasers as soon as she came within range.
Like two savage bull-dogs, the two ships rushed at each other,
disdaining all manoeuvring, and seemingly intent only upon locking in
a deadly struggle, yard-arm to yard-arm. At first the "Savage" won a
slight advantage. Swinging across the bow of the "Congress," she raked
her enemy twice. But soon the two ships lay side by side, and the
thunder of the cannon was constant. The militia-marines on the
"Congress" did good service. Stationed in the tops, on the forecastle,
the quarter-deck, and every elevated place on the ship, they poured
down upon the deck of the enemy a murderous fire. The jackies at the
great guns poured in broadsides so well directed that soon the
"Savage" had not a rope left with which to manage the sails. Her
quarter-deck was cleared, and not a man was to be seen to serve as a
mark for the American gunners. So near lay the two vessels to each
other, that the fire from the guns scorched the gunners on the
opposite ship. The antagonists were inextricably entangled; for the
mizzen-mast of the "Savage" had been shot away, and had fallen into
the after-rigging of the "Congress." There was no flight for the
weaker vessel. When she could no longer fight, surrender was her only
recourse. Neither vessel showed any colors, for both ensigns had been
shot away early in the action. Accordingly, when the boatswain of the
"Savage" was seen upon the forecastle wildly waving his arms, it was
taken as an evidence of surrender; and the fire slackened until his
voice could be heard.

"Give us quarter," he cried hoarsely; "we are a wreck, and strike our
flag."

The firing then ceased; but, when the lieutenant of the "Congress"
ordered a boat lowered in which to board the prize, the old boatswain
came back with the report,--

"Boats all knocked to pieces, sir. Couldn't find one that would
float."

Accordingly the two vessels had to be slowly drawn together, and the
boarding party reached the deck of the prize by clambering over a spar
which served as a bridge. When they reached the prize, they found her
decks covered with dead and wounded men. The slaughter had been
terrible. Twenty-three men were killed, and thirty-one wounded. On the
"Congress" were thirty, killed and wounded together. One of the
wounded Americans was found lying with his back braced against the
foot of the bowsprit, cheering for the victory, and crying,--

"If they have broken my legs, my hands and heart are still whole."

Throughout this sanguinary action both parties showed the greatest
courage and determination. Two vessels of the two most perfectly
organized regular navies in the world could not have been better
handled, nor could they have more stubbornly contested for the
victory.

A class of armed vessels outside the limits of the regular navy, but
very active and efficient in the service of the country, was the
maritime forces of the individual states. Before Congress had seen
the necessity for a naval force, several of the colonies had been
alive to the situation, and fitted out cruisers of their own. Even
after the Revolution had developed into a war of the first magnitude,
and after the colonies had assumed the title of states, and delegated
to Congress the duty of providing for the common defence, they still
continued to fit out their own men-of-war to protect their ports and
act as convoys for their merchant fleets. Though vessels in this
service seldom cruised far from the coast of their home colony, yet
occasionally they met the vessels of the enemy, and many sharp actions
were fought by them.

Of all the actions fought by the State cruisers, the most hotly
contested was that between the Pennsylvania cruiser "Hyder Ali," and
the British sloop-of-war "Gen. Monk." The "Hyder Ali" was a
merchantman, bought by the state just as she was about departing on a
voyage to the West Indies. She was in no way calculated for a
man-of-war; but the need was pressing, and she was pierced for eight
ports on a side, and provided with a battery of six-pounders. The
command of this vessel was given to Joshua Barney, a young officer
with an extensive experience of Yankee privateers and British prisons,
and whose later exploits in the United States navy are familiar to
readers of "Blue-Jackets of 1812."

Barney's instructions were, not to go to sea, but to patrol the
Delaware River and Bay, and see that no privateer lay in wait for the
merchant-vessels that cleared from the port of Philadelphia. In April,
1782, the "Hyder Ali" stood down Delaware Bay at the head of a large
fleet of outward-bound merchantmen. When Cape May was reached, strong
head-winds sprang up, and the whole fleet anchored to await more
favorable weather before putting out to sea. While they lay at anchor,
the "Hyder Ali" sighted a trio of British vessels, two ships and a
brig, rounding the cape. Instantly Barney signalled his convoy to trip
anchor and retreat, a signal which was promptly obeyed by all save one
too daring craft, that tried to slip round the cape, and get to sea,
but fell into the hands of the enemy. Soon the whole fleet, with the
"Hyder Ali" bringing up the rear, fled up the bay. The British
followed in hot pursuit.

At a point half-way up the bay the pursuers parted; one of the ships,
a frigate, cutting through a side channel in the hope of intercepting
the fugitives. The other two pursuers, a privateer brig and a
sloop-of-war, continued in the wake of the "Hyder Ali." The brig
proved herself a clipper, and soon came up with the American vessel,
which promptly offered battle. The challenge was declined by the
privateer, which fired a harmless broadside, and continued on up the
bay. Barney let her pass, for he had determined to risk the dangers of
an unequal combat with the sloop-of-war. This vessel came up rapidly;
and as she drew near Barney luffed up suddenly, and let fly a
broadside. This somewhat staggered the enemy, who had expected only a
tame surrender; but she quickly recovered, and came boldly on. At this
juncture Barney turned to his helmsman, and said,--

"Now, when I give the word, pay no attention to my order, but put the
helm hard-a-starboard. Pay no heed to the actual command I may give
you."

The British vessel was then within half pistol-shot, and her forward
guns were beginning to bear. From his station on the quarter-deck
Barney shouted to his steersman in stentorian tones,--

"Port your helm. Hard-a-port."

The order was clearly heard on board the enemy, and he prepared to
manoeuvre his ship accordingly. But the steersman of the "Hyder Ali"
remembered his instructions; and before the enemy discovered the ruse,
the American ship lay athwart the other's bow, and the bowsprit of the
enemy was caught in the "Hyder Ali's" rigging, giving the latter a
raking position. Quickly the Yankee gunners seized the opportunity.
Not five miles away was a British frigate ready to rush to the
assistance of her consort, and whatever was to be done by the bold
lads of Pennsylvania had to be done with expedition. No cheer rose
from their ranks; but with grim determination they worked at the great
guns, pouring in rapid and effective broadsides. The explosions of the
two batteries were like the deafening peals of thunder echoed and
re-echoed in some mountain-gorge. Smoke hid the vessels from sight,
and the riflemen in the tops could only occasionally catch sight of
the figures of the enemy. The enemy had twenty guns to Barney's
sixteen; but he was out-manoeuvred at the start, and this disadvantage
he never overcame. Half an hour from the time of the opening of the
battle, his flag was struck, and the Americans, with lusty cheers,
took possession of their prize. There was no time for ceremony. The
frigate had seen the conflict from afar, and was bearing down upon
the two antagonists. So without even asking the name of the captured
vessel, Barney hastily threw a prize crew aboard, ordered her to
proceed to Philadelphia, and himself remained behind to cover the
retreat.

Some hours later, having escaped the British frigate, the two vessels
sailed up to a Philadelphia wharf. The scars of battle had been in no
way healed: the tattered sails, the shattered hulls and bulwarks, the
cordage hanging loosely from the masts, told the story of battle. The
crowd that rushed to the wharf, and peered curiously about the decks
of the two vessels, saw a ghastly and horrible sight. For the battle
had been as sanguinary as it was spirited, and the dead still lay
where they fell. On the British vessel, the "Gen. Monk," lay the
lifeless bodies of twenty men; while twenty-six wounded, whose blood
stained the deck, lay groaning in the cock-pit below. On the "Hyder
Ali" were four killed and eleven wounded.

This action, for steadiness and brilliancy, was not surpassed by any
naval duel of the war of the Revolution. By it the name of Joshua
Barney was put upon a plane with those of the most eminent commanders
in the regular navy; and had not the war speedily terminated, he would
have been granted a commission and a ship by the United States.

While the chief naval events of the war for independence have now been
recounted, there still remain certain incidents connected more or less
closely with the war on the water, which deserve a passing mention.
One of these is the curious desultory warfare carried on in and about
New York Harbor by fishermen and longshoremen in whale-boats, dories,
sharpies, and similar small craft.

From 1776 until the close of the war, New York City and the region
bordering upon the harbor were occupied by the British. Provisions
were needed for their support, and were brought from Connecticut and
New Jersey in small sailing craft, chiefly whale-boats. These boats
the patriots often intercepted, and desperate encounters upon the
water were frequent. Nor did the Yankee boatmen confine their attacks
to the provision boats alone. In the summer of 1775 the British
transport "Blue Mountain Valley" was captured by a band of hardy
Jerseymen, who concealed themselves in the holds of four small
sail-boats until fairly alongside the enemy's vessel, when they
swarmed out and drove the British from the deck of their vessel.

Two New Jersey fishermen, Adam Hyler and William Marriner, were
particularly active in this class of warfare. Twice the British sent
armed forces to capture them, and, failing in that, burned their
boats. But the sturdy patriots were undaunted, and building new boats,
waged a relentless war against the followers of King George. Every
Tory that fished in the bay was forced to pay them tribute; and many
of these gentry, so obnoxious to the Yankees, were visited in their
homes at dead of night, and solemnly warned to show more moderation in
their disapproval of the American cause. When the occasion offered,
the two Jerseymen gathered armed bands, and more than one small
British vessel fell a prey to their midnight activity. Two British
corvettes were captured by them in Coney Island Bay, and burned to the
water's edge. With one of the blazing vessels forty thousand dollars
in specie was destroyed,--a fact that Hyler bitterly lamented when he
learned of it.

No narrative of the events of the Revolution would be complete,
without some description of the floating prison-houses in which the
British immured the hapless soldiers and sailors who fell into their
hands. Of these the chief one was a dismasted hulk known as the "Old
Jersey" prison-ship, and moored in Wallabout Bay near New York City.
No pen can adequately describe the horrors of this prison; but some
extracts from the published recollections of men once imprisoned in
her noisome hold will give some idea of the miserable fate of those
condemned to be imprisoned on her.

Thomas Andros, a sailor taken by the British with the privateer "Fair
American," writes of the "Old Jersey:" "This was an old sixty-four-gun
ship, which, through age, had become unfit for further actual service.
She was stripped of every spar and all her rigging. After a battle
with a French fleet, her lion figure-head was taken away to repair
another ship. No appearance of ornament was left, and nothing remained
but an old unsightly rotten hulk; and doubtless no other ship in the
British navy ever proved the means of the destruction of so many human
beings. It is computed that no less than eleven thousand American
seamen perished in her. When I first became an inmate of this abode of
suffering, despair, and death, there were about four hundred prisoners
on board; but in a short time they amounted to twelve hundred. In a
short time we had two hundred or more sick and dying lodged in the
forepart of the lower gun-deck, where all the prisoners were confined
at night. Utter derangement was a common symptom of yellow-fever; and
to increase the horror of the darkness that surrounded us (for we were
allowed no light between decks), the voice of warning would be heard,
'Take heed to yourselves. There is a madman stalking through the ship
with a knife in his hand,' I sometimes found the man a corpse in the
morning, by whose side I laid myself down at night. In the morning the
hatchways were thrown open; and we were allowed to ascend on the upper
deck all at once, and remain on the upper deck all day. But the first
object that met our view in the morning was an appalling spectacle,--a
boat loaded with dead bodies, conveying them to the Long Island shore,
where they were very slightly covered."

Ebenezer Fox, another privateersman, has left his recollections of
this dreadful prison. His description of the food upon which the
unhappy prisoners were forced to subsist is interesting:--

"Our bill of fare was as follows: on Sunday, one pound of biscuit, one
pound of pork, and half a pint of pease; Monday, one pound of biscuit,
one pint of oatmeal, and two ounces of butter; Tuesday, one pound of
biscuit, and two pounds of salt beef; Wednesday, one and a half pounds
of flour, and two ounces of suet; Thursday was a repetition of
Sunday's fare; Friday, of Monday's; and Saturday, of Tuesday's.

"If this food had been of good quality and properly cooked, as we had
no labor to perform, it would have kept us comfortable, at least from
suffering; but this was not the case. All our food appeared to be
damaged. As for the pork, we were cheated out of it more than half the
time; and when it was obtained, one would have judged from its motley
hues, exhibiting the consistence and appearance of variegated fancy
soap, that it was the flesh of the porpoise or sea-hog, and had been
an inhabitant of the ocean rather than of the stye. The pease were
generally damaged, and, from the imperfect manner in which they were
cooked, were about as indigestible as grape-shot. The butter the
reader will not suppose was the real 'Goshen;' and had it not been for
its adhesive properties to hold together the particles of the biscuit,
that had been so riddled by the worms as to lose all their attraction
of cohesion, we should have considered it no desirable addition to our
viands."

But it is unnecessary to prolong the painful description of the
horrors of this floating charnel house. Its name and record must ever
rest as a dark stain upon the name of England. It is seldom possible
in war-time to house and care for the immense hordes of
prisoners-of-war with the same regard for their comfort which is shown
ordinarily to convicted felons. War is brutal; it is unfeeling, and
the weaker party must always suffer. But such sufferings as those of
the "Old Jersey" captives can be excused upon no ground. There was no
need to crowd hundreds of men into a space hardly large enough for a
few score. To starve her prisoners, should not be part of a great
nation's policy. The one plea which England can urge in extenuation of
the "Old Jersey" is that it had its day at a time when those broad
principles of humanity, now so generally accepted, had not yet been
applied to the rules of war.

With this chapter ends the narrative of the naval events of the war of
the Revolution. It was not a great naval war, for the belligerent
nations were not sufficiently well matched in naval strength. But it
brought forth Paul Jones and more than one other brave and able
commander. It established a new flag upon the seas, a flag that has
ever since held an honorable position among the insignia of the
foremost nations of the earth. And in the war of the Revolution, as in
every war in which the United States has taken part since, there was
manifested the wonderful ability of the American people to rush into a
conflict half prepared, and gain daily in strength until the cause for
which they fight is won. In 1776 that cause was liberty, and in its
behalf none fought more bravely than the lads who wore the blue
jackets of the American navy.




CHAPTER XV.

     THE NAVY DISBANDED. -- AGGRESSIONS OF BARBARY CORSAIRS. -- A
     DISGRACEFUL TRIBUTE. -- BAINBRIDGE AND THE DEY. -- GEN.
     EATON AT TUNIS. A SQUADRON SENT TO THE MEDITERRANEAN. --
     DECATUR AND THE SPANIARDS. -- THE "ENTERPRISE" AND THE
     "TRIPOLI." -- AMERICAN SLAVES IN ALGIERS.


Peace having been signed with Great Britain in 1783, the nucleus of a
navy then in existence was disbanded. Partly this was due to the
disinclination of the sturdy Republicans to keep a standing
establishment, either naval or military, in time of peace. The same
tendency of the American mind to disregard the adage, "In time of
peace, prepare for war," is observable to-day. But the chief reason
for the dissolution of the navy lay in the impossibility of collecting
funds to pay for its maintenance. The states had formed themselves
into a confederacy, but so jealously had each state guarded its
individual rights, that no power was left to the general government.
The navy being a creation of the general government, was therefore
left without means of support; and in 1785 the last remaining frigate,
the "Alliance," was sold because there was not enough money in the
treasury to pay for her needed repairs.

For eight years thereafter the nation remained without a navy. But
gradually there sprung up a very considerable maritime commerce under
the flag of the United States. The stars and stripes began to be a
familiar sight in sea-ports as far away as China and Japan. But as far
as it afforded any protection to the vessel above which it waved, that
banner might have been a meaningless bit of striped bunting. In 1785
the Dey of Algiers, looking to piracy for his income, sent his
piratical cruisers out into the Atlantic to seize upon the merchantmen
of the new nation that had no navy to enforce its authority. Two
vessels were captured, and their crews sold into disgraceful slavery
in Algiers.

When the first Congress of the United States under the present
Constitution assembled, President Washington called the attention of
the law-makers to the crying need for a navy. But war had set in
between Portugal and Algiers; the Algerian corsairs were blockaded in
their ports, and American vessels were enjoying a temporary immunity
from piratical attack. Therefore Congress hesitated.

But in 1793 peace was suddenly arranged between Portugal and Algiers.
Immediately the corsairs swarmed out of the Mediterranean Sea, and
swooped down upon the American merchantmen. In a few weeks four ships
were in their hands, and the gangs of white slaves in Tunis and
Tripoli were re-enforced by nearly two hundred luckless Yankee
sailors. Then Congress awoke, and ordered the immediate building of
six frigates. The ships were laid down, the work was well under way,
naval officers had been appointed, and every thing seemed to point to
the revival of the American navy, when a treaty was negotiated with
Algiers, and all work was stopped.

And what a treaty it was! By it the United States relinquished every
claim to the rights of a sovereign nation. It agreed to pay an annual
tribute to the piratical Dey, in consideration of his granting to
American vessels the right of travel on the high seas. And when some
slight delay occurred in making the first payment of tribute, the
obsequious government presented the Barbary corsair with a frigate, to
allay his wrath.

We must pass hastily over the time during which this iniquitous treaty
was in force. Suffice it to say, that by it the United States paid the
Dey more than a million dollars. For the same sum his piratical
establishment might have been scattered like the sands of the desert.

In May, 1800, it fell to the lot of Capt. William Bainbridge,
commanding the frigate "George Washington," to carry the annual
tribute to Algiers. On arriving there he was treated with contempt by
the Dey, who demanded that he put the "Washington" at the service of
Algiers, to carry her ambassador to Constantinople. "You pay me
tribute, by which you become my slaves," said the Dey; "I have
therefore a right to order you as I may think proper."

Bainbridge protested, but to no avail. He had anchored his frigate
under the guns of the Dey's castle, and to disobey meant capture and
slavery. Accordingly he complied, but despatched a letter to the
authorities at home, saying, "I hope I may never again be sent to
Algiers with tribute, unless I am authorized to deliver it from the
mouth of our cannon."

When Bainbridge reached the United States, after faithfully
discharging the errand of the Dey, he found that it was unlikely that
either he or any other officer would be forced to carry any further
tribute to the Barbary pirates. For, while the tribute paid to Algiers
had merely changed the attitude of that country from open hostility to
contemptuous forbearance, it had brought the other Barbary states
clamoring to the United States for tribute. Tunis and Tripoli demanded
blood-money; and each emphasized its demand by capturing a few Yankee
merchantmen, and selling their crews into slavery.

The agents or ambassadors sent by the United States to these powers
were treated with the utmost contempt; and while their lives were
often in danger, their property was always considered the fair prey of
the Barbarian ruler to whose domain they were sent. To Tunis was sent
Gen. William Eaton, an American politician, who has left a record of
his experiences in the land of the Bey. Some of the entries in his
journal are very pithy. Thus under the date of Aug. 11, 1799, he
wrote,--

"Some good friend had informed the Bey that I had an elegant Grecian
mirror in my house. To-day he sent a request for it, pretending that
he wanted it for the cabin of his pleasure-boat, now about to be
launched. So it is. If the consuls have a good piece of furniture, or
any other good thing which strikes the Bey's fancy, he never hesitates
to ask for it; and they have no alternative but to give it. They have
suffered this to become usance also.

"12th. Sent the Bey the mirror."

A letter from Gen. Eaton to the Secretary of State, in 1801, tells of
the capacity of the Bey. A fire in the regal palace destroyed fifty
thousand stand of small-arms. The next day the monarch ordered Eaton
to procure from the United States ten thousand stand to help make up
the loss. Eaton demurred. "The Bey did not send for you to ask your
advice," said the prime minister, "but to order you to communicate his
demands to your Government."

Eaton still protested, pointed out the fact that the United States had
already paid the Bey heavy tribute, and asked when these extortionate
demands were to end.

"Never," was the cool response; and the interview ended.

But by this time the United States authorities had perceived the error
they had committed in temporizing with the Barbary powers. They had
quieted Algiers by the payment of a heavy tribute, and the gift of a
frigate. But this had only excited the cupidity of the other petty
states. Tunis demanded like tribute. The Bashaw of Tripoli,
discontented with his share of the spoils, cut down the flagstaff
before the American consulate, and sent out his cruisers to prey upon
American commerce. Accordingly, on the 20th of May, 1801, the
Secretary of the Navy ordered a squadron prepared to proceed to the
Mediterranean, and bring the rapacious Arabs to terms.

The vessels chosen for this service were the "President," Commodore
Richard Dale; "Philadelphia," Capt. Barron; "Essex," Capt. Bainbridge;
and the schooner "Enterprise," Lieut.-Commandant Sterrett. Though the
fleet in itself was powerful, the commodore was hampered by the timid
and vacillating instructions of Congress. War had not been actually
declared, and he was therefore to commit no overt act of hostility.
The vessels of the fleet were to be employed simply to convoy American
merchantmen in and out of the Mediterranean Sea, and to be in
readiness to ward off any hostile action on the part of any of the
Barbary powers.

On July 1 the fleet entered the roadstead at Gibraltar, and anchored
in the shadow of the famous rock. Here the Americans found two of the
most rapacious of the Tripolitan corsairs lying at anchor; one a ship
of twenty-six guns under the command of the Tripolitan admiral, and
the other a brig of sixteen guns. To keep an eye on these piratical
worthies, the "Philadelphia" was ordered to remain at Gibraltar, while
the other vessels scattered. The "Essex" was ordered to cruise along
the northern shore of the Mediterranean, gathering up all the American
merchantmen, and convoying them to sea. The "President" and the
"Enterprise" made sail for Algiers, to convince the ruler of that
country that it would be impolitic for him to declare war against the
United States at that time. The desired effect was produced; for the
sight of an American frigate did more to tone down the harshness of
the Dey's utterances, than could the most extortionate tribute.

The cruise of the "Essex" was uneventful, save for a dispute between
the officers of the American man-of-war and a Spanish xebec in the
roads of Barcelona. The trouble arose in this wise:--

The "Essex," though a small vessel, was perfectly appointed, of
handsome model and appearance, and her crew was drilled to the highest
possible state of discipline and efficiency. When she cast anchor at
Barcelona, she straightway became the talk of the town, and her
officers became the lions of the hour, vastly to the disgust of the
Spaniards on the xebec lying in the same port. Accordingly they took
every opportunity to annoy the Americans, challenging the boats of the
"Essex" as they passed the xebec, and not scrupling to use abusive
language to Capt. Bainbridge himself. One night a boat, under command
of Lieut. Stephen Decatur, was brought under the guns of the xebec,
and held there while the Spaniards shouted insults from the deck
above. Decatur called for the officer in command, and remonstrated
with him, but receiving no satisfaction, ordered his men to shove off,
declaring he would call again in the morning.

Accordingly, in the forenoon of the following day, a boat from the
"Essex," with Decatur in the stern-sheets, made for the Spanish
vessel. Coming alongside, Decatur went on board, and asked for the
officer who had been in command the night previous. He was told that
the man he sought had gone ashore.

"Well, then," thundered Decatur, in tones that could be heard all over
the vessel, "tell him that Lieut. Decatur of the frigate 'Essex'
pronounces him a cowardly scoundrel, and when they meet on shore he
will cut his ears off." And having thrown this bombshell into the
enemy's camp, Decatur returned to his ship.

The duel was never fought, for the civil authorities bestirred
themselves to prevent it. But the matter was taken up by the United
States minister to Spain, who never permitted it to rest until the
fullest apology was made by Spain for the indignities to which the
American naval officers had been subjected.

After having collected a large number of merchantmen, and taken them
safely out of the reach of Tripolitan cruisers, the "Essex" showed her
colors in the chief Barbary ports, and rejoined the flag-ship in time
to return to the United States in December.

While the "Essex" had been thus pacificly employed, the little
schooner "Enterprise" had carried off the honors by fighting the first
and only pitched battle of the year. This little craft, after
accompanying the "President" to Algiers, was ordered to Malta. While
on the way thither she fell in with a polacre-rigged ship flying the
Tripolitan colors. Closer inspection showed her to be a notorious
corsair, well known for the constant and merciless warfare she waged
upon American merchantmen. The stars and stripes, floating at the peak
of the American man-of-war, alarmed the Moors, and they opened fire
without waiting for a hail. The "Enterprise" took up a position
alongside, and at a distance of less than a pistol-shot. Broadside
succeeded broadside in rapid succession. The aim of the Americans was
better than that of the enemy, and the effect of their fire was
observable whenever the breeze cleared away the dense smoke that hid
the vessels from each other. But the ordnance of both was light, so
that the combat was greatly prolonged. The vessels were almost equally
matched; for the "Enterprise" carried twelve guns and ninety men,
while the Tripolitan mounted fourteen guns, and had a crew of
eighty-five men.

For two hours the battle continued, and the roar of the cannon and the
rattle of small-arms were incessant. The day was calm and clear, with
the still, warm air prevalent in the Mediterranean. Hardly was the
breeze strong enough to carry away the sulphurous cloud of smoke that
formed the one blot on the fair surface of the fairest of all seas. At
last the Americans noticed that the fire of the enemy had ceased.
Eagerly they peered through the smoke, and when the outline of their
adversary could be made out, three ringing cheers told that the
Tripolitan flag waved no longer in its place. Leaving their guns, the
Americans were preparing to board the prize, when they were astonished
to receive another broadside, and see the colors of their adversary
again hoisted.

With cries of rage the Yankee seamen again went to quarters; and, if
they had fought boldly before, they now fought viciously. They cared
little to take the prize: their chief end was to send her, and the
treacherous corsairs that manned her, to the bottom. The Tripolitans
in their turn exerted every energy to conquer. Bringing their vessel
alongside the "Enterprise," they strove repeatedly to board, only to
be beaten back again and again. Finally, after receiving two raking
broadsides from the "Enterprise," she again struck her flag.

This time Capt. Sterrett was in no haste to consider the combat ended.
Keeping his men at the guns, he ordered the Tripolitan to come under
the quarter of the "Enterprise." But no sooner had the enemy done so
than she renewed the conflict for the third time, by attempting to
board.

"No quarter for the treacherous dogs," was then the cry on the
American vessel. "Fight on, and send them to the bottom."

The rest of the battle was wholly in favor of the "Enterprise."
Several times she raked her antagonist, doing great execution. Many
shots took effect between wind and water; and the cry arose on the
decks of the Tripolitan, that she was sinking. The "Enterprise" kept
at a safe distance, and by skilful sailing chose her own position, so
that she could pour in a deliberate and murderous fire. Bitterly were
the Tripolitans punished for their treachery. Their decks ran red with
blood, half of their officers were shot down, the cries of their
wounded rose shrill above the thunder of the cannon. Her flag was
struck, but to this the American gunners paid no heed. The repeated
treachery of the corsairs had left in the minds of the Yankee sailors
but one thought,--to send the ship to the bottom, and rid the ocean of
so pestiferous a craft.

But, enraged though they were, the Americans could not wholly cast
aside their feelings of humanity. Though they had been twice deceived,
they could not keep up their attack upon a vessel so sorely stricken
as to be unable to respond to their fire. And when at last the
commander of the Tripolitan, a venerable old man with a flowing beard,
appeared in the waist of the ship, sorely wounded, and, bowing
submissively, cast the colors of his vessel into the sea, then the
fire of the "Enterprise" ceased, although the usages of war would have
justified the Americans in exterminating their treacherous foe.

Having captured his enemy, Capt. Sterrett was in some uncertainty as
to what to do with it. The instructions under which he sailed gave him
no authority to take prizes. After some deliberation, he concluded to
rob the captured vessel, which proved to be the "Tripoli," of her
power for evil. Accordingly he sent Lieut. David Porter, the daring
naval officer of whose exploits we have already spoken in the
"Blue-Jackets of 1812," on board the prize, with instructions to
dismantle her. Porter carried out his instructions admirably. With
immense satisfaction the jackies he took with him forced the
Tripolitans to cut away their masts, throw overboard all their cannon,
cutlasses, pistols, and other arms; cut their sails to pieces; throw
all ammunition into the sea, and, to use a nautical expression, "strip
the ship to a girtline." One jury-mast and small sail alone was left.

Porter then pointed out to the crestfallen Tripolitan captain, Mahomet
Sons, that the "Enterprise" had not lost a man in the action, while of
the corsairs not less than fifty were either killed or wounded.

"Go," said he sternly to the cowering Mussulman, "go tell the Bashaw
of Tripoli, and the people of your country, that in future they may
expect only a tribute of powder and ball from the sailors of the
United States."

Amid the jeers and execrations of the Yankee tars, the crippled
Tripolitan hulk, with her dead and dying, drifted slowly away. When
she reached Tripoli, the anger of the Bashaw was unappeasable. He had
expected his cruiser to return freighted deep with plunder, and
crowded with American slaves. She had returned a dismantled hulk. In
vain her commander showed his wounds to his wrathful master, and told
of the size of his enemy, and the vigor of his resistance. The rage of
the Bashaw demanded a sacrifice, and the luckless Mahomet Sons was led
through the streets of Tripoli tied to a jackass. This in itself was
the deepest degradation possible for a Mussulman, but the Bashaw
supplemented it with five hundred bastinadoes well laid on. This
severe punishment, together with the repeated assertions of the
sailors of the defeated ship, that the dogs of Christians had fired
enchanted shot, so terrified the seafaring people of Tripoli that it
was almost impossible for the Bashaw to muster a ship's crew for a
year after.

[Illustration: Commodore Decatur.]

The battle between the "Enterprise" and the "Tripoli" alone saved the
first year of the war from being entirely puerile. Certain it is that
the distinguished naval officers who accompanied the fleet to the
Mediterranean were so hedged about with political red tape, that they
were powerless to take a step in defence of the honor of their
country. While they were empowered to rescue any American ship that
might be discovered in the grasp of a corsair, they were powerless to
attempt the rescue of the hundreds of Americans held by Bashaw, Bey,
and Dey as slaves. Commodore Dale, indeed, through diplomacy, managed
to free a few of the enslaved Americans. Having blockaded the
harbor of Tripoli with the frigate "President," he captured a Greek
vessel having a score or more of Tripolitan soldiers aboard. He then
sent word to the Bashaw that he would exchange these prisoners for an
equal number of Americans; but the monarch apparently cared little for
his subjects, for he replied that he would not give one American slave
for the whole lot. After much argument, an exchange was made upon the
basis of three Tripolitans to one Yankee.

It is hard, even at this late day, to regard the policy of the United
States towards the Barbary powers with feelings other than of
mortification. Tunis, Tripoli, Algiers, and Morocco constantly preyed
on our commerce, and enslaved our sailors. In the streets of Algiers
worked American slaves, chained together, and wearing iron collars
upon their necks. Their lives were the property of their owners, and
they suffered unheard of privations and tortures. Yet at this very
time the United States kept a consul in Algiers, and maintained
friendly relations with the Dey. Indeed, a historian writing in 1795
applauds the American Government for the care it took of its citizens
enslaved in Algiers, by providing each with a suit of clothing yearly!

But the continued aggressions and extortionate demands of the Barbary
powers became at last unbearable. The expedition to the Mediterranean,
under Commodore Dale, was but the premonitory muttering before the
storm. Dale returned to the United States in December, 1801, and his
report led to the organization of the naval expedition that was to
finally crush the piratical powers of Barbary.




CHAPTER XVI.

     MORE VIGOROUS POLICY. -- COMMODORE MORRIS SENT TO THE
     MEDITERRANEAN. -- PORTER'S CUTTING-OUT EXPEDITION. --
     COMMODORE PREBLE SENT TO THE MEDITERRANEAN. -- HIS ENCOUNTER
     WITH A BRITISH MAN-OF-WAR. -- THE LOSS OF THE
     "PHILADELPHIA." -- DECATUR'S DARING ADVENTURE.


The return of Commodore Dale from the Mediterranean, and the reports
which he brought of the continued aggressions and insolence of the
Barbary powers, made a very marked change in the temper of the people
of the United States. Early in 1802 Congress passed laws, which,
though not in form a formal declaration of war, yet permitted the
vigorous prosecution of hostilities against Tripoli, Algiers, or any
other of the Barbary powers. A squadron was immediately ordered into
commission for the purpose of chastising the corsairs, and was put
under the command of Commodore Morris. The vessels detailed for this
service were the "Chesapeake," thirty-eight; "Constellation,"
thirty-eight; "New York," thirty-six; "John Adams," twenty-eight;
"Adams," twenty-eight; and "Enterprise," twelve. Some months were
occupied in getting the vessels into condition for sea; and while the
"Enterprise" started in February for the Mediterranean, it was not
until September that the last ship of the squadron followed her. It
will be remembered that the "Philadelphia" and "Essex," of Dale's
squadron, had been left in the Mediterranean; and as the "Boston,"
twenty-eight, had been ordered to cruise in those waters after
carrying United States Minister Livingstone to France, the power of
the Western Republic was well supported before the coast-line of
Barbary.

The "Enterprise" and the "Constellation" were the first of the
squadron to reach the Mediterranean, and they straightway proceeded to
Tripoli to begin the blockade of that port. One day, while the
"Constellation" was lying at anchor some miles from the town, the
lookout reported that a number of small craft were stealing along,
close in shore, and evidently trying to sneak into the harbor.
Immediately the anchor was raised, and the frigate set out in pursuit.
The strangers proved to be a number of Tripolitan gunboats, and for a
time it seemed as though they would be cut off by the swift-sailing
frigate. As they came within range, the "Constellation" opened a rapid
and well-directed fire, which soon drove the gunboats to protected
coves and inlets in the shore. The Americans then lowered their boats
with the intention of engaging the enemy alongshore, but at this
moment a large body of cavalry came galloping out from town to the
rescue. The Yankees, therefore, returned to their ship, and, after
firing a few broadsides at the cavalry, sailed away.

Thereafter, for nearly a year, the record of the American squadron in
the Mediterranean was uneventful. Commodore Morris showed little
disposition to push matters to an issue, but confined his operations
to sailing from port to port, and instituting brief and imperfect
blockades.

In April, 1803, the squadron narrowly escaped being seriously weakened
by the loss of the "New York." It was when this vessel was off Malta,
on her way to Tripoli in company with the "John Adams" and the
"Enterprise." The drums had just beat to grog; and the sailors, tin
cup in hand, were standing in a line on the main deck waiting their
turns at the grog-tub. Suddenly a loud explosion was heard, and the
lower part of the ship was filled with smoke.

"The magazine is on fire," was the appalling cry; and for a moment
confusion reigned everywhere. All knew that the explosion must have
been near the magazine. There was no one to command, for at the grog
hour the sailors are left to their own occupations. So the confusion
spread, and there seemed to be grave danger of a panic, when Capt.
Chauncey came on deck. A drummer passed hurriedly by him.

"Drummer, beat to quarters!" was the quick, sharp command of the
captain. The drummer stopped short, and in a moment the resonant roll
of the drum rose above the shouts and the tramping of feet. As the
well-known call rose on the air, the men regained their self-control,
and went quietly to their stations at the guns, as though preparing to
give battle to an enemy.

When order had been restored, Capt. Chauncey commanded the boats to be
lowered; but the effect of this was to arouse the panic again. The
people rushed from the guns, and crowded out upon the bowsprit, the
spritsail-yard, and the knightheads. Some leaped into the sea, and
swam for the nearest vessel. All strove to get as far from the
magazine as possible. This poltroonery disgusted Chauncey.

"Volunteers, follow me," he cried. "Remember, lads, it's just as well
to be blown through three decks as one."

So saying he plunged down the smoky hatchway, followed by Lieut. David
Porter and some other officers. Blinded and almost stifled by the
smoke, they groped their way to the seat of the danger. With wet
blankets, and buckets of water, they began to fight the flames. As
their efforts began to meet with success, one of the officers went on
deck, and succeeded in rallying the men, and forming two lines of
water-carriers. After two hours' hard work, the ship was saved.

The explosion was a serious one, many of the bulkheads having been
blown down, and nineteen officers and men seriously injured, of whom
fourteen died. It came near leading to a still more serious blunder;
for, when the flames broke out, the quartermaster was ordered to hoist
the signal, "A fire on board." In his trepidation he mistook the
signal, and announced, "A mutiny on board." Seeing this, Capt. Rodgers
of the "John Adams" beat his crew to quarters, and with shotted guns
and open ports took up a raking position astern of the "New York,"
ready to quell the supposed mutiny. Luckily he discovered his error
without causing loss of life.

For a month after this incident, the ships were detained at Malta
making repairs; but, near the end of May, the "John Adams," "Adams,"
"New York," and "Enterprise" took up the blockade of Tripoli. One
afternoon a number of merchant vessels succeeded in evading the
blockaders, and though cut off from the chief harbor of the town, yet
took refuge in the port of Old Tripoli. They were small lanteen-rigged
feluccas of light draught; and they threaded the narrow channels, and
skimmed over shoals whither the heavy men-of-war could not hope to
follow them. Scarcely had they reached the shore when preparations
were made for their defence against any cutting-out party the
Americans might send for their capture. On the shore near the spot
where the feluccas were beached, stood a heavy stone building, which
was taken possession of by a party of troops hastily despatched from
the city. The feluccas were laden with wheat, packed in sacks; and
these sacks were taken ashore in great numbers, and piled up on either
side of the great building so as to form breastworks. So well were the
works planned, that they formed an almost impregnable fortress. Behind
its walls the Tripolitans stood ready to defend their stranded
vessels.

That night Lieut. Porter took a light boat, and carefully reconnoitred
the position of the enemy. He was discovered, and driven away by a
heavy fire of musketry, but not before he had taken the bearings of
the feluccas and their defences. The next morning he volunteered to go
in and destroy the boats, and, having obtained permission, set out,
accompanied by Lieut. James Lawrence and a strong party of sailors.
There was no attempt at concealment or surprise. The Americans pushed
boldly forward, in the teeth of a heavy fire from the Tripolitans. No
attempt was made to return the fire, for the enemy was securely posted
behind his ramparts. The Yankees could only bend to their oars, and
press forward with all possible speed. At last the beach was reached,
and boats-prows grated upon the pebbly sand. Quickly the jackies
leaped from their places; and while some engaged the Tripolitans,
others, torch in hand, clambered upon the feluccas, and set fire to
the woodwork and the tarred cordage. When the flames had gained some
headway, the incendiaries returned to their boats, and made for the
squadron again, feeling confident that the Tripolitans could do
nothing to arrest the conflagration. But they had underestimated the
courage of the barbarians; for no sooner had the boats pushed off,
than the Tripolitans rushed down to the shore, and strained every
muscle for the preservation of their ships. The men-of-war rained
grape-shot upon them; but they persevered, and before Porter and his
followers regained their ships, the triumphant cries of the
Tripolitans gave notice the flames were extinguished. Porter had been
severely wounded in the thigh, and twelve or fifteen of his men had
been killed or wounded; so that the failure of the expedition to fully
accomplish its purpose was bitterly lamented. The loss of the enemy
was never definitely ascertained, though several were seen to fall
during the conflict. On both sides the most conspicuous gallantry was
shown; the fighting was at times almost hand to hand, and once,
embarrassed by the lack of ammunition, the Tripolitans seized heavy
stones, and hurled them down upon their assailants.

For some weeks after this occurrence, no conflict took place between
the belligerents. Commodore Morris, after vainly trying to negotiate a
peace with Tripoli, sailed away to Malta, leaving the "John Adams" and
the "Adams" to blockade the harbor. To them soon returned the
"Enterprise," and the three vessels soon after robbed the Bey of his
largest corsair.

On the night of the 21st of June, an unusual commotion about the
harbor led the Americans to suspect that an attempt was being made to
run the blockade. A strict watch was kept; and, before morning, the
"Enterprise" discovered a large cruiser sneaking along the coast
toward the harbor's mouth. The Tripolitan was heavy enough to have
blown the Yankee schooner out of the water; but, instead of engaging
her, she retreated to a small cove, and took up a favorable position
for action. Signals from the "Enterprise" soon brought the other
United States vessels to the spot; while in response to rockets and
signal guns from the corsair, a large body of Tripolitan cavalry came
galloping down the beach, and a detachment of nine gunboats came to
the assistance of the beleaguered craft.

No time was lost in manoeuvring. Taking up a position within
point-blank range, the "John Adams" and the "Enterprise" opened fire
on the enemy, who returned it with no less spirit. For forty-five
minutes the cannonade was unabated. The shot of the American gunners
were seen to hull the enemy repeatedly, and at last the Tripolitans
began to desert their ship. Over the rail and through the open ports
the panic-stricken corsairs dropped into the water. The shot of the
Yankees had made the ship's deck too hot a spot for the Tripolitans,
and they fled with great alacrity. When the last had left the ship,
the "John Adams" prepared to send boats to take possession of the
prize. But at this moment a boat-load of Tripolitans returned to the
corsair; and the Americans, thinking they were rallying, began again
their cannonade. Five minutes later, while the boat's-crew was still
on the Tripolitan ship, she blew up. The watchers heard a sudden
deafening roar; saw a volcanic burst of smoke; saw rising high above
the smoke the main and mizzen masts of the shattered vessel, with the
yards, rigging, and hamper attached. When the smoke cleared away, only
a shapeless hulk occupied the place where the proud corsair had so
recently floated. What caused the explosion, cannot be told. Were it
not for the fact that many of the Tripolitans were blown up with the
ship, it might be thought that she had been destroyed by her own
people.

After this encounter, the three United States vessels proceeded to
Malta. Here Commodore Morris found orders for his recall, and he
returned to the United States in the "Adams." In his place Commodore
Preble had been chosen to command the naval forces; and that officer,
with the "Constitution," forty-four, arrived in the Mediterranean in
September, 1802. Following him at brief intervals came the other
vessels of his squadron,--the "Vixen" twelve, "Siren" sixteen, and
"Argus" sixteen; the "Philadelphia" thirty-eight, and the "Nautilus"
twelve, having reached the Mediterranean before the commodore. Three
of these vessels were commanded by young officers, destined to win
enduring fame in the ensuing war,--Stephen Decatur, William
Bainbridge, and Richard Somers.

Before the last vessel of this fleet reached the Mediterranean, a
disaster had befallen one of the foremost vessels, which cost the
United States a good man-of-war, and forced a ship's crew of Yankee
seamen to pass two years of their lives in the cells of a Tripolitan
fortress. This vessel was the "Philadelphia," Capt. Bainbridge. She
had reached the Mediterranean in the latter part of August, and
signalled her arrival by overhauling and capturing the cruiser
"Meshboha," belonging to the emperor of Morocco. With the cruiser was
a small brig, which proved to be an American merchantman; and in her
hold were found the captain and seven men, tied hand and foot. Morocco
was then ostensibly on friendly terms with the United States, and
Bainbridge demanded of the captain of the cruiser by what right he had
captured an American vessel. To this the Moor returned, that he had
done so, anticipating a war which had not yet been declared.

"Then, sir," said Bainbridge sternly, "I must consider you as a
pirate, and shall treat you as such. I am going on deck for fifteen
minutes. If, when I return, you can show me no authority for your
depredations upon American commerce, I shall hang you at the
yard-arm."

So saying, Bainbridge left the cabin. In fifteen minutes he returned,
and, throwing the cabin doors open, stepped in with a file of marines
at his heels. In his hand he held his watch, and he cast upon the Moor
a look of stern inquiry. Not a word was said, but the prisoner
understood the dread import of that glance. Nervously he began to
unbutton the voluminous waistcoats which encircled his body, and from
an inner pocket of the fifth drew forth a folded paper. It was a
commission directing him to make prizes of all American craft that
might come in his path. No more complete evidence of the treachery of
Morocco could be desired. Bainbridge sent the paper to Commodore
Preble, and, after stopping at Gibraltar a day or two, proceeded to
his assigned position off the harbor of Tripoli.

In the latter part of October, the lookout on the "Philadelphia" spied
a vessel running into the harbor, and the frigate straightway set out
in chase. The fugitive showed a clean pair of heels; and as the shots
from the bow-chasers failed to take effect, and the water was
continually shoaling before the frigate's bow, the helm was put hard
down, and the frigate began to come about. But just at that moment she
ran upon a shelving rock, and in an instant was hard and fast aground.

The Americans were then in a most dangerous predicament. The sound of
the firing had drawn a swarm of gunboats out of the harbor of Tripoli,
and they were fast bearing down upon the helpless frigate. Every
possible expedient was tried for the release of the ship, but to no
avail. At last the gunboats, discovering her helpless condition,
crowded so thick about her that there was no course open but to
strike. And so, after flooding the magazine, throwing overboard all
the small-arms, and knocking holes in the bottom of the ship,
Bainbridge reluctantly surrendered.

Hardly had the flag touched the deck, when the gunboats were
alongside. If the Americans expected civilized treatment, they were
sadly mistaken, for an undisciplined rabble came swarming over the
taffrail. Lockers and chests were broken open, storerooms ransacked,
officers and men stripped of all the articles of finery they were
wearing. It was a scene of unbridled pillage, in which the Tripolitan
officers were as active as their men. An officer being held fast in
the grasp of two of the Tripolitans, a third would ransack his
pockets, and strip him of any property they might covet. Swords,
watches, jewels, and money were promptly confiscated by the captors;
and they even ripped the epaulets from the shoulders of the officers'
uniforms. No resistance was made, until one of the pilferers tried to
tear from Bainbridge an ivory miniature of his young and beautiful
wife. Wresting himself free, the captain knocked down the vandal, and
made so determined a resistance that his despoilers allowed him to
keep the picture.

When all the portable property was in the hands of the victors, the
Americans were loaded into boats, and taken ashore. It was then late
at night; but the captives were marched through the streets to the
palace of the Bashaw, and exhibited to that functionary. After
expressing great satisfaction at the capture, the Bashaw ordered the
sailors thrown into prison, while the officers remained that night as
his guests. He entertained them with an excellent supper, but the next
morning they were shown to the gloomy prison apartments that were
destined to be their home until the end of the war. Of their life
there we shall have more to say hereafter.

While this disaster had befallen the American cause before Tripoli,
Commodore Preble in the flag-ship "Constitution," accompanied by the
"Nautilus," had reached Gibraltar. There he found Commodore Rodgers,
whom he was to relieve, with the "New York" and the "John Adams."
Hardly had the commodore arrived, when the case of the captured
Morocco ship "Meshboha" was brought to his attention; and he
straightway went to Tangier to request the emperor to define his
position with regard to the United States. Though the time of
Commodore Rodgers on the Mediterranean station had expired, he
consented to accompany Preble to Tangier; and the combined squadrons
of the two commodores had so great an effect upon the emperor, that he
speedily concluded a treaty. Commodore Rodgers then sailed for the
United States, and Preble began his preparations for an active
prosecution of the war with Tripoli.

It was on the 31st of October that the "Philadelphia" fell into the
hands of the Tripolitans, but it was not until Nov. 27 that the news
of the disaster reached Commodore Preble and the other officers of the
squadron. Shortly after the receipt of the news, the commodore
proceeded with his flag-ship, accompanied by the "Enterprise," to
Tripoli, to renew the blockade which had been broken by the loss of
the "Philadelphia."

It was indeed high time that some life should be infused into the war
with Tripoli. Commodore Dale had been sent to the Mediterranean with
instructions that tied him hand and foot. Morris, who followed him,
was granted more discretion by Congress, but had not been given the
proper force. Now that Preble had arrived with a sufficient fleet,
warlike instructions, and a reputation for dash unexcelled by that of
any officer in the navy, the blue-jackets looked for some active
service. Foreign nations were beginning to speak scornfully of the
harmless antics of the United States fleet in the Mediterranean, and
the younger American officers had fought more than one duel with
foreigners to uphold the honor of the American service. They now
looked to Preble to give them a little active service. An incident
which occurred shortly after the arrival of the "Constitution" in the
Bay of Gibraltar convinced the American officers that their commodore
had plenty of fire and determination in his character.

One night the lookouts reported a large vessel alongside, and the hail
from the "Constitution" brought only a counter-hail from the stranger.
Both vessels continued to hail without any answer being returned, when
Preble came on deck. Taking the trumpet from the hand of the
quartermaster, he shouted,--

"I now hail you for the last time. If you do not answer, I'll fire a
shot into you."

"If you fire, I'll return a broadside," was the reply.

"I'd like to see you do it. I now hail you for an answer. What ship is
that?"

"This is H. B. M. ship 'Donegal,' eighty-four; Sir Richard Strachan,
an English commodore. Send a boat aboard."

"This is the United States ship 'Constitution,' forty-four," answered
Preble, in high dudgeon; "Edward Preble, an American commodore; and
I'll be d--d if I send a boat on board of any ship. Blow your matches,
boys!"

The Englishman saw a conflict coming, and sent a boat aboard with
profuse apologies. She was really the frigate "Maidstone," but being
in no condition for immediate battle had prolonged the hailing in
order to make needed preparations.

On the 23d of December, while the "Constitution" and "Enterprise" were
blockading Tripoli, the latter vessel overhauled and captured the
ketch "Mastico," freighted with female slaves that were being sent by
the Bashaw of Tripoli to the Porte, as a gift. The capture in itself
was unimportant, save for the use made of the ketch later.

The vessels of the blockading squadron, from their station outside the
bar, could see the captured "Philadelphia" riding lightly at her
moorings under the guns of the Tripolitan batteries. Her captors had
carefully repaired the injuries the Americans had inflicted upon the
vessel before surrendering. Her foremast was again in place, the holes
in her bottom were plugged, the scars of battle were effaced, and she
rode at anchor as pretty a frigate as ever delighted the eye of a tar.

From his captivity Bainbridge had written letters to Commodore Preble,
with postscripts written in lemon-juice, and illegible save when the
sheet of paper was exposed to the heat. In these postscripts he urged
the destruction of the "Philadelphia." Lieut. Stephen Decatur, in
command of the "Enterprise," eagerly seconded these proposals, and
proposed to cut into the port with the "Enterprise," and undertake the
destruction of the captured ship. Lieut.-Commander Stewart of the
"Nautilus" made the same proposition; but Preble rejected both, not
wishing to imperil a man-of-war on so hazardous an adventure.

The commodore, however, had a project of his own which he communicated
to Decatur, and in which that adventurous sailor heartily joined. This
plan was to convert the captured ketch into a man-of-war, man her with
volunteers, and with her attempt the perilous adventure of the
destruction of the "Philadelphia." The project once broached was
quickly carried into effect. The ketch was taken into the service, and
named the "Intrepid." News of the expedition spread throughout the
squadron, and many officers eagerly volunteered their services. When
the time was near at hand, Decatur called the crew of the "Enterprise"
together, told them of the plan of the proposed expedition, pointed
out its dangers, and called for volunteers. Every man and boy on the
vessel stepped forward, and begged to be taken. Decatur chose
sixty-two picked men, and was about to leave the deck, when his steps
were arrested by a young boy who begged hard to be taken.

"Why do you want to go, Jack?" asked the commodore.

"Well, sir," said Jack, "you see, I'd kinder like to see the country."

The oddity of the boy's reason struck Decatur's fancy, and he told
Jack to report with the rest.

On the night of Feb. 3, 1804, the "Intrepid," accompanied by the
"Siren," parted company with the rest of the fleet, and made for
Tripoli. The voyage was stormy and fatiguing. More than seventy men
were cooped up in the little ketch, which had quarters scarcely for a
score. The provisions which had been put aboard were in bad condition,
so that after the second day they had only bread and water upon which
to live. When they had reached the entrance to the harbor of Tripoli,
they were driven back by the fury of the gale, and forced to take
shelter in a neighboring cove. There they remained until the 15th,
repairing damages, and completing their preparations for the attack.

The weather having moderated, the two vessels left their place of
concealment, and shaped their course for Tripoli. On the way, Decatur
gave his forces careful instructions as to the method of attack. The
Americans were divided into several boarding parties, each with its
own officer and work. One party was to keep possession of the upper
deck, another was to carry the gun-deck, a third should drive the
enemy from the steerage, and so on. All were to carry pistols in their
belts; but the fighting, as far as possible, was to be done with
cutlasses, so that no noise might alarm the enemy in the batteries,
and the vessels in the port. One party was to hover near the
"Philadelphia" in a light boat, and kill all Tripolitans who might try
to escape to the shore by swimming. The watchword for the night was
"Philadelphia."

About noon, the "Intrepid" came in sight of the towers of Tripoli.
Both the ketch and the "Siren" had been so disguised that the enemy
could not recognize them, and they therefore stood boldly for the
harbor. As the wind was fresh, Decatur saw that he was likely to make
port before night; and he therefore dragged a cable and a number of
buckets astern to lessen his speed, fearing to take in sail, lest the
suspicions of the enemy should be aroused.

When within about five miles of the town, the "Philadelphia" became
visible. She floated lightly at her anchorage under the guns of two
heavy batteries. Behind her lay moored two Tripolitan cruisers, and
near by was a fleet of gunboats. It was a powerful stronghold into
which the Yankee blue-jackets were about to carry the torch.

About ten o'clock, the adventurers reached the harbor's mouth. The
wind had fallen so that the ketch was wafted slowly along over an
almost glassy sea. The "Siren" took up a position in the offing, while
the "Intrepid," with her devoted crew, steered straight for the
frigate. A new moon hung in the sky. From the city arose the soft low
murmur of the night. In the fleet all was still.

On the decks of the "Intrepid" but twelve men were visible. The rest
lay flat on the deck, in the shadow of the bulwarks or weather-boards.
Her course was laid straight for the bow of the frigate, which she was
to foul. When within a short distance, a hail came from the
"Philadelphia." In response, the pilot of the ketch answered, that the
ketch was a coaster from Malta, that she had lost her anchors in the
late gale, and had been nearly wrecked, and that she now asked
permission to ride by the frigate during the night. The people on the
frigate were wholly deceived, and sent out ropes to the ketch,
allowing one of the boats of the "Intrepid" to make a line fast to the
frigate. The ends of the ropes on the ketch were passed to the hidden
men, who pulled lustily upon them, thus bringing the little craft
alongside the frigate. But, as she came into clearer view, the
suspicions of the Tripolitans were aroused; and when at last the
anchors of the "Intrepid" were seen hanging in their places at the
catheads, the Tripolitans cried out that they had been deceived, and
warned the strangers to keep off. At the same moment the cry,
"Americanos! Americanos!" rang through the ship, and the alarm was
given.

By this time the ketch was fast to the frigate. "Follow me, lads,"
cried Decatur, and sprang for the chain-plates of the "Philadelphia."
Clinging there, he renewed his order to board; and the men sprang to
their feet, and were soon clambering on board the frigate. Lieut.
Morris first trod the deck of the "Philadelphia," Decatur followed
close after, and then the stream of men over the rail and through the
open ports was constant. Complete as was the surprise, the entire
absence of any resistance was astonishing. Few of the Turks had
weapons in their hands, and those who had fled before the advancing
Americans. On all sides the splashing of water told that the
affrighted Turks were trying to make their escape that way. In ten
minutes Decatur and his men had complete possession of the ship.

Doubtless at that moment the successful adventurers bitterly regretted
that they could not take out of the harbor the noble frigate they had
so nobly recaptured. But the orders of the commodore, and the dangers
of their own situation, left them no choice. Nothing was to be done
but to set fire to the frigate, and retreat with all possible
expedition. The combustibles were brought from the ketch, and piled
about the frigate, and lighted. So quickly was the work done, and so
rapidly did the flames spread, that the people who lit the fires in
the storerooms and cock-pit had scarce time to get on deck before
their retreat was cut off by the flames. Before the ketch could be
cast off from the sides of the frigate, the flames came pouring out of
the port-holes, and flaming sparks fell aboard the smaller vessel, so
that the ammunition which lay piled amidships was in grave danger of
being exploded. Axes and cutlasses were swung with a will; and soon
the bonds which held the two vessels together were cut, and the ketch
was pushed off. Then the blue-jackets bent to their sweeps, and soon
the "Intrepid" was under good headway.

"Now, lads," cried Decatur, "give them three cheers."

And the jackies responded with ringing cheers, that mingled with the
roar of the flames that now had the frame of the "Philadelphia" in
their control. Then they grasped their sweeps again, and the little
vessel glided away through a hail of grape and round shot from the
Tripolitan batteries and men-of-war. Though the whistle of the
missiles was incessant, and the splash of round-shot striking the
water could be heard on every side, no one in the boat was hurt; and
the only shot that touched the ketch went harmlessly through her
main-sail. As they pulled away, they saw the flames catch the rigging
of the "Philadelphia," and run high up the masts. Then the hatchways
were burst open, and great gusts of flame leaped out. The shotted guns
of the frigate were discharged in quick succession; one battery
sending its iron messengers into the streets of Tripoli, while the
guns on the other side bore upon Fort English. The angry glare of the
flames, and the flash of the cannon, lighted up the bay; while the
thunders of the cannonade, and the cries of the Tripolitans, told of
the storm that was raging.

The ruddy light of the burning ship bore good news to two anxious
parties of Decatur's friends. Capt. Bainbridge and the other American
officers whom the Tripolitans had captured with the "Philadelphia"
were imprisoned in a tower looking out upon the bay. The rapid thunder
of the cannonade on this eventful night awakened them; and they rushed
to their windows, to see the "Philadelphia," the Bashaw's boasted
prize, in flames. Right lustily they added their cheers to the general
tumult, nor ceased their demonstrations of joy until a surly guard
came and ordered them from the windows.

Far out to sea another band of watchers hailed the light of the
conflagration with joy. The "Siren" had gone into the offing when the
"Intrepid" entered the harbor, and there awaited with intense anxiety
the outcome of the adventure. After an hour's suspense, a rocket was
seen to mount into the sky, and burst over Tripoli. It was the signal
of success agreed upon. Boats were quickly lowered, and sent to the
harbor's mouth to meet and cover the retreat of the returning party.
Hardly had they left the side of the ship, when the red light in the
sky told that the "Philadelphia" was burning; and an hour later
Decatur himself sprang over the taffrail, and proudly announced his
victory.

Not a man had been lost in the whole affair. As the expedition had
been perfect in conception, so it was perfect in execution. The
adventure became the talk of all Europe. Lord Nelson, England's
greatest admiral, said of it, "It was the most bold and daring act of
the ages." And when the news reached the United States, Decatur,
despite his youth, was made a captain.




CHAPTER XVII.

     A STIRRING YEAR. -- THE BOMBARDMENT OF TRIPOLI. -- DECATUR'S
     HAND-TO-HAND FIGHT. -- LIEUT. TRIPPE'S BRAVERY. -- LIEUT.
     SPENCE'S BOLD DEED. -- SOMERS'S NARROW ESCAPE. -- THE
     FLOATING MINE. -- THE FATAL EXPLOSION. -- CLOSE OF THE WAR.
     -- THE END.


Decatur's brilliant exploit set the key-note for the year 1804; and,
for the remainder of that year, the Americans carried on the war with
no less spirit and dash. A high degree of daring had been infused into
the men by so notable an example; and long before the year was out,
the blue-jackets began to consider themselves invincible, and were
ready to undertake any exploit for which their services might be
required.

The lesser events of the year, we must pass over hastily. The
maintenance of the blockade of Tripoli led to one or two slight
actions, and an occasional capture of little consequence. Thus, in
March, the "Siren" captured the "Transfer," privateer, which was
trying to run the blockade. A month or two later, a coasting felucca,
loaded with supplies, was chased ashore near Tripoli, and two boats'
crews were sent to take possession of her. The Tripolitans, as usual,
sent out a body of cavalry to protect the felucca, and the Americans
were driven off. Thereupon the American blockading squadron took up a
position within range, and threw solid shot into the felucca until she
was a complete wreck. Nor did the Tripolitan cavalry escape without a
shot or two.

But while the smaller vessels of the Mediterranean squadron were
enforcing the blockade before Tripoli, Commodore Preble, with the
flag-ship and the larger vessels, was at Malta preparing for a
vigorous attack upon the city of the Bashaw itself. He had added to
the fleet he had brought with him from the United States two
bomb-vessels and six gunboats. He had also added somewhat to the
armament of the "Constitution," and now proposed to try the effect
upon Tripoli of a vigorous bombardment. By the 21st of July, the
commodore was able to leave Malta with his fleet, fully prepared for
active hostilities.

Tripoli was then defended by heavy batteries mounting a hundred and
fifteen guns. In the harbor were moored nineteen gunboats, two
galleys, two schooners, and a brig. The available force under the
command of the Bashaw numbered not less than twenty-five thousand men.
It was no pygmy undertaking upon which the Americans had embarked.

On the 31st of August, 1804, the first attack was made; and though
only a bombardment of the town had been contemplated, there followed
one of the most desperate hand-to-hand naval battles recorded in
history.

It was a sultry midsummer day, and the white walls of the city of
Tripoli glared under the fierce rays of a tropical sun. A light breeze
stirred the surface of the water, and made life on the ships bearable.
Before this breeze the American squadron ran down towards the town.
All preparations had been made for a spirited bombardment; and as the
Americans drew near the shore, they saw that the Tripolitans had
suspected the attack, and had made ready for it.

The attacking forces formed into two lines, with the regular naval
vessels in the rear, and the gunboats and bomb-vessels in front. As
the vessels in the van were to bear the brunt of the battle, they were
manned by picked crews from the larger vessels, and had for their
officers the most daring spirits of the Mediterranean squadron. At
half-past two the firing commenced, and soon from every vessel in the
American line shells and shot were being thrown into the city of the
Bashaw. The Tripolitan batteries returned the fire with vigor, and
their gunboats pressed forward to drive the assailants back. At the
approach of the Tripolitan gunboats, the Americans diverted their aim
from the city, and, loading with grape and canister, turned upon
their foes a murderous fire. Upon the eastern division of the enemy's
gunboats, nine in number, Decatur led the four boats under his
command. The advance of the enemy was checked; but still the Americans
pressed on, until fairly within the smoke of the Tripolitans' guns.
Here the boats were held in position by the brawny sailors at the
sweeps, while the gunners poured grape and canister into the enemy.
Fearfully were the Americans outnumbered. They could hope for no help
from their friends in the men-of-war in the rear. They were hemmed in
on all sides by hostile gunboats, more strongly manned, and heavier in
metal, than they. They were outnumbered three to one; for gunboat No.
3, which had belonged to Decatur's division, had drawn out of the
fight in obedience to a signal for recall, which had been displayed by
mistake on the "Constitution." Then Decatur displayed his desperate
courage. Signalling to his companions to close with their adversaries
and board, he laid his vessel alongside the nearest gunboat; and in a
trice every American of the crew was swarming over the enemy's
bulwarks. Taken by surprise, the Turks retreated. The gunboat was
divided down the centre by a long, narrow hatchway; and as the Yankees
came tumbling over the bulwarks, the Turks retreated to the farther
side. This gave Decatur time to rally his men; and, dividing them into
two parties, he sent one party around by the stern of the boat, while
he led a party around the bow. The Turks were dazed by the suddenness
of the attack, and cowed by the fearful effect of the Americans' last
volley before boarding. Their captain lay dead, with fourteen bullets
in his body. Many of the officers were wounded, and all the survivors
were penned into a narrow space by the two parties of blue-jackets.
The contest was short. Hampered by lack of room in which to wield
their weapons, the Turks were shot down or bayoneted. Many leaped over
the gunwale into the sea; many were thrown into the open hatchway; and
the remnant, throwing down their arms, pleaded piteously for quarter.
Decatur had no time to exult in his victory. Hastily securing his
prisoners below decks, and making his prize fast to his own vessel, he
bore down upon the Tripolitan next to leeward.

While shaping his course for this vessel, Decatur was arrested by a
hail from the gunboat which had been commanded by his brother James.
He was told that his brother had gallantly engaged and captured a
Tripolitan gunboat, but that, on going aboard of her after her flag
had been struck, he had been shot down by the cowardly Turk who was in
command. The murderer then rallied his men, drove the Americans away,
and carried his craft out of the battle.

Decatur's grief for the death of his brother gave way, for the time,
to his anger on account of the base treachery by which the victim met
his death. Casting prudence to the winds, he turned his boat's prow
towards the gunboat of the murderer, and, urging on his rowers, soon
laid the enemy aboard. Cutlass in hand, Decatur was first on the deck
of the enemy. Behind him followed close Lieut. Macdonough and nine
blue-jackets. Nearly forty Turks were ready to receive the boarders.
As the boarders came over the rail, they fired their pistols at the
enemy, and then sprang down, cutlass in hand. The Turks outnumbered
them five to one; but the Americans rallied in a bunch, and dealt
lusty blows right and left. At last, Decatur singled out a man whom he
felt sure was the commander, and the murderer of his brother. He was a
man of gigantic frame; his head covered with a scarlet cap, his face
half hidden by a bristly black beard. He was armed with a heavy
boarding-pike, with which he made a fierce lunge at Decatur. The
American parried the blow, and make a stroke at the pike, hoping to
cut off its point. But the force of the blow injured the Tripolitan's
weapon not a whit, while Decatur's cutlass broke short off at the
hilt. With a yell of triumph the Turk lunged again. Decatur threw up
his arm, and partially avoided the thrust; so that the pike pierced
his breast, but inflicted only a slight wound. Grappling the weapon,
Decatur tore it from the wound, wrested it from the Turk, and made a
lunge at him, which he avoided. The combatants then clinched and fell
to the deck, fiercely struggling for life and death. About them fought
their followers, who strove to aid their respective commanders.
Suddenly a Tripolitan officer, who had fought his way to a place above
the heads of the two officers, aimed a blow at the head of Decatur.
His victim was powerless to guard himself. One American sailor only
was at hand. This was Reuben James, a young man whose desperate
fighting had already cost him wounds in both arms, so that he could
not lift a hand to save his commander. But, though thus desperately
wounded, James had yet one offering to lay before his captain,--his
life. And he showed himself willing to make this last and greatest
sacrifice, by thrusting his head into the path of the descending
scimetar, and taking upon his own skull the blow intended for Decatur.
The hero fell bleeding to the deck; a pistol-shot from an American
ended the career of the Turk, and Decatur was left to struggle with
his adversary upon the deck.

But by this time the great strength of the Turkish captain was
beginning to tell in the death-struggle. His right arm was clasped
like an iron band around the American captain, while with his left
hand he drew from his belt a short _yataghan_, which he was about to
plunge into the throat of his foe. Decatur lay on his side, with his
eyes fixed upon the face of his foe. He saw the look of triumph flash
in the eyes of the Turk; he saw the gleaming steel of the _yataghan_
as it was drawn from its sheath. Mustering all his strength, he
writhed in the grasp of his burly foe. He wrested his left arm clear,
and caught the Turk's wrist just as the fatal blow was falling; then
with his right hand he drew from his pocket a small pistol. Pressing
this tightly against the back of his enemy, he fired. The ball passed
through the body of the Turk, and lodged in Decatur's clothing. A
moment later the Tripolitan's hold relaxed, and he fell back dead;
while Decatur, covered with his own blood and that of his foe, rose to
his feet, and stood amidst the pile of dead and wounded men that had
gathered during the struggle around the battling chiefs.

The fall of their captain disheartened the Tripolitans, and they
speedily threw down their arms. The prize was then towed out of the
line of battle; and, as by this time the American gunboats were
drawing off, Decatur took his prizes into the shelter of the
flag-ship.

While Decatur had been thus engaged, the gunboats under his command
had not been idle. Lieut. Trippe, in command of No. 6, had fought a
hand-to-hand battle that equalled that of Decatur. Trippe's plan of
attack had been the same as that of his leader. Dashing at the enemy,
he had let fly a round of grape and canister, then boarded in the
smoke and confusion. But his boat struck that of the enemy with such
force as to recoil; and Trippe, who had sprung into the enemy's
rigging, found himself left with but nine of his people, to confront
nearly twoscore Tripolitans. The Americans formed in a solid phalanx,
and held their ground bravely. Again the two commanders singled each
other out, and a fierce combat ensued. The Turk was armed with a
cutlass, while Trippe fought with a short boarding-pike. They fought
with caution, sparring and fencing, until each had received several
slight wounds. At last the Tripolitan struck Trippe a crushing blow on
the head. The American fell, half stunned, upon his knees; and at this
moment a second Tripolitan aimed a blow at him from behind, but was
checked and killed by an American marine. Rallying all his strength,
Trippe made a fierce thrust at his adversary. This time the sharp pike
found its mark, and passed through the body of the Tripolitan captain,
who fell to the deck. His men, seeing him fall, abandoned the contest,
and the Americans were soon bearing away their prize in triumph. But
in the excitement of victory no one thought to haul down the
Tripolitan flag, which-still flaunted defiant at the end of the long
lateen mast. So, when the prize came near the "Vixen," the American
man-of-war, mistaking her for an enemy, let fly a broadside, that
brought down flag, mast and all. Luckily no one was hurt, and the
broadside was not repeated.

But by this time the wind had veered round into an unfavorable
quarter, and the flag-ship showed a signal for the discontinuance of
the action. The gunboats and their prizes were taken in tow by the
schooners and brigs, and towed out of range of the enemy's shot. While
this operation was going on, the "Constitution" kept up a rapid fire
upon the shore batteries, and not until the last of the smaller craft
was out of range, did she turn to leave the fray. As she came about, a
shot came in one of her stern-ports, struck a gun near which Commodore
Preble was standing, broke to pieces, and scattered death and wounds
about.

When the squadron had made an offing, Preble hoisted a signal for the
commanders to come aboard the flag-ship, and make their reports. He
was sorely disappointed in the outcome of the fray, and little
inclined to recognize the conspicuous instances of individual
gallantry shown by his officers. He had set his heart upon capturing
the entire fleet of nine Tripolitan gunboats, and the escape of six of
them had roused his naturally irascible disposition to fury. As he
stalked his quarter-deck, morose and silent, Decatur came aboard. The
young officer still wore the bloody, smoke-begrimed uniform in which
he had grappled with the Turk, his face was begrimed with powder, his
hands and breast covered with blood. As he walked to the quarter-deck,
he was the centre of observation of all on the flag-ship. Stepping up
to the commodore, he said quietly,--

"Well, commodore, I have brought you out three of the gunboats."

Preble turned upon him fiercely, seized him with both hands by the
collar, and shaking him like a schoolboy, snarled out,--

"Ay, sir, why did you not bring me more?"

The blood rushed to Decatur's face. The insult was more than he could
bear. His hand sought his dagger, but the commodore had left the
quarter-deck. Turning on his heel, the outraged officer walked to the
side, and called his boat, determined to leave the ship at once. But
the officers crowded about him, begging him to be calm, and reminding
him of the notoriously quick temper of the commodore. While they
talked, there came a cabin steward with a message. "The commodore
wishes to see Capt. Decatur below." Decatur hesitated a moment, then
obeyed. Some time passed, but he did not re-appear on deck. The
officers became anxious, and at last, upon some pretext, one sought
the commodore's cabin. There he found Preble and Decatur, sitting
together, friendly, but both silent, and in tears. The apology had
been made and accepted.

There is one humble actor in the first attack upon Tripoli, whom we
cannot abandon without a word. This is Reuben James. That heroic young
sailor quickly recovered from the bad wound he received when he
interposed his own head to save his commander's life. One day Decatur
called him aft, and publicly asked him what could be done to reward
him for his unselfish heroism. The sailor was embarrassed and
nonplussed. He rolled his quid of tobacco in his mouth, and scratched
his head, without replying. His shipmates were eager with advice.
"Double pay, Jack: the old man will refuse you nothing;" "a
boatswain's berth;" "a pocket-full of money and shore leave," were
among the suggestions. But James put them aside. He had decided.

"If you please, sir," said he, "let somebody else hand out the
hammocks to the men when they are piped down. That is a sort of
business that I don't exactly like."

The boon was granted; and ever afterwards, when the crew was piped to
stow away hammocks, Reuben James sauntered about the decks with his
hands in his pockets, the very personification of elegant leisure.

For modesty, the request of the preserver of Decatur is only equalled
by that of the sailor who decided the battle between the "Bon Homme
Richard" and the "Serapis." He had stationed himself on the yard-arm,
and was dropping hand-grenades upon the deck of the "Serapis." At last
a well-aimed grenade set fire to some powder on the enemy's ship, and
virtually decided the day in favor of the Americans. When asked by
Paul Jones what he would have as a reward for this great service, he
suggested double rations of grog for the next week as the proper
recompense. This he got, and no more.

But to return to the American fleet before Tripoli. Four days were
spent in repairing damages, and on the 7th of August a second attack
was made upon the town. The disposition of the American forces was
much the same as on the occasion of the first attack, although the
Americans were re-enforced by the three captured gunboats. The
fighting was confined to long-range cannonading; for the enemy had
been taught a lesson, and was afraid to try conclusions hand to hand
with the Americans. About three o'clock in the afternoon, a tremendous
explosion drew the gaze of every one to the spot where gunboat No. 8
had been anchored. At first only a dense mass of smoke, with the water
surrounding it littered with wreckage, was to be seen. When the smoke
cleared away, the extent of the disaster was evident. The gunboat had
blown up. Her bow alone remained above water, and there a handful of
plucky men were loading the great twenty-six-pound cannon that formed
her armament. Lieut. Spence commanded the gunners, and urged them on.

"Now, lads, be lively," he cried. "Let's get one shot at the Turks
before we sink."

Every ship in the squadron was cheering the devoted crew of No. 8.
From every vessel anxious eyes watched the men who thus risked their
lives for one shot. The water was rushing into the shattered hulk; and
just as Spence pulled the lanyard, and sent a cast-iron shot into
Tripoli, the wreck gave a lurch, and went down. Her crew was left
struggling in the water. Spence, who could not swim, saved himself by
clinging to an oar, while his men struck out for the nearer vessels,
and were soon receiving the congratulations of their comrades.

In this attack, Richard Somers, a most courageous and capable officer,
who a few weeks later met a tragic end, narrowly escaped death. He was
in command of gunboat No. 1, and while directing the attack stood
leaning against her flagstaff. He saw a shot flying in his direction.
Involuntarily he ducked his head, and the next instant the flying
shot cut away the flagstaff just above him. When the action was over,
Lieut. Somers stood by the pole, and found that the shot had cut it at
the exact height of his chin.

After firing for about three hours, the American squadron drew off.
Little had been accomplished, for the stone walls and fortresses of
Tripoli were not to be damaged very greatly by marine artillery. The
Americans themselves had suffered seriously. Their killed and wounded
amounted to eighteen men. They had lost one gunboat by an explosion,
and all the vessels had suffered somewhat from the Tripolitan fire.

That night the Americans were gladdened by the arrival of the frigate
"John Adams," bringing letters and news from home. She brought also
the information that re-enforcements were coming. Accordingly Preble
determined to defer any further attack upon Tripoli until the arrival
of the expected vessels. In the mean time he had several interviews
with the Bashaw upon the subject of peace; but, as the Turk would not
relinquish his claim of five hundred dollars ransom for each captive
in his hands, no settlement was reached.

While waiting for the re-enforcements, Preble continued his
preparations for another attack. The ships were put into fighting
trim, munition hauled over, and repeated and thorough reconnoissances
of the enemy's works made. It was while on the latter duty, that the
brig "Argus" narrowly escaped destruction. With Preble on board, she
stood into the harbor, and was just coming about before one of the
batteries, when a heavy shot raked her bottom, cutting several planks
half through. Had the shot been an inch higher, it would have sunk the
brig.

By the 24th of August, Preble's patience was exhausted; and, without
waiting longer for the expected squadron, he began an attack upon the
town. On the night of the 24th, a few shells were thrown into Tripoli,
but did little damage. Four days later, a more determined attack was
made, in which every vessel in the squadron took part. Two of the
enemy's gunboats were sunk; but with this exception little material
damage was done, though the Americans chose the most advantageous
positions, and fired fast and well. It was becoming evident that
men-of-war were no match for stone walls.

During this engagement, the American fleet came within range of the
Bashaw's palace, and the flying shot and shell drove that dignitary
and his suite to a bomb-proof dungeon. One heavy shot flew in at the
window of the cell in which Capt. Bainbridge was confined, and
striking the wall, brought down stones and mortar upon him as he lay
in bed, so that he was seriously bruised. But the American captain was
in no way daunted, and the next day wrote in sympathetic ink to
Preble, telling him to keep up his fire, for the Tripolitans were
greatly harassed by it.

On Sept. 3, yet another attack upon the town and fortress was made. As
in the foregoing instances, nothing was accomplished except the
throwing of a vast quantity of shot and shell. Capt. Bainbridge, in a
secret letter to Preble, reported, that of the shells he had seen
falling in the city very few exploded, and the damage done by them was
therefore very light. Preble investigated the matter, and found that
the fuse-holes of many of the shells had been stopped with lead, so
that no fire could enter. The shells had been bought in Sicily, where
they had been made to resist a threatened invasion by the French. It
is supposed that they had been thus ruined by French secret agents.

But, before this time, Commodore Preble, and the officers under his
command, had about reached the conclusion that Tripoli could not be
reduced by bombardment. Accordingly they cast about for some new
method of attack. The plan that was finally adopted proved unfortunate
in this instance, just as similar schemes for the reduction of
fortresses have prove futile throughout all history. Briefly stated,
the plan was to send a fire-ship, or rather a floating mine, into the
harbor, to explode before the walls of the fortress, and in the midst
of the enemy's cruisers.

The ketch "Intrepid," which had carried Decatur and his daring
followers out of the harbor of Tripoli, leaving the "Philadelphia"
burning behind them, was still with the fleet. This vessel was chosen,
and with all possible speed was converted into an "infernal," or
floating mine. "A small room, or magazine, had been planked up in the
hold of the ketch, just forward of her principal mast," writes
Fenimore Cooper. "Communicating with this magazine was a trunk, or
tube, that led aft to another room filled with combustibles. In the
planked room, or magazine, were placed one hundred barrels of
gunpowder in bulk; and on the deck, immediately above the powder, were
laid fifty thirteen-and-a-half-inch shells, and one hundred nine-inch
shells, with a large quantity of shot, pieces of kentledge, and
fragments of iron of different sorts. A train was laid in the trunk,
or tube, and fuses were attached in the proper manner. In addition to
this arrangement, the other small room mentioned was filled with
splinters and light wood, which, besides firing the train, were to
keep the enemy from boarding, as the flames would be apt to induce
them to apprehend an immediate explosion."

Such was the engine of death prepared. The plan of operations was
simply to put a picked crew on this floating volcano, choose a dark
night, take the "infernal" into the heart of the enemy's squadron,
fire it, and let the crew escape in boats as best they might.

The leadership of this desperate enterprise was intrusted to Lieut.
Richard Somers. Indeed, it is probable that the idea itself originated
with him, for a commanding officer would be little likely to assign a
subordinate a duty so hazardous. Moreover, there existed between
Decatur and Somers a generous rivalry. Each strove to surpass the
other; and since Decatur's exploit with the "Philadelphia," Somers had
been seeking an opportunity to win equal distinction. It is generally
believed, that, having conceived the idea of the "infernal," he
suggested it to Preble, and claimed for himself the right of
leadership.

But ten men and one officer were to accompany Mr. Somers on his
perilous trip. Yet volunteers were numerous, and only by the most
inflexible decision could the importunate ones be kept back. The
officer chosen was Lieut. Wadsworth of the "Constitution," and the men
were chosen from that ship and from the "Nautilus."

As the time for carrying out the desperate enterprise drew near,
Preble pointed out to the young commander the great danger of the
affair, and the responsibility that rested upon him. Particularly was
he enjoined not to permit the powder in the ketch to fall into the
hands of the Tripolitans, who at that time were short of ammunition.
One day, while talking with Somers, Preble burned a port-fire, or
slow-match, and, noting its time, asked Somers if he thought the boats
could get out of reach of the shells in the few minutes it was
burning.

"I think we can, sir," was the quiet response.

Something in the speaker's tone aroused Preble's interest, and he
said,--

"Would you like the port-fire shorter still?"

"I ask no port-fire at all," was the quiet reply.

At last the day of the adventure was at hand. It was Sept. 4, the day
following the last attack upon Tripoli. The sky was overcast and
lowering, and gave promise of a dark night. Fully convinced that the
time for action was at hand, Somers called together the handful of
brave fellows who were to follow him, and briefly addressed them. He
told them he wished no man to go with him who did not prefer being
blown up to being captured. For his part, he would much prefer such a
fate, and he wished his followers to agree with him. For answer the
brave fellows gave three cheers, and crowded round him, each asking to
be selected to apply the match. Somers then passed among the officers
and crew of the "Nautilus," shaking hands, and bidding each farewell.
There were few dry eyes in the ship that afternoon; for all loved
their young commander, and all knew how desperate was the enterprise
in which he had embarked.

It was after dusk when the devoted adventurers boarded the
powder-laden ketch, as she lay tossing at her anchorage. Shortly after
they had taken possession, a boat came alongside with Decatur and
Lieut. Stewart in the stern-sheets. The officers greeted their
comrades with some emotion. They were all about of an age, followed
one loved profession, and each had given proofs of his daring. When
the time came for them to part, the leave-taking was serious, but
tranquil. Somers took from his finger a ring, and breaking it into
four pieces, gave one to each of his friends. Then with hearty
handshakings, and good wishes for success, Decatur and Stewart left
their friends.

On the ketch was one man who had not been accepted as a volunteer.
This was Lieut. Israel of the "Constitution," who had smuggled himself
aboard. With this addition to his original force, Somers ordered sail
made, and the "Intrepid" turned her prow in the direction of the
Tripolitan batteries.

As far as the harbor's mouth, she was accompanied by the "Argus," the
"Vixen," and the "Nautilus." There they left her, and she pursued her
way alone. It was a calm, foggy night. A few stars could be seen
glimmering through the haze, and a light breeze ruffled the water, and
wafted the sloop gently along her course. From the three vessels that
waited outside the harbor's mouth, eager watchers with night-glasses
kept their gaze riveted upon the spectral form of the ketch, as she
slowly receded from their sight. Fainter and fainter grew the outline
of her sails, until at last they were lost to sight altogether. Then
fitful flashes from the enemy's batteries, and the harsh thunder of
the cannon, told that she had been sighted by the foe. The anxious
watchers paced their decks with bated breath. Though no enemy was near
to hear them, they spoke in whispers. The shadow of a great awe, the
weight of some great calamity, seemed crushing them.

"What was that?"

All started at the abrupt exclamation. Through the haze a glimmering
light had been seen to move rapidly along the surface of the water, as
though a lantern were being carried along a deck. Suddenly it
disappeared, as though dropped down a hatchway. A few seconds
passed,--seconds that seemed like hours. Then there shot up into the
sky a dazzling jet of fire. A roar like that of a huge volcano shook
earth and sea. The vessels trembled at their moorings. The concussion
of the air threw men upon the decks. Then the mast of the ketch, with
its sail blazing, was seen to rise straight into the air, and fall
back. Bombs with burning fuses flew in every direction. The distant
sound of heavy bodies falling into the water and on the rocks was
heard. Then all was still. Even the Tripolitan batteries were silent.

For a moment a great sorrow fell upon the Americans. Then came the
thought that Somers and his brave men might have left the ketch before
the explosion. All listened for approaching oars. Minutes lengthened
into hours, and still no sound was heard. Men hung from the sides of
the vessels, with their ears to the water, in the hopes of catching
the sound of the coming boats. But all was in vain. Day broke; the
shattered wreck of the "Intrepid" could be seen within the harbor, and
near it two injured Tripolitan gunboats. But of Somers and his brave
followers no trace could be seen, nor were they ever again beheld by
their companions.

To Capt. Bainbridge in his prison-cell came a Tripolitan officer,
several days later, asking him to go to a point of rocks, and view
some bodies thrown there by the waves. Thither Bainbridge went, and
was shown several bodies shockingly mutilated and burned. Though they
were doubtless the remains of some of the gallant adventurers, they
could not be identified.

The exact reason for this disaster can never be known. Many have
thought that Somers saw capture inevitable, and with his own hand
fired the fatal charge; others believed the explosion to be purely
accidental; while the last and most plausible theory is, that a shot
from the enemy's batteries penetrated the magazine, and ended the
career of the "Intrepid" and her gallant crew. But however vexed the
controversy over the cause of the explosion, there has been no denial
of the gallantry of its victims. The names of all are honored in naval
annals, while that of Somers became a battle-cry, and has been borne
by some of the most dashing vessels of the United States navy.

It may be said that this episode terminated the war with Tripoli.
Thereafter it was but a series of blockades and diplomatic
negotiations. Commodore Barron relieved Preble, and maintained the
blockade, without any offensive operations, until peace was signed in
June, 1805. The conditions of that peace cannot be too harshly
criticised. By it the United States paid sixty thousand dollars for
American prisoners in the hands of the Bashaw, thus yielding to
demands for ransom which no civilized nation should for a moment have
considered. The concession was all the more unnecessary, because a
native force of insurrectionists, re-enforced by a few Americans, was
marching upon Tripoli from the rear, and would have soon brought the
Bashaw to terms. But it was not the part of the navy to negotiate the
treaty. That rested with the civilians. The duty of the blue-jackets
had been to fight for their country's honor; and that they had
discharged this duty well, no reader of these pages can deny.




PART II




BLUE-JACKETS OF 1812.

CHAPTER I.

     THE GATHERING OF THE WAR-CLOUD. -- THE REVOLUTION ENDED, BUT
     THE WAR FOR INDEPENDENCE YET UNFOUGHT. -- OUTRAGES UPON
     AMERICAN SAILORS. -- THE RIGHT OF SEARCH. -- IMPRESSMENT. --
     BOYHOOD OF COMMODORE PORTER. -- EARLY DAYS OF COMMODORES
     PERRY AND BARNEY. -- BURNING A PRIVATEER. -- THE EMBARGO. --
     WAR INEVITABLE.


On a bright November afternoon in the year 1783, the streets of New
York City, bordering on the bay, were crowded with excited people,
pushing and elbowing each other rudely, and all pressing down to the
water-side, where was collected a huge crowd, looking anxiously across
the broad waters of the noble bay, to a spot where lay anchored a
large squadron of ships. The taut cordage, the trimly squared yards,
and the rows of cannon protruding from the open ports made it evident
to the veriest landsman that many of the ships were men-of-war; while
the scarlet flags crossed by the emblem of St. George, flaunting from
the peak of every vessel, declared the allegiance of the fleet to the
monarch of Great Britain, against whose rule the hardy Colonists had
been for years waging a warfare, now to end in victory. Between the
ships and the landing-place of old Fort George, that then stood where
now extends the green sward of the Battery park, a fleet of long-boats
was actively plying; the long, swinging strokes of the blue-clad
sailors stamping them as men-o'-war's men beyond doubt. The
landing-place was thronged with troops, whose glistening muskets,
scarlet coats, gold trimmings, and waving plumes contrasted
beautifully with the bright blue jackets of the sailors, as file after
file of the soldiers boarded the boats, and were rowed away to the
waiting ships. The troops drawn up on the shore formed long lines of
scarlet against the green background of the bastions of Fort George.
The men standing at rest talked loudly to each other of the coming
voyage, and now and again shouted fiercely at some soberly clad
citizen who strolled too near the warlike ranks; for had not all the
sturdy citizens of New York come down to see the hated British
evacuate the city, forced out by the troops of Gen. Washington (plain
_Mr._ Washington, the British liked to call him)? The ragged gamins
scurried here and there, yelling ribald jests at the departing
soldiers; and the scarlet-coated troopers had hard work keeping down
their rising anger, as suggestive cries of "boiled lobsters" rose on
every side. Even the staid citizens could hardly conceal their
exultation, as they thought that with those soldiers departed forever
the rule of Great Britain over the Colonies. It was a quaint-looking
crowd that had gathered that day, at the end of the little town. The
sturdy mechanics and laborers, who were most numerous, were dressed in
tight leather or yellow buckskin breeches, checked shirts, and flaming
red flannel jackets. Their heads were covered with rusty felt hats,
cocked up at the sides into a triangular shape, and decorated with
feathers or bright buckles. On their feet were heavy leathern shoes,
fastened with huge brass buckles that covered the entire instep. Here
and there in the crowd stood a prosperous merchant or man of fashion,
whose garb, if less rough than that of his humbler fellow-citizen, was
no less odd and picturesque. At first sight, an observer might think
that all the men of New York were white-haired; but a closer
examination would show that the natural color of the hair was hid by
dense layers of white powder. The hair was done up in a short cue tied
by black ribbons, and on top of all rested a three-cornered cocked
hat, heavily laced with gold or silver braid. The coat was
light-colored, with a profusion of silver buttons, stamped with the
wearer's monogram, decorating the front. Over the shoulders hung a
short cape. The knee-breeches, marvellously tight, ended at the tops
of gaudy striped stockings, which in turn disappeared in the recesses
of pointed shoes adorned with gleaming buckles. The broad cuffs of the
coat-sleeves were heavily laden with lead, to keep them in proper
position.

[Illustration: Derelict.]

Such were the characteristics of the crowd that had assembled that day
to witness the closing scene of British domination in America. Even as
they stood there, they heard, faintly rising on the autumnal air, the
sound of the fife and drum, as the American troops came marching down
into the city, from their camp at the upper end of the island. And, as
the last boat-load of grenadiers pushes off from the shore, the crowd,
no longer restrained by the glittering bayonets, rushes down to the
water's edge, and hurls taunts and gibes after the retreating boats,
until the grizzled old soldiers curse the "Yankee rebels" fiercely,
under their mustaches, and beg the officers to give them a volley.

Now the advance guard of the little American army, with fifes
shrilling out the notes of "Yankee Doodle," comes marching down to the
fort. No gay trappings, scarlet or gold lace about these soldiers, but
ragged suits of homespun and homely flint-lock muskets, whose barrels
are better burnished within than without. They march quickly to the
water-front, and halt. The captain looks at the British squadron, now
getting under way, and then, with true soldierly instinct, flashes a
glance to the top of the flagstaff in the centre of the fort. His brow
contracts, he stamps his foot, and the soldiers and citizens who have
followed his glance break out into a cry of rage that rings far out
over the placid waters of the bay, and makes the tough old British
veterans chuckle grimly over the success of their little joke upon the
Yankees; for there, high above the heads of the wrathful crowd,
flaunting its scarlet folds over the roofs of the liberated city,
floats proudly the BRITISH FLAG.

"Tear it down!" The cry rises hoarsely from a thousand throats; and
the Colonial officer springs with glittering sword to cut the
halliards, but finds them cut away already, and the flag nailed to the
mast. Then a trim sailor-boy works his way through the crowd, and,
grasping the pole firmly, attempts to climb up, but soon slides down
ingloriously over the greasy surface, freshly slushed by the British
before their departure. The crowd yells in wrathful impotence; and a
few hot-headed youths spring forward, axe in hand, to bring down pole
and all to the earth. But the firm hand of the commanding officer
restrains them. He whispers a few words into their ears; and they
start briskly away, followed by a dozen or two of the steadily growing
crowd.

"Gen. Washington will be here soon," says the captain; "we must get
that rag down at once."

[Illustration: Cutting Away The Flag.]

In a few minutes the messengers return. They have been to a
neighboring hardware store, and startled the gray-haired old merchant
so that he stared vaguely at them through his spectacles, as they
fiercely demanded hammers, nails, and wooden cleats. Loaded with
these, they dash back to the scene of action; and again the sailor-boy
becomes the hero of the moment. With his pockets filled with cleats,
and his mouth stuffed with nails, he begins again his ascent of the
slippery staff. He nails cleat after cleat upon the pole, and step by
step mounts toward the top. At last he reaches the flag; and, with a
few quick jerks, it is torn from the pole, and thrown contemptuously
out into the air, to float down upon the crowd, and be torn to pieces
by curiosity seekers. Then the halliards are lowered, and soon the
flag of the young and struggling nation floats in the cool breeze;
while from the neighboring heights the cannon of the forts speak in
deep-mouthed salvos of applause, that mingle with the rejoicings of
the people, and do not cease until the ships of the enemy have passed
through the Narrows, and are out of sight and hearing. The British had
evacuated New York, and America had won her independence.

Not many years, however, had passed after this memorable event, when
the citizens not only of New York, but the people of all the United
States, began to find out that America had not won her true
independence, but merely a slight relief from the oppressions of Great
Britain. Already the nations of Europe were beginning to encroach upon
the rights and liberties of the infant nation. For this the States
were themselves greatly to blame. Nobly as they had fought in unison
to throw off the yoke of Great Britain, they fell into strife among
themselves as soon as the war was at an end, and by their quarrels and
bickerings led all the European nations to believe that the
contentious Colonies, like the Kilkenny cats, would end by destroying
each other. Such a nation could command little respect, and the
stronger powers were not slow to show their contempt for the United
States. American vessels, coming back to port, would report that a
British ship-of-war had halted them in mid-ocean, and seized American
sailors as suspected British deserters. Other American ships, sailing
full of hope from American ports, would never re-appear, and their
fate would be a mystery, until, after many months, some sailor
wandering home told of his ship's capture by a French privateer or
Tripolitan war vessel. For years a debasing tribute was paid to the
Bashaw of Tripoli, upon condition of his granting to American ships
the privileges of the sea, that are the undoubted rights of every
nation; yet even this compact was more often ignored than observed.
Small wonder was it that the sage old statesman, Benjamin Franklin, on
hearing a young man speak of the "glorious war for independence,"
responded gravely, "Say rather the war of the revolution: the war for
independence is yet to be fought."

In the year 1789, the States, after much debate and bickering, finally
ratified the document known as the Constitution of the United States.
While the work of the American Revolution was thus being completed,
and a new nation was being formed, events were transpiring on the
other side of the Atlantic that were destined to affect gravely the
growth of the new nation. The oppressed peasantry and laborers of
France, smarting under the wrongs of centuries, rose in a mighty wave,
and swept away the nobles, their masters. The royal head of King Louis
fell a prey to the remorseless spirit of the guillotine, and the reign
of terror in Paris began. Soon the roll of the drum was heard in every
European city, and the armies of every nation were on the march for
France. England was foremost in the fray; and the people of the United
States, seeing their old enemy at war with the country of Lafayette,
fired by generous enthusiasm, were ready to rush to the aid of their
old ally. But the wise prudence of their rulers restrained them; and
for the next twenty years the United States were neutrals, while all
the nations of Europe were plunged in war.

The first effect of this condition of affairs was most beneficial. As
neutrals, the ships of the United States could trade with all the
battling peoples; while any vessel flying a European flag was sure to
find an enemy somewhere on the broad seas, and suffer confiscation.
While France was giving her farmers and mechanics to follow in the
glorious footsteps of Napoleon, the industrious citizens of the United
States were reaping a rich reward in trade with the warring nation.
The farmers received the highest prices for their grain, the ingenious
mechanics of New England reaped fortunes from the sale of their wares,
and the shipyards were filled to their greatest capacity with the
graceful frames of fast clipper vessels destined for the trade with
Europe. In 1780 the shipping of the United States was confined to a
few coasting-vessels, and the American flag was seldom seen beyond the
Atlantic. Fifteen years later, the white sails of American ships
dotted every sea, and but few European ports did not show some trim
clipper floating in the harbor, bearing at her peak the stars and
stripes.

From Maine to Georgia the people were building ships, and manning
them. The vast forests resounded with the strokes of the woodman's
axe, getting out the timber; and the seaport towns were given over to
ship-wrights, who worked day and night at their craft. In New England
there sprung up a race of hardy seamen. Boys of twelve or fourteen ran
away to sea, made a coasting voyage or two, and, after a voyage to
some European port, became captains of ocean-going ships,--often
before they were twenty years of age. The people of the coastwise
towns of New England can tell of hundreds of such cases. There was
"Nat" Palmer of Stonington, who shipped when a boy of fourteen, and,
after four years' coasting, was made second mate of the brig
"Herselias," bound around Cape Horn, for seals. On his first voyage
the young mate distinguished himself by discovering the South Shetland
Islands, guided by the vague hints of a rival sealer, who knew of the
islands, and wished them preserved for his own trade, as the seals
swarm there by the hundred thousands. The discovery of these islands,
and the cargo of ten thousand skins brought home by the "Herselias,"
made young Palmer famous; and, at the age of twenty, he was put in
command of a sloop, and sent to the South Seas again. One day he found
his passage in the desired direction blocked by two long islands, with
a narrow opening between them. To go around the islands would have
been a long voyage; and the young captain headed his craft for the
opening, but soon found himself on the rocks. Luckily, the vessel
backed off, and the crew set about repairing damages. While thus
engaged, the great, blunt head of a whale was seen in the narrow
channel; and, after blowing a column of water high in the air, the
monster swam lazily through the strait. "If a whale can go through
that channel, I can," quoth "Cap'n Nat." And he forthwith did so.
Quick of observation, and prompt of action, the sailors of the United
States became the foremost seamen of the world, and guided their
little vessels over every known sea.

But the growing commerce of the United States was destined to meet a
series of checks, that seemed for a time likely to destroy it forever.
England, jealous of the encroachments of the Americans upon the broad
seas of which she had long called herself the mistress, began a series
of outrages upon American ships, and, not content with acting in open
hostility, incited the piratical rulers of Tripoli and Algiers to make
war upon American shipping. In this volume it is not my purpose to
tell of the means adopted by England to let the swarming ships of the
Barbary pirates out of the Mediterranean Sea, to prey upon the vessels
of the United States; nor do I intend to tell how, after peaceful
arguments had been exhausted, Decatur and Preble, with a fleet of
American vessels and a handful of fighting jack-tars, crossed the
ocean, and thrashed the pirates of the Mediterranean into subjection.
That may well be left for future consideration, and this chapter
devoted to a history of the acts of insolence and oppression on the
part of England, that finally forced the United States to declare war
against a power so vastly superior to them in wealth, population, and
military and naval strength.

The first great and crying outrage, protested against by the
statesmen, the newspapers, and the people of the United States, was
the so-called right of search. By this was meant the right claimed by
every British man-of-war to stop an American vessel on the high seas,
muster her crew on the forecastle, and seize and carry away any sailor
thought to be a native of Great Britain. This outrageous act was
committed time and time again by the commanders of British frigates,
who knew no easier way of filling up a short-handed crew than by
stopping some passing vessel flying the stars and stripes, and taking
from her the best-looking sailors of her crew. Hardly a week passed
without the arrival of a ship at New York, New London, or any of the
shipping towns of New England, bringing some such tale. The
merchant-vessel, skimming lightly over the ocean, at peace with all
the world, and with nothing to fear save the terrors of the storms,
against which the sturdy mariners knew so well how to guard, would be
suddenly halted by a shot from a frigate of a nation with whom the
United States had no quarrel. A hail from the frigate told the
American to come up into the wind, while a boat was sent aboard. Soon
a long-boat filled with man-o'-war's men, and with a beardless young
midshipman in the stern-sheets, came dancing over the water; and in a
minute or two a lieutenant, the middy, and a few sailors clambered
aboard the wondering merchantman. There was small ceremony about the
proceedings then.

"Muster your men aft," quoth the middy peremptorily; "and you'd better
be quick about it, too."

Perhaps the American captain protested,--they generally did,--and
talked about the peace between the nations, and the protection of his
flag; but his talk was usually of little avail.

"Get those man aft, and be quick about it," orders the British
officer. "You've got deserters from his Majesty's service in your
crew; and I'll have them. Do you want me to send the boat back for the
marines?"

The American crew came aft unwillingly, grumbling, and cursing his
Majesty's service under their breath, and formed a line before the
boarding officer. That worthy whispered a minute or two with the
boatswain and sailors who came aboard with him, and then, pointing out
one man, boldly claimed him as a British subject. American captains
declared that the man so chosen was generally the most ship-shape
sailor aboard; and indeed it seemed but natural that the English, in
filling out their crew, should choose the best. Sometimes the American
captain went on board the British ship, to protest against so summary
a draft upon his crew. In such a case he was usually received with
courtesy by the commander, but never did he regain his kidnapped
sailors. The commander trusted in every thing to his first lieutenant,
who boarded the merchantman; and that officer was thus made, in the
words of an English journalist, "at once accuser, witness, judge, and
captor."

The men thus pressed were expected to serve with all the zeal and
bravery of regularly enlisted sailors. The slightest sign of
hesitation or unwillingness was met with blows. A pressed man who
refused to serve was triced up, and lashed with the cat-o'-nine tails
until his back was cut to ribbons, and the blood spurted at every
blow. Few cared to endure such punishment twice. Yet the sailors taken
from the American ships lost no opportunity for showing their desire
to get out of the service into which they had been kidnapped.
Desertions from ships lying near the coast were of weekly occurrence,
although recaptured deserters were hanged summarily at the yard-arm.
Sailors who found no chance to desert made piteous appeals to the
American consuls in the ports at which they stopped, or wrote letters
to their friends at home, begging that something should be done to
release them from their enforced service. It was not the severity of
man-o'-war discipline that so troubled the poor fellows; many of them
were old man-o'-war's men, and all would have been glad of berths in
the United States navy; but the sight of the red flag of Great Britain
waving above their heads, and the thought that they were serving a
nation with which their country had just fought a bloody war, were
intolerable.

One "pressed man," on a British ship lying in the West Indies, managed
to write the following letter to a newspaper editor in New York, and,
after much planning, succeeded in mailing it.

                              Port Royal, Jamaica, June 30, 1811.

     Mr. Snowden,--I hope you will be so good as to publish these few
     lines. I, Edwin Bouldin, was impressed out of the barque
     "Columbus" of Elizabeth City, and was carried on board his
     Britannic Majesty's brig "Rhodian," in Montego Bay, commanded by
     Capt. Mowbary. He told me my protection was of no consequence,
     and he would have me whether or not. I was born in Baltimore, and
     served my time with Messrs. Smith & Buchanan. I hope my friends
     will do something for me to get my clearance; for I do not like
     to serve any other country but my own, which I am willing to
     serve. I am now captain of the forecastle, and stationed captain
     of a gun in the waist. I am treated very ill, because I will not
     enter. They request of me to go on board my country's ships to
     list men, which I refused to do, and was threatened to be
     punished for it.

          I remain a true citizen of the United States

                                        EDWIN BOULDIN.

Pathetic letters such as this appear often in the columns of the
newspapers published in the early part of this century; and are
usually accompanied by petitions from the relatives and friends of the
pressed man, begging that Congress take some action to secure American
sailors from such outrages. But year after year the practice went on,
and higher and higher grew the enmity between England and the United
States. Among the sailors who suffered impressment at the hands of the
British were many who afterward in the naval battles of the ensuing
war won ample revenge from the nation that had so abused their
liberties.

Most prominent of all these men was David Porter, who, from the humble
station of a cabin boy on his father's ship in 1796, rose in twenty
years to be commodore in the United States navy. The name of Porter is
one famous in the naval annals of the United States; and probably
there never existed a family in which the love for the life of a
fighting jack-tar was so strong as among these representative American
sailors. David Porter, sen., and Samuel Porter served the American
Colonies dashingly upon the sea in the Revolution. Of David Porter,
jun., we shall have much to say in this volume. Of his children the
eldest, William D., rose to the post of commodore, United States navy,
and died of wounds received in the civil war; Henry O. Porter was
first lieutenant of the "Hatteras" when she sunk before the fire of
the Confederate ship "Alabama;" Thomas Porter served in the Mexican
navy; Hambleton Porter died of yellow-fever while a midshipman in the
United States navy; Lieut. Theodoric Porter, U.S.A., was the first
officer killed in the Mexican war; and Admiral David D. Porter,
U.S.N., by virtue of his exploits on blue water and in the ditches and
bayous back of Vicksburg during the civil war, now stands at the head
of living naval officers.

But to return to David Porter. He was sixteen years old, when, in
1796, his father, having obtained command of a vessel in the West
India trade, determined to take the lad to sea, that he might learn
the profession of his ancestors. It was hardly a favorable time to
inspire an independent boy with admiration for the life of an American
merchant sailor. The United States had no navy to protect its merchant
ships; and the British cruisers that scoured the ocean felt little
hesitation about boarding the ships of the infant nation, and
kidnapping such sailors as they might desire. Of this young Porter
soon had evidence. While his ship, the "Eliza," was lying in the port
of Jeremie in San Domingo, a British frigate came into the harbor, and
dropped anchor near by. One morning the lookout on the "Eliza" saw a
boat, manned by armed men, put off from the frigate, and steer for the
American merchantman. The movement was quickly reported to Capt.
Porter, who was too old a seaman not to know what it portended, and
too plucky an American to submit willingly to any indignity. His
preparations were quickly made; and by the time the frigate's boat
came alongside, the crew of the "Eliza" were armed and ready to rush
to the deck at the first alarm. Capt. Porter with his officers and
son stood on the quarter-deck, and awaited with great dignity the
arrival of the boat. Soon the British came alongside; and an officer
in the stern-sheets announced that he was about to board the "Eliza,"
and demanded to search the vessels for deserters from the British
service.

Capt. Porter replied that his was an American ship, and the British
might board at their peril; for he was armed, and would resist the
boarders to the last extremity. A great laugh went up from the boat
alongside. A Yankee merchantman to resist British sailors, indeed! And
the officer, without more ado, ordered his men to board. Hardly had
the order passed his lips, than Porter's clear voice rang out, "Repel
boarders!" and the crew of the "Eliza," armed with pikes and muskets,
rushed upon their assailants, and drove them into the sea. Young
Porter was not behindhand in the fight, but lent his boyish aid to
the vindication of American sailors' rights. One man was shot down by
his side; and Porter received his first baptism of blood in this
encounter, which thus early rooted in his mind a detestation for the
arrogance of the British, and a determination to devote his life to
the cause of his seafaring countrymen.

On his second voyage, a year later, young Porter was destined to
experience still further the hardships and ignominy which American
sailors only too often encountered at the hands of the British. Once
again the boy, now a first officer, was walking the deck of his vessel
in a San Domingo port, when a boat's-crew from a British frigate came
on board on the usual errand of impressment. This time the sturdy,
independent spirit of the elder Porter was absent; and the captain of
the American vessel basely permitted a portion of his crew, among whom
was Porter, to be carried aboard the frigate, where they were to be
kept until they agreed to enlist. Loaded with irons, they were thrust
into "the brig," or guard-room of the frigate; but, though the case
seemed hopeless, Porter gallantly refused to enter the king's service,
and ceaselessly exhorted his comrades to stand firm against the
commands of the British. Days passed, and still the frigate's crew was
in no wise increased from among the obstinate Americans. The British
captain lost patience, and commanded that all the prisoners be brought
out on deck, triced up, and publicly flogged with the cat-of-nine
tails, for "the bad example they set the crew of his Majesty's ship."
The order was duly put into execution. The prisoners, still ironed,
were brought up under a heavy guard, and taken to the gratings; but
when young Porter reached the deck, and saw the ignominious punishment
in store for him, he fought desperately with his guards, and, finally
breaking away, ran below, and hid in some corner of the hold, from
which the most careful search failed to dislodge him. The captain
finally gave orders to leave him alone, saying, "He'll come out fast
enough when he gets hungry." But the lad did not wait for hunger to
drive him from his hiding-place. That very night he came from the
hold, crawled stealthily across the deck, and dropped into the water,
regardless of the sharks that abound in those tropic seas. A short
swim took him to a Danish vessel, by which he was carried across the
Atlantic. Only after many months of voyaging as a common sailor did
the lad succeed in working his way back to his home.

Even this experience could not deter the young seaman from again
seeking employment upon the billowy main, and for the third time he
shipped upon an American merchantman. Again his course lay toward the
West Indies, and again he was intercepted by the inevitable
man-of-war. This time he was not so fortunate as to escape until after
a month or more of captivity, during which time he was treated with
the greatest cruelty on account of his persistent refusal to serve
under any flag save that of his own country. At last he made his
escape, and reached home. By this time he was naturally somewhat
disgusted with the life of a sailor on an American merchant-vessel;
and he cast about for an appointment to the navy, which he soon
received. It is impossible to doubt that his three adventures with the
British press-gang had much to do with the ardor and bravery with
which in later days the young sailor, then elevated to the highest
ranks, did battle with the enemies of his country. When, at the close
of the War of 1812, the veteran naval officer looked back upon his
record during that conflict, he could point to one captured British
man-of-war and scores of captured British merchantmen as the measure
of his retaliation for the wrongs done him as a defenceless American
sailor-boy.

Oliver Hazard Perry, of whose famous victory over the British on Lake
Erie we shall speak later, also was brought into conflict with the
British in the days of the "right of search." His father, Christopher
Raymond Perry, in command of the United States ship "Gen. Greene," was
escorting an American brig freighted with a valuable cargo. Near
Gibraltar they were sighted by a British man-of-war, which bore down
quickly upon the two ships. Perry was an old and cautious naval
officer; and, though peace reigned between his country and Great
Britain, he no sooner saw an armed vessel approaching, than he put his
vessel in trim for action, and sent the crew to the guns. Nearer and
nearer came the great English man-o'-war; and, as she came within
range, a puff of smoke burst from her bow-port, and a ball skipped
along the water before Perry's unarmed convoy, conveying a forcible
invitation to heave to. Perry at once made signal to his convoy to pay
no regard to the Englishman; and, setting the American flag, the two
ships continued on their way. But at this moment the breeze died away,
and all three ships lay becalmed within easy range of each other. The
British captain was not slow to take advantage of this; and a boat
soon put off from his ship, and made for the American brig. This move
Perry promptly checked by a shot from the "Gen. Greene," which so
narrowly missed the boat that the crew thought it well to run
alongside the American man-o'-war, and arrange the matter peaceably.
As the boat came alongside the "Gen. Greene," the gangway was manned,
and the British officer escorted with the greatest formality to
Perry's presence.

He at once stated his purpose in attempting to board the merchantman;
claiming that, by virtue of the right of search, he was entitled to
visit the brig, and examine into the nationality of her crew.

"I deny the existence of any right, on the part of British vessels, to
search any American vessel, except with the consent of the American
commander," responded Perry; "and my shot was intended to warn you
that you had received no such permission."

By this time the British vessel had come within hailing distance of
the "Gen. Greene;" and the captain demanded why his boat had been
fired upon, and was now detained. Perry responded in the same words
with which he had answered the boarding-officer.

"It's a most surprising thing," shouted the Englishman, losing his
temper, "if a British seventy-four-gun ship cannot search a pitiful
little Yankee merchantman."

"By Heaven!" responded Perry. "If you were a ship of the first rate,
you should not do it, to the dishonor of my flag." And in an instant
the ports of the "Gen. Greene" were triced up, and the British captain
saw that his adversary was prepared for battle. After a moment's
thought, he abandoned all attempts at violence, and sent a courteous
letter to Perry, begging leave to visit the brig in search of British
deserters, which request Perry as courteously granted.

To this list of American seamen who suffered indignities at the hands
of the British, and afterwards won reparation from their enemies in
the War of 1812, may be added the name of Joshua Barney. Few Americans
have given to their country a longer service or more efficient aid
than he. In the little Colonial navy of the Revolution, he held high
rank, and won the plaudits of older sailors. At the close of the
Revolution, he served for a time in the merchant-marine; then entered
the naval service of France, and, at the first news of war between
England and America, returned to his country, to enlist under the
stars and stripes. It was while he was in command of a merchantman
that he was brought into collision with the British in a way that well
might make the doughty old sea-dog doubt if the Revolutionary days,
when he suffered in the noisome confines of Mill Prison, had not come
again.

It was in the summer of 1793, that the good ship "Sampson," two days
out from Cape Francois, West Indies, was slowly making her way
northward, over the tropic seas, and under the glaring rays of the
summer sun of the torrid zone. Capt. Barney and his crew were ever on
the watch for danger; for, in addition to the hurricanes and typhoons
common to the equatorial latitudes, much was to be feared from the
lawless British privateers that then swarmed in the West Indies and
Bermudas. That the "Sampson" was under the flag of a neutral power,
was but little protection; for the commanders of the semi-piratical
craft cared little for international law or for justice. War was
raging between France and England; and a mere suspicion of traffic
with French colonies was enough, in the eyes of these worthies, to
condemn a vessel of any nationality.

Knowing his danger, Capt. Barney strove to avoid the localities
frequented by the privateers, but to no avail. One bright morning, the
lookout reported three sail in sight from the masthead, and in a few
hours Barney found himself hemmed in by privateers. Three officers
boarded him, and began a rigid examination of the cargo and papers.
Two finally expressed themselves as satisfied of the neutral character
of the vessel; but the third exclaimed that he had discovered in the
cabin an iron chest, full of money, which surely proved that the
"Sampson" had something to do with the French, for "no blasted Yankee
ever had iron chests or dollars on board his vessel!" Such conclusive
proof as this could not be overlooked by the sapient privateers; and,
after a little consultation, they informed Capt. Barney that they
would let the ship go, if the money were given to them. As it amounted
to eighteen thousand dollars, Capt. Barney looked upon this demand as
nothing short of robbery, and indignantly refused to consider it;
whereupon his captors took from the "Sampson" all her crew except the
carpenter, boatswain, and cook, sent a prize-crew aboard, and ordered
that she be taken to New Providence, a British naval station. The
privateers were soon hull down on the horizon; and Barney found
himself a prisoner on his own ship, exposed to ceaseless insolence
from the British prize-master.

[Illustration: Commodore Perry.]

Several days passed, as the "Sampson" lay becalmed in the tropics.
Barney, though too old a sailor to be cast down by misfortune,
nevertheless chafed under his situation. From prize-master and
prize-crew he received nothing but scurrilous epithets; and the
oft-repeated murmurs of "Rebel rascal!" "Yankee traitor!" "Blow out
his brains!" and "Throw him overboard!" made it hard for him to
believe the Revolution over, and the United States and England at
peace. Even while they thus abused the captain, the rogues were
feasting upon his provisions and drinking his wines; and only his firm
refusal to give up his keys prevented their rifling his iron chest,
and filling their pockets with his dollars. At last he began to feel
that his life was no longer safe in the hands of his captors; and,
though he had by him but three men of his original crew, he determined
to attempt to recapture the ship.

One evening the captain managed to catch a few minutes' conversation
with the carpenter and boatswain of his own crew, and broached to them
the project for a recapture. No argument was needed to induce these
bold men to embark in the perilous enterprise. Indeed, from the very
moment of the capture, they must have cherished some such purpose; for
each had hidden away in his bunk a gun and bayonet. Barney, on his
part, had secreted a small brass blunderbuss and a broad-sword; and
with this meagre armament the three determined to take the ship from
its captors.

The success of the project then depended upon a favorable opportunity,
and the three conspirators watched eagerly for the decisive moment to
arrive. At last there came a day so squally that all the prize-crew
were kept busy with the sails all the morning. Much exhausted, the
sailors sat down to their dinner on the forecastle at noon, while the
three British officers spread their mess amidships. Barney saw that
the moment had arrived; and, giving the signal to his men, the
plotters went below for their weapons. Barney was the first to
re-appear,--the blunderbuss, loaded and cocked, in his hand, and the
naked cutlass under his arm. Hardly had he stepped on deck when one of
the officers saw him, and, throwing down dishes and dinner, sprang at
the American and grappled with him. Barney struggled violently, and
soon managing to get the blunderbuss against his enemy's shoulder,
fired it, filling the wretch's arm and side with buckshot. Freed from
his adversary, the gallant captain cut down with a blow of his
cutlass the second prize officer, who was advancing upon him; and the
third, seeing his two companions lying, drenched with blood, upon the
deck, ran below. In the mean time the crew, startled from their dinner
by the report of the blunderbuss, had rushed below for their weapons;
but the last man had hardly dived down the hatchway when the wily
carpenter and boatswain rushed forward, clapped on the hatches, and in
a trice had the British sailors nicely cooped up in the forecastle.
The two wounded officers were quickly cared for, and the unhurt
fugitive secured; and Barney found himself again in control of the
ship.

The victors then held a consultation as to their future action. They
controlled the ship, it was true; but what were three men to do with a
full-rigged ship on the stormy Atlantic? Clearly they must get aid
from their captives, or all might go to the bottom together.
Accordingly the three, with loaded weapons, went forward, and standing
at the hatchway, proposed terms to the imprisoned sailors below. Capt.
Barney acted as spokesman.

"You shall be released from confinement," cried he to the captives,
"and may now come on deck one at a time, each one bringing his weapons
with him."

The hatches were then thrown back, and the carpenter and boatswain
stood with cutlasses and muskets ready to cut down the first who
should make an offensive movement. The British saw the preparations
for their reception, and came up one at a time as ordered. As each
came up, his arms were seized and thrown overboard; and a gruff order
given for him to go forward. Before long the crew, deprived of all
means of resistance, were gathered on the forecastle. Barney then
retired to the quarter-deck, and ordered that the crew be mustered
before him.

"You are now my prisoners," said he; "and I have not only the power,
but the right, to hang every man jack of you. You seized this vessel
without any just cause, and simply because you were the stronger; and
you have further used that strength to abuse and ill-treat me and
waste my property. I do not propose to execute you, but will give you
the choice of two alternatives. You may either stay with me and work
this ship to Baltimore, there to be discharged with wages; or I will
give you a small boat with provisions, and set you adrift to shift for
yourselves. One condition I attach to the first alternative. If one
of you is seen talking with his former officers, or if one man steps
abaft the main-mast, he shall be instantly shot."

[Illustration: Barney Regains His Ship.]

The crew wasted no time in deliberation, but decided to stay with the
ship, and at once went forward on duty. Then began a fortnight of
ceaseless watchfulness and grave anxiety for Capt. Barney. At night he
never closed his eyes, but took his sleep by day in an armchair on
deck, his blunderbuss and cutlass by his side, and a sentinel ready to
awaken him at the slightest alarm. At last, however, he brought his
ship safely to Baltimore, and discharged his crew. But the memory of
that month of violence remained with him; and we shall hear of him
again as a brave sailor in the service of the United States, and an
uncompromising foe to England.

Among the most adventurous of American merchant seamen in the days
following the Revolution was Capt. Thomas Macdonough. Like others of
his class, his daring and ability as a navigator gained him a
commission in the very small American navy of that time. On one
occasion the United States ship "Siren," of which he was first
lieutenant, was lying at anchor in the harbor of Gibraltar, surrounded
by a number of merchantmen, from the peak of one of which floated the
stars and stripes. While pacing the deck one bright afternoon,
Macdonough observed a boat manned with armed men put off from a
British man-of-war that rode at anchor a mile away. At once his
suspicions were aroused, and with a strong glass he watched the
movements of the British. As he had expected, the boat steered
straight for the American merchantman; and through his glass
Macdonough could see the boarders scramble over the bulwarks of the
vessel, and soon thereafter return to their boat, taking with them a
man dressed in the garb of a merchant seaman, and tightly bound.

The captain of the "Siren" was on shore; and Macdonough, as the
officer in command, determined that so audacious an impressment should
not succeed under the guns of an American war-vessel, small though she
might be.

"Clear away the long-boat," he shouted; and the boat quickly was
lowered to the water, and a dozen jackies grasped the oars. Macdonough
sprung into the stern-sheets, and grasped the tiller.

"Let fall! Give way! Pull hard, men!" He gave the orders in quick
succession, and laid his course straight for the British boat, which
was soon overtaken. He laid his boat alongside the British cutter, and
demanded that the captive be given up. The English officer began to
protest, but Macdonough cut his protests short.

"You have no right to that man. He is an American sailor.--Tumble in
here, my man."

The pressed man, delighted with the prospect of rescue, sprang into
the American boat; and before the British officer had recovered from
his amazement sufficiently to offer resistance, the blue-jackets were
pulling away toward the "Siren," with the long, swinging, man-o'-war
stroke. When he reached his vessel, Macdonough retired to his cabin to
await further developments, which were not long in appearing.

"Boat from the British frigate heading for the ship, sir," reported
the officer of the deck, in a few minutes.

"Very good, sir. Have the gangway manned," returned the lieutenant.

The boat was soon alongside; and the British captain, white with rage,
leaped to the gangway, and was shown to Lieut. Macdonough's cabin.

"How dare you take a man from a boat of his Majesty's ship, sir?" was
his salutation.

"'Dare' is not a word to be spoken to an officer of the United States
navy," responded Macdonough. "As for the man, he is a citizen of the
United States; and I propose to protect him, at all hazards."

"I'll bring my frigate alongside, and sink your beggarly little
craft," shouted the visitor, with a volley of oaths.

"That you may do," responded the American; "but while she swims, the
man you shall not have."

"You are a hair-brained young fellow, and will repent this rashness,"
cried the irate Briton. "Do you mean to say, that, if I had been in
that boat, you would have dared to commit such an act?"

"I should have made the attempt, sir, at all hazards."

"What, sir!" shouted the captain, greatly enraged, "would you venture
to interfere, if I should now impress men from that brig?"

"You have but to try it, sir," was the pithy response. And the British
captain returned to his frigate, vowing all sorts of vengeance, but
nevertheless did not again annoy the American ship.

While the popular clamor against the hateful right of search was still
at its height in America, Great Britain unwisely added yet another
outrage to the already long list of grievances complained of by the
Americans. Notwithstanding the danger of Barbary pirates and British
impressment, the merchants of the United States were carrying on a
thriving trade with France. England, then at war with the great
Napoleon, looked upon this commerce at first with disfavor, and
finally with such intense hatred that she determined to put an end to
it altogether. Accordingly, she issued the celebrated "Orders in
Council," forbidding all traffic with French ports. For such action
the imperious nation had no authority by any principle of
international law. Her blockade of the French ports was very
imperfect, and easily evaded. It is a perfectly well-established
principle of the common law of nations that a blockade, to be legal,
must be complete and effective; otherwise, it is known as a "paper
blockade," and neutral vessels are justified in attempting to evade
it. Instead of posting blockading vessels at the entrances of French
ports, to warn off all vessels, Great Britain contented herself with
licensing hordes of privateers, that roamed the seas and snapped up
vessels with little regard to law or justice. Hundreds of American
vessels were thus captured; for our trade with France and the French
West Indian colonies at that time was of vast proportions. The ocean
soon became so infested with privateers that every American
merchantman carried cannon, and an array of small-arms that would have
done credit to a sloop-of-war. The New England sailors became able
naval fighters, as well as experienced seamen; for a man shipping for
a voyage knew well that, in addition to battling with the angry
elements, he might be required to sight truly the great "long Tom," or
beat back piratical boarders at the muzzle of the muskets. But even
these heroic remedies could not save many a good ship.

Occurrences such as these fanned into flaming fury the smouldering
fires of the American hatred for Great Britain. The people saw their
old oppressor and enemy engaged in war with their old ally France, and
the popular cry went up for a union of France and the United States
against England. Happily, the statesmen of the time--Washington,
Hamilton, and Jay--were too firm of purpose, and too clear-sighted, to
be led away by popular clamor; and they wisely kept the United States
Government in a position of neutrality between the two nations. Deep
and loud were the murmurs of the people at this action. Could
true-hearted Americans desert their friends in such a manner? Never!
And so, whatever might be the policy of the rulers, the many-headed
people welcomed French ambassadors, feted the officers of visiting
men-of-war, and hung the tricolor and the stars and stripes side by
side on all public holidays.

It was in 1795, while the popular affection for France was at its
height, that a merchant-vessel flying the British flag sailed into
Boston Harbor, and made fast to the Long Wharf. Under her stern
appeared the legend, "The Betsy of St. Croix;" her decks were
littered with poultry and domestic animals, her cordage flapped
loosely in the breeze, and every thing about her bespoke the
merchant-vessel. Her captain, being hailed by the dock-loafers, and
made the victim of the proverbial Yankee inquisitiveness, stated that
he had just come from the West Indies with a load of lignum-vitae,
pineapples, and hides, which he hoped to sell in Boston. The
self-constituted investigating committee seemed satisfied, and the
captain strolled on into the city.

But the French consul at Boston was far from satisfied, and he took
care to let his suspicions become generally known. "That
innocent-looking merchantman is a British privateer," quoth he; "and
it's a shame to harbor her in the good port of Boston, amid
French-loving people." The consul's words spread like wildfire; and
his suspicions soon passed for facts, without any supporting proof. No
one knows who was the writer, or who the printer; but in a few hours
the people upon the streets had thrust into their hands the following
handbill:--

               THIS NIGHT

  Will be performed at the steps bottom of
               Long Wharf

                A COMEDY

             of stripping the

           BERMUDIAN PRIVATEER.


  CITIZENS. Remember there have been
  near three hundred of our American vessels
  taken by these Bermudians, and have received
  the most barbarous treatment from those
  Damn'd PIRATES!!!

  Now, Americans, if you feel the spirit of
  resentment or revenge kindling in your hearts,
  let us be united in the cause.

This was enough to rouse the turbulent people of Boston to action.
They well remembered the winter's night, twenty-two years before, when
their harbor was the scene of the first protest against the oppression
of Great Britain. Then they threw overboard the tea, and spared the
ships; this time ship and cargo alike should be destroyed. When night
fell, small bodies of men could be seen marching down to the wharfs,
through the narrow, crooked streets of the old town. Before eight
o'clock Long Wharf was crowded with an angry mob. On the deck of the
threatened vessel stood the captain, arguing and pleading with the
crowd, and at times pointing to the scarlet flag above his head, and
threatening his assailants with the wrath of mighty England. Argument,
entreaty, and threats proved unavailing; and the crowd, gaining
courage with numbers, rushed upon the vessel, and ordered captain and
crew ashore. Leaving the scene, the captain rushed wildly into the
city in search of the British consul; and, in his absence, the mob
began to search his ship. An active and careful search soon brought to
light in an out-of-the-way corner of the hold two swivel-guns, two
three-pounders, forty charges of shot, fifteen pounds of powder, and
eight muskets. All was piled upon the deck, and pointed out to the
captain on his return, amid frantic yells from the enraged populace.
He solemnly protested that the ordnance was only intended for purposes
of defence against the pirates that infested the Bermudas. But the
case was already judged. The people laughed at the captain's
declarations; and in a few minutes the "Betsy," a mass of flame, was
drifting across the harbor to the Charlestown beach. There she blazed
away, while the crowd watched the bonfire from the dock, until the
last timbers of the ship fell with a hiss into the black waters, and
all was dark again.

Popular sympathy is at best but an unstable sentiment, and so it
proved with this unreasoning affection of the American people for
France. Firmly the American authorities held to their policy of
neutrality, refusing to be influenced in the slightest degree by the
popular clamor of the people for an alliance with France. Then the
French sympathizers made their fatal error. In the presidential chair
of the United States sat Washington, the hero of the Revolution.
Rashly the French minister and his following began an onslaught upon
this great and wise man, because of his firm determination to keep the
United States neutral. They accused him of being an "aristocrat;" of
wishing to found an hereditary monarchy, with himself at the head. No
epithet was too vile for them to apply to him: "liar" and "traitor"
were terms freely applied to him whom we regard as the veritable
founder of our free Republic. Such intemperate and unreasoning malice
as this had a very different effect from what was intended by the
French sympathizers, or Republicans as the party was then termed. The
party supporting the President gained strength and influence, even
while the actions of Napoleon and the French Chamber of Deputies were
giving American seamen the same grounds of complaint as those which
Great Britain had so long forced upon them.

It was during the last year of the administration of Washington, that
the French Directory issued secret orders to the commanders of all
French men-of-war, directing them to treat neutral vessels in the same
manner as they had suffered the English to treat them. The cunning
intent of this order is apparent by its wording: "Treat American
vessels as they suffer themselves to be treated by the British." What
course does that leave open to the Americans, save to resist the
British, thereby become involved in a war, and so aid France? But
there was one other alternative; and, much to the surprise and chagrin
of the French, the Americans adopted it. And the only effect of the
diplomatic secret order was to embroil France in a naval war with the
United States.

The condition of American commerce, after the promulgation of the
French decree, became deplorable indeed. A merchant-vessel flying the
American flag was never safe unless under the guns of an American
war-vessel; and the reduction of the navy had made these few indeed.
Should the brig "Nancy" or "Sarah Jane" put out from the little port
of Salem or New London, she was certain to be overhauled by some
British frigate, whose boarding officer would pick from the brig's
crew a few able sailors, and leave her to make her way short-handed as
best she might. Next would come along some French frigate or
privateer,--some "Terreur," "Incroyable," or "Insurgente,"--whose
astute officers would quickly notice the gaps in the American crew,
and, finding out that the brig had been boarded by the English, would
declare her a prize for having given aid to the enemies of _la belle
France_. Should the little brig be so fortunate as to escape the
civilized belligerents, there were still the pirates of Tripoli, the
picaroons of the French West Indies, and the unauthorized and
irresponsible pirates, who, with forged commissions and flying the
Spanish or Portuguese colors, ravaged the seas in all directions. The
career of an American merchantman at that time is admirably told by
our great novelist Fenimore Cooper in his sea-tale of "Miles
Wallingford." The fate of the good brig "Dawn" was the fate of too
many an American vessel in those turbulent times; and the wondrous
literary art with which the novelist has expanded the meagre records
of the times into an historical novel of surpassing interest makes an
acquaintance with the book essential to a proper knowledge of American
naval history.

The first act of retaliation on the part of the United States was the
embargo ordered by Congress, which prohibited any vessel from leaving
American ports. This action had two effects. It quickly brought about
great distress in European countries, which even then relied much on
the United States for food. This was the chief object of the embargo.
The second effect was inevitable. The sudden check upon all foreign
commerce plunged business in all parts of the United States into
stagnation. Sailors out of work thronged the streets of the seaport
towns. Farmers trudged weary miles beside their ox-teams, only to
find, when they had hauled their produce to town, that there was no
market for it. Along the docks the ships lay idly tugging at their
cables, or stranded on the flats as the tide went out. Merchants
discharged their clerks, and great warehouses were locked up and
deserted. For nearly a year the ports were closed, and commerce thus
languished. Then Congress substituted for the embargo the
Non-intercourse Act, which simply prohibited commerce with France and
England; and again the American flag appeared upon the ocean. But the
two warring nations had learned neither wisdom nor justice, and began
again their depredations upon the unoffending Americans. Envoys were
sent to France to protest against the outrageous action of that
nation; but they were told that no audience could be granted them,
unless they paid into the French treasury two hundred and forty
thousand dollars. This last insult was too great. The envoys returned
home, told of their treatment, and the war party in the United States
rallied to the defence of their nation's honor, shouting Pinckney's
noble sentiment, "_Millions for defence, but not one cent for
tribute_."




CHAPTER II.

     WAR WITH FRANCE. -- THE BUILDING OF A NAVY. -- FIRST SUCCESS
     FOR THE AMERICANS. -- CUTTING OUT THE "SANDWICH." -- THE
     "CONSTELLATION" AND "L'INSURGENTE." -- THE "CONSTELLATION"
     AND "LA VENGEANCE."


While France and England were waging a desperate and bloody war, the
United States was like a shuttlecock, being struck repeatedly by the
diplomatic battledores of each nation. Between the British "Orders in
Council" and the French "Milan Decree," American commerce was in a
fair way of being obliterated. To declare war against both nations,
would have been absurd in so young a people; and for months, and even
years, the fierce contests of political parties in the United States
made a declaration of war against either aggressor impracticable. Now
the Franco-maniacs were in the ascendency, and the country rang with
praises of France,--the nation which had cast off aristocrats, and,
like America, was devoted to republican principles; the nation which
had aided the Colonies in their war for freedom. What though a French
privateer did occasionally seize an American ship? The Americans alone
were to blame for that; for was not their attitude toward England,
their natural foe, enough to inflame the French? And were not the
British aggressions more oppressive than those of France? War there
must be, but let it be declared against the hated British.

Such were the sentiments of the French sympathizers, or Democrats as
they were then termed in political parlance. But the English
sympathizers, or Federalists, held very different opinions. They made
no attempt to excuse the offensive attitude assumed by England, but
claimed that so soon as her war with France was over she would admit
the injustice of her actions, and make due reparation for the injuries
she had heaped upon American commerce. But they pointed out that for
one vessel taken by England, ten were seized by French privateers, or
piratical vessels of nondescript nationality, but bearing French
papers. As for France loving republican principles, her republicanism
was founded upon blood and the guillotine. She was no longer the
nation that had aided the struggling Colonies. She was the nation that
had foully murdered the kind king who had lent that aid two decades
before. Besides these arguments, the Federalists did not scruple to
hint, that, in a second war with England, the United States might lose
the independence so recently won, while the navy of France was not so
greatly to be dreaded.

Indeed, the American people of that day might well be excused for
lethargy in resenting the insults of any first-class naval power. It
is not too strong a statement, to say that at this time, when the need
was greatest, the United States had no navy. At the close of the
Revolution, the navy had been disbanded, the ships sold, and the
officers dispersed among the vessels of the merchant marine. This fact
alone is enough to account for the depredations of French, English,
Portuguese, Tripolitans, and the hordes of pirates without a country.
Is there no lesson in this? From this lesson of history cannot we
deduce the rule that a nation with 6,000 miles of seacoast, a republic
hated by all monarchies, must maintain its sea-power if it would
maintain its honor? The naval regeneration begun in 1893 ought not to
be checked until the United States ranks next to Great Britain as a
naval power.

But the depredations of the enemies of American commerce at last
reached such a point that Congress could no longer overlook the
necessity for an American navy. In March, 1794, Congress, after
listening to a message from the President detailing the depredations
of the Algerines, passed an Act authorizing the construction or
purchase of six frigates, or an equivalent naval force. This was the
beginning of the present United States navy; for some of the frigates
built under that law are still afloat, although no longer exposed to
the rude shocks of battle or the still more violent onslaughts of the
mighty ocean.

In accordance with the law, the frames of six frigates were quickly
laid upon the stocks at six different shipyards; and even while the
ribs were yet uncovered, commanders were selected for the unbuilt
ships. The names of ships and officers alike are famous in American
annals, and may well be mentioned here. The "Constitution,"
"President," "United States," "Chesapeake," "Constellation," and
"Congress" were the vessels begun at this time; and the rolls of no
navy of the world ever bore six more famous names. The captains chosen
were John Barry, Samuel Nicholson, Silas Talbot, Joshua Barney,
Richard Dale, and Thomas Truxton. Of these, all save Truxton had
served the Colonies in the Revolution. Barney narrowly escaped being
totally disowned by his country, because while holding a commission in
the French navy he had once accidentally hoisted the American flag
upside down. A cry went up from his enemies, that it was an
intentional insult to the country; but his friends, with justice,
pleaded that the flag had been wet, and a sailor, running it up to
dry, had thus carelessly inverted it.

In the mean time the building of the ships went merrily on, until,
when they were nearly finished, a disgraceful treaty was made with
Algiers, and work on the new navy was neglected, and three of the
unfinished ships sold. But in 1797 the French depredations became so
unbearable that work was hastened; and cities and towns, not satisfied
with the three frigates provided for, began collecting subscriptions
for the purchase of ships, to be presented to the Government. The
first of the frigates building by the Government to reach the water
was the "United States." As the first vessel built by the United
States under the Constitution, her launch was an event to be
celebrated. At noon on the bright May afternoon chosen, the streets of
Philadelphia leading to the ship-yard, where the hull of the great
frigate lay upon the stocks, were thronged with holiday-making people.
The sun had hardly risen, when anxious spectators began to seize upon
the best points of observation about the ship-yard. The hour of the
launch was set at one P.M.; and for hours before the crowd of watchers
sung patriotic songs, cheered for Congress and the new navy, and
anxiously debated the chances of a successful launch. The river was
covered with pleasure-craft, decked with flags, and bright with the
gay dresses of ladies. The great frigate, too, was a mass of bunting
from stem to stern. At one precisely, the blows of many hammers were
heard knocking out the blocks; and, after a moment's trembling pause,
the first United States frigate glided swiftly into the water, and,
after a graceful dip, rode buoyantly on the placid surface of the
Delaware.

[Illustration: Toasting The Wooden Walls Of Columbia.]

While the ships were building, the war-feeling against France was
steadily growing, and the enthusiasm of the people over the infant
navy knew no bounds. Toasts to the "wooden walls of Columbia," and the
"rising navy of America," were drunk with cheers at stately public
banquets, and by bands of jolly roisterers at tap-houses. The
patriotic song writer invaded the columns of the newspapers; and, as
these could not afford space for all the poetic effusions, they were
printed on broadsides, and hawked about the streets. At Harvard
College the students made the chapel walls ring with the ode written
by Joseph Story:--

        "Shall Gallia's clan our coast invade,
          With hellish outrage scourge the main,
        Insult our nation's neutral trade,
          And we not dare our rights maintain?
            Rise, united Harvard's band,
            Rise, the bulwark of our land."

Admirable as may be the patriotism of this ode, the poetry is not
above criticism; but it is classic in comparison with many others. The
following stanza and chorus will show the character of one of the most
popular street-songs of the day:--

        "Americans, then fly to arms,
          And learn the way to use 'em.
        If each man fights to 'fend his rights,
          The French can't long abuse 'em.

        Yankee Doodle (mind the tune),
          Yankee Doodle Dandy;
        For the French there's trouble brewin':
          We'll spank 'em, hand and handy."

From Maine to Georgia the mania for writing such doggerel spread with
a rapidity only equalled by the avidity with which the people seized
upon the songs, and sung them. A complete collection of these
remarkable efforts of poetic art would form an amusing volume, and
from it alone a history of political movements in the United States
might be written. That even such wretched doggerel had its effect upon
popular sentiment, cannot be doubted; for has it not been said, "I
care not who makes the laws of a nation, let me but write its songs"?

But the manifestation of the growing ill-feeling towards France was
not confined to poor but harmless poetizing. The first open rupture
took place at Savannah. In the port of that city were lying two long,
rakish schooners flying the French tricolor. Their decks were crowded
with men, whose rough actions and brutal countenances showed them to
be no respecters of law or order. It did not need the rows of cannon
protruding from the ports, nor the carefully covered "long Toms"
amidships, to indicate to the good people of Savannah that their
harbor sheltered two French privateers. Among the seafaring people of
the city, the sight of these two vessels aroused the greatest anger.
Were they not representatives of the nation whose ships were seizing
and burning American vessels in the West Indies almost daily? Perhaps
these very vessels were then fresh from an action with some American
ship. Who could tell that the holds of the privateers did not at that
very minute contain the best part of the cargo of some captured
American vessel? Probably the last shot fired from that "long Tom" had
crashed into the side of some little brig flying the stars and
stripes, and perhaps ended the career of many an American sailor. From
suspicions and conjectures, positive statements soon grew. It was
whispered about that the two privateers had recently plundered and
burned a Yankee ship returning from the West Indies with a goodly
store of specie in exchange for her cargo. Those cut-throat-looking
Frenchmen were even then stained with the blood of true Americans. The
money they threw on the bars of water-side dram-shops, in exchange for
the vile rum which was the worst enemy of too many a good jack-tar,
was looked upon with suspicion. "What Yankee's pockets did Johnny
Crapaud pick to get all that money?" growled the American sailors.

The Frenchmen were not slow in discovering the dislike manifested by
the people of Savannah; and like true soldiers of fortune, as they
were, they did nothing to make friends of their enemies. They came
ashore in troops instead of singly. Cutlasses hung at their sides.
Their tight leather belts held many a knife or clumsy pistol. Their
walk on the street was a reckless swagger; and a listener who could
understand French could catch in their loud conversation many a
scornful sneer or braggart defiance of the Americans.

[Illustration: Commodore Macdonough.]

Such a state of affairs could not long continue. Each party was ready
and waiting to fight, and it was not hard to find an excuse. How the
fighting began, no one ever knew; but one night the streets of the
little city resounded with cries of rage and groans of agony. Soon
crowds began to gather; and sailors rushed up and down the streets,
crying that the French desperadoes had killed three Americans. The
rage of the populace, and particularly of the seafaring community, had
no bounds. "Arm! arm! and take bloody vengeance upon the murderers,"
was the cry in all quarters. The mob blocked all the roadways
leading to the water-front. With cutlasses and guns they attacked the
sailors on "L'Agile," which lay at a wharf, and drove them overboard.
Once in possession of the ship, the enraged rioters vented their fury
by cutting away the masts and rigging, tearing to pieces the woodwork
of the cabin, and finally putting the torch to the battered bulk, and
sending her drifting helplessly down the river. This summary vengeance
did not satisfy their anger. They looked about them for the other
vessel, "La Vengeance," and discovered that she had been towed away
from the shore, and was being warped up stream to a place of safety.
Boats were secured, and the irresistible mob set out in mad pursuit. A
militia company, hastily sent to the scene of action by the
authorities of the town, failed to check the riot; and, after a futile
struggle on the part of her crew, "La Vengeance" shared the fate of
her consort. Sympathy for France was well rooted out of Savannah then,
and the cry of the city was for war.

Before the news of the uprising at Savannah was known in New England,
the navy had struck the first blow against French oppression, and the
victory had rested with the sailors of the United States. Congress had
at last been aroused to a sense of the situation, and had issued
orders to captains of American war-vessels, directing them to capture
French cruisers wherever found. A number of large merchant-vessels and
Indiamen had been armed hastily, and sent out; and at last the country
had a navy on the seas. One of the first vessels to get away was the
"Delaware," a twenty-gun ship, commanded by Stephen Decatur the elder.
Decatur had been out but a few days when a merchantman, the "Alexander
Hamilton," was sighted, from the halliards of which a flag of distress
was flying. The "Delaware" ran toward the vessel, and sent a boat
aboard, which returned, bringing the captain of the distressed craft.
To Decatur the captain related the old story of French aggression,
which had become so hateful. Only the day before, he said, his ship
had been boarded by boats'-crews from a French privateer of twenty
guns. The assailants, once on board, had eaten his provisions, and
plundered his cargo without scruple. He gave careful directions as to
the course of the privateer after leaving the "Alexander Hamilton,"
and returned to his ship happy in the thought, that, though he could
not regain his plundered property, the thieves at least would be
punished.

Decatur crowded on all sail, and set off in pursuit of the oppressor.
Four hours later, the lookout forward reported four schooners in sight
off the bow. For a moment the captain was puzzled, as he had no means
of knowing which was the guilty privateer; but, after brief
deliberation, he determined to adopt strategy. The rigging of his
vessel was slackened, the yards slewed round, and every attempt made
to transform the trim man-o'-war into a shiftless merchantman. Then
the helmsman was instructed to carefully avoid running near the
suspected schooners. The ruse succeeded admirably. The lookouts in the
tops of the schooners reported an American merchantman in sight, but
making attempts to escape. The cupidity of the Frenchmen was aroused.
In the "Delaware" they saw only a defenceless ship, from which, by
virtue of their strength, they could take whatever plunder they
desired. From the decks of the "Delaware," the sailors could see the
Frenchmen shaking out sail after sail; and soon one schooner, a
perfect cloud of canvas, took the lead, and left her consorts far in
the rear. It was the privateer they were after. The jackies of the
"Delaware" clambered into the rigging, and set all sail, with the
clumsiness of merchant-sailors; but, though the ship spread a large
expanse of canvas, she was making but little progress, for two long
cables dragged in the water astern, holding her back. The Frenchman
came up gallantly, but suddenly discovered the ports along the side of
the "Delaware," and concluded he had caught a Tartar. It was too late
to escape then; for the "Delaware," coming about, had the schooner
directly under her guns, and the Frenchman had no course left but to
surrender. The privateer proved to be "Le Croyable," of fourteen guns
and seventy men. Her captain was vastly astounded to hear that the
United States had at last sent out cruisers against the French, who
had come to look upon Americans as their legitimate prey. Keeping "Le
Croyable" alongside, Decatur ran for Philadelphia, where he was
received with unbounded enthusiasm. The captured ship was taken into
the United States navy, under the name of the "Retaliation," and sent,
under command of Lieut. Bainbridge, to cruise in search of other
privateers.

But the career of the "Retaliation" under the American flag was
neither long nor glorious. Ill luck seemed to attend the vessel in all
her cruises, and Bainbridge wandered up and down the high seas without
getting within range of a French cruiser or privateer. In November,
1798, the "Retaliation" was cruising, with two other men-of-war, in
the West Indies, not far from Guadaloupe. One day three sails were
made out to the eastward, and two more to the westward. Bainbridge
thought that at last his opportunity had arrived; and the
"Retaliation" set off to reconnoitre the strangers on the eastward,
while the two other American ships made after the three sails in the
opposite direction. As Bainbridge gained upon his chase, he concluded
from their appearance that they were two English ships, and
accordingly threw aside all caution, and sailed boldly alongside.
Unluckily, they proved to be hostile French cruisers; and, when the
discovery was made, the "Retaliation" was well within range. Every
sail was set, and the ship put before the wind, to escape from the
enemy, but too late. The leading ship of the enemy was a fine frigate;
and she rushed through the water after the fugitive, like a dolphin
after a flying-fish. Soon a heavy shot from one of the frigate's
bow-chasers came whizzing by the "Retaliation," unpleasantly reminding
the Americans that they were still within range, and their adversaries
carried heavy metal. The second frigate soon opened fire, and the
position of the "Retaliation" became hopeless. Her flag was
unwillingly hauled down, and the vessel became again the property of
its original owners. It is a strange coincidence, that this ship
should have thus been the first prize of both Americans and French in
the war.

The Frenchmen were not content with their success in capturing the
"Retaliation:" so, while one frigate stopped to secure the prize, the
other passed on in hot chase after "The Retaliation's" two former
consorts, the "Montezuma" and "Norfolk." Bainbridge was taken aboard
the French frigate "Volontaire," which then continued her course in
the wake of her consort, the "Insurgente." For the captured American
captain on the deck of the "Volontaire," the chase was one of great
excitement. He well knew that the two stately French frigates were
much more than a match for the flying Americans; and, should they
overhaul the chase, the "Montezuma" and the "Norfolk" would join the
"Retaliation" in French captivity. Racked with anxiety he paced the
deck, trying in vain not to perceive that the pursuers were steadily
gaining, and chafing under the position of helplessness in which he
found himself. But an opportunity to help did unexpectedly present
itself. The French captain, after a long look through his
marine-glasses at the flying craft, turned to Bainbridge, and
inquired,--

"What may be the force of your consorts, captain?"

Without a moment's hesitation, Bainbridge responded,--

"The ship carries twenty-eight twelve-pounders, and the brig twenty
nines."

The Frenchman was astounded, as well he might be; for Bainbridge's
answer was a most preposterous falsehood, nearly doubling the actual
armament of the two vessels. An eager consultation was immediately
held by the officers on the quarter-deck. Bainbridge looked on
anxiously, and was delighted with the success of his ruse, when he
heard orders for the hoisting of a signal which should call back the
frigate leading in the chase. The signal was hoisted; and the
"Insurgente," obeying, abandoned the chase, and returned. Her captain
was indignant at his recall, and curious to know the cause of it. When
told of Bainbridge's statement, he was furious; for his ship had been
close enough to the chase to see that the Americans were small craft,
utterly unable to cope with the two pursuing frigates. For his
falsehood, Bainbridge was roundly abused, and many a French oath was
hurled at his head. His action was indeed inexcusable by the rules of
honor; and the utmost that can be said of it by the most patriotic
American is, that by his falsehood he saved two good ships for the
infant navy of the United States. From a military point of view,
however, his conduct was commendable; and in recognition thereof, on
his release from captivity, he was made commander of the "Norfolk,"
one of the vessels he had saved.

France and the United States were now actually at war, although no
definite declaration of war had been made by either party. This fact
made many French privateers assume an injured air, on being captured
by United States ships, and complain that they had never heard of any
declaration of war. With a Frenchman of this sort, Stephen Decatur the
younger had an experience early in his naval career.

This occurred in February, 1799. The frigate "United States" was
cruising near Martinique in that year, and to her young Decatur was
attached as a sub-lieutenant. One morning a French privateer was
sighted, and the frigate set out in hot pursuit. The privateer took
the alarm quickly, and crowded on all sail, until her long, narrow
hull slipped through the waves like a fish. The breeze was fresh, and
the chase an exciting one; but gradually the immense spread of the
frigate's canvas began to tell, and she rapidly overhauled the
fugitive. The French captain was plucky, and even desperate, in his
attempt to escape; for, seeing that he was about to be overhauled, he
resorted to the expedient of a fox chased by hounds, and doubled,
turning short to windward, and running right under the guns of the
frigate. The move was a bold one, and might well have succeeded, had
it not been for the good marksmanship of a gunner on the frigate, who
promptly sent a twenty-four-pound shot (the only one fired in the
affair) straight through the hull of the privateer, between wind and
water. In an instant all was confusion on the French vessel. The water
poured into her hold through the hole cut by the shot; and the hasty
lowering of her sails, and the frantic howls for succor from the crew,
told the people of the "United States" that their chase was at an end.
The boats of the frigate were quickly lowered, and Decatur went in one
as officer in command. When he reached the sinking ship, he found a
scene too ludicrous to be pathetic. Along the rail of the vessel, from
bow to stern, the Frenchmen were perched like birds. Many had stripped
off all their clothes, in order to be prepared to swim; and from all
arose a medley of plaintive cries for help, and curses on that unlucky
shot. By skilful management of the boats, all were saved; and it
happened that Decatur pulled into his own boat the captain of the
sinking vessel.

Brushing the salt water out of his eyes, this worthy expressed great
surprise that he had been fired upon by a vessel bearing the United
States flag.

"Ees eet that that ees a sheep of les Etats-Unis?" he inquired, in the
broken English that four years of cruising against Americans had
enabled him to pick up.

"It is," responded Decatur.

"I am indeed sairprised. I had not thought that les Etats-Unis had the
war with La Republique Francaise."

"No, sir," responded Decatur, thoroughly provoked; "but you knew that
the French Republic was at war with the United States, that you were
taking our merchant-vessels every day, and crowding our countrymen
into prison at Basseterre to die like sheep."

This was more than the Frenchman could deny, and he was constrained to
accept his capture with the best grace possible.

An audacious, but clearly illegal, exploit of the blue-jackets in this
war, was the cutting out and capture of the French letter-of-marque
vessel "Sandwich," as she lay in Port Platte, a small harbor on the
Spanish side of St. Domingo. Commodore Talbot, who won a reputation
for daring and recklessness in the Revolution, was cruising about on
the San Domingo station, and had spent some weeks in monotonous
voyaging, without an opportunity to capture a single prize. Word was
brought to the squadron, that in the little harbor of Port Platte a
vessel was taking in a cargo of coffee. From the description of the
vessel, Commodore Talbot recognized her as a former British packet,
the "Sandwich," now sailing under French letters of marque. Her known
speed and seaworthy qualities made her too valuable a prize to be left
in the hands of the enemy; and Talbot, without more ado, determined to
capture her. The first difficulty that lay in the way was the fact
that the vessel was under the protection of Spain, a neutral power.
Talbot was no man to notice so purely formal an obstacle. He growled
out a decided negative to all hints about respecting a neutral flag.
Spain neutral, indeed! She might claim to be neutral, but her
Picaroons were too often to be found among the French pirates to leave
any respect for Spain's neutrality in the mind of a man of sense; and
the "Sandwich" he was going to take, and on his own responsibility.
This silenced all opposition.

Having arrived at the determination to take the "Sandwich," the next
problem to be solved was, how shall she be taken? Obviously the first
step was to make a careful reconnoissance of the ship and her
defences. To Lieut. Hull of the "Constitution," this duty was
assigned. One dark and stormy night Mr. Hull took one of the frigate's
cutters, and, pulling into the harbor, carefully examined the
situation. On his return, he reported that the "Sandwich" was stripped
of her rigging, and lay directly under the guns of a small battery,
built on shore for her protection. To sail in with the frigate, and
capture the enemy by mere force of arms, would have been simple
enough; but the object of the Americans was to take the ship without
injuring her, in order that she might at once join the United States
squadron. Strategy was therefore necessary.

It was accordingly determined to secure an American merchant-vessel,
that could enter the port, and run alongside the "Sandwich," without
arousing suspicion. Luckily at that very moment a craft turned up that
filled the need precisely. This was the American sloop "Sally," a
battered, weather-beaten little craft, that had for some time been
trading in the West Indies, and by her very insignificance had escaped
capture by the French. She had often entered and cleared from Port
Platte, and therefore her appearance there would create no suspicion.

[Illustration: Hull Makes A Reconnoissance.]

The "Sally" was accordingly chosen to bear the sailors on their
audacious expedition. A rendezvous having been appointed, the sloop
met the "Constitution" far out at sea; and a large body of
blue-jackets and marines left the frigate, and took quarters on the
clumsy little merchantman, which then laid her course for Port Platte.
About midnight the lookouts on the "Sally" saw a vessel's lights near
at hand; but, beyond reporting to the officer of the deck, they paid
no heed to their neighbor. Suddenly, however, out of the darkness came
a bright flash; and the hum of a heavy shot in the air above the
"Sally" was followed by the dull report of a cannon. At the same time
a blue light burned on the deck of the vessel from which the shot
proceeded, showed her to be a powerful frigate. Then ensued a few
moments of intense suspense for the little band on the "Sally." Should
the stranger prove to be a French frigate, all was lost; but in that
latitude English vessels were common, and possibly this might be one.
Soon the regular thumping of oars in the tholepins, and the splashing
of the waves against an approaching boat, could be heard; and in a few
minutes a hail came from the black water alongside, and the dark
figure of a man standing in the stern-sheets of a boat was seen. A
rope was thrown him, by the aid of which he nimbly clambered aboard.
An involuntary murmur of relief arose from the party on the "Sally,"
as by the dim light of the lanterns they saw that the officer wore a
British uniform. The officer himself could not repress a start and
exclamation of surprise as he saw a band of officers in naval uniform,
and a large body of blue-jackets and marines, on the vessel which he
expected to find manned by a half-dozen lanky Yankees, commanded by a
down-east "skipper."

"Why, what ship's this?" he exclaimed in surprise, as he looked upon
the armed men about him. Lieut. Hull, who was in command, explained to
him the situation, and told him of the adventure that was being
attempted. The officer seemed much disappointed, and told Mr. Hull
that the British frigate was standing about outside the harbor, to
capture the "Sandwich" as she came out; but the idea of so boldly
setting at naught the principles of neutrality had not occurred to
them. After a few minutes' conversation, the visitor returned to his
ship, and the "Sally" proceeded on her errand. She reached the
entrance to the harbor of Port Platte in the morning, and sailed
boldly in. Most of the crew and the marines were hidden beneath the
bulwarks, or sent below; so that the people on the "Sandwich" gave but
a glance to the approaching vessel, until she ran so close to their
vessel's bows that they feared an accident.

"Look out there, or you'll run foul of us!" shouted a mate from the
deck of the "Sandwich"; and, as if his cry was a signal, the helm of
the "Sally" was put down, the vessel ranged up alongside, and in an
instant a torrent of armed men poured over the sides of the surprised
Frenchman, and drove the crew below. There was no resistance. The ship
was captured in five minutes. The marines of the expedition had been
sent ashore to spike the guns of the battery, and their work was
performed with equal promptitude. Then all hands set to work rigging
the captured vessel, and getting her ready for sea. On the shore the
people were in the greatest excitement, beating drums, parading the
few militia, and threatening dire revenge in the name of outraged
Spain. But the captors of the vessel paid but little attention to
their enemies; and by sunset the "Sandwich," with all sails set, left
the harbor, and joined the United States squadron.

The news of this achievement, lawless as it was, evoked great
enthusiasm in the United States. A nation's conscience is elastic; and
the people praised the heroes of the "Sandwich" episode, much as
sixty-five years later they commended the commander of the "Wachuset"
for running down and capturing the Confederate ship "Florida," which
was relying upon the protection of a neutral port in Brazil. Yet in
1814, when two British frigates attacked and captured the "Essex" in
the harbor of Rio Janeiro, the good people of the United States were
loud in their denunciations of the treachery of a commander who would
so abuse the protection of a neutral nation. Such inconsistencies are
only too common in the history of nations. In the end, however, the
affair of the "Sandwich" terminated disastrously for the bold
adventurers; for the protests of Spain were too forcible to be
disregarded, and the prize-money of all concerned in the exploit was
confiscated to pay the damages awarded the injured party.

Not all the successes of the United States navy in the war with France
were, like those we have related, dependent upon the speed rather than
the fighting qualities of our ships. Not many months had passed, when
two representative ships of the warring nations met, and tried
conclusions at the mouths of their cannon. It was on the 9th of
February that the "Constellation," one of the new American frigates,
was cruising on her station in the West Indies, when her lookout
reported a large ship some miles to leeward. The frigate at once ran
down the stranger, which hoisted American colors. Among ships of the
same navy it is customary to have private signals of recognition; and
Commodore Truxton, who commanded the "Constellation," set his signal,
and awaited the answer. But no answer came; and the stranger,
evidently considering further disguise impossible, boldly set French
colors, and fired a gun to windward by way of a challenge.

On the "Constellation" the challenge aroused universal enthusiasm. For
the first time since the Revolution, the gallant defenders of the
stars and stripes were to have an opportunity to try their strength
with a hostile man-of-war. The enemy seemed no less ready for the
conflict, and waited gallantly for the "Constellation" to come down to
closer quarters. From both ships came the roll of the drums and the
shrill pipings of the bo's'n's whistle, as the men were called to
quarters. Then all became still, and the two frigates bore down upon
each other. Neither antagonist was hasty about opening fire, and the
report of the first gun came from the Yankee when she had come into
point-blank range. Then began the thunderous broadsides, that soon
enveloped the hulls of the two ships in dense gray smoke; so that, to
an observer at a little distance, all that could be seen of the fight
was the tapering masts and yard-arms, above the smoke, crowded with
sailors repairing damages, and nimble young midshipmen shrilly
ordering about the grizzled seamen, and now and again taking a crack
at the enemy with pistol or musket, by way of recreation. In the
foretop of the "Constellation" was stationed young David Porter, who
in that trying moment showed the result of his hard schooling in the
merchant-service, of which we have spoken. By the rapid fire of the
enemy, the fore-topmast was badly cut, and there was great danger that
it might go by the board. Porter hailed the deck several times for
instructions, but, finding that his voice could not be heard above the
roar of battle, determined to act upon his own responsibility, and
accordingly cut away the sails, lowered the yards, and, by relieving
the injured spar of all strain, prevented its falling. In the mean
time the battle raged fiercely below. The American frigate was more
powerful in her armament, and better handled, than the Frenchman. Her
guns were handled with deliberation, and the aim of the gunners was
sure and deadly; while the shot from the enemy went hurtling through
the rigging of the "Constellation," doing but little damage. The
decks of the Frenchman were covered with dead and wounded, and at
last two raking broadsides from the American frigate ended the
conflict. When the vanquished ship was boarded, she proved to be the
"Insurgente," the same frigate that had captured the "Retaliation"
some months before. Her loss in this engagement amounted to
twenty-nine killed and forty-one wounded, while the cock-pit of the
"Constellation" was tenanted by but three wounded men; and but one
American had lost his life, he having been killed by an officer, for
cowardice. Both ships were badly cut up in the engagement.

The news of this victory was received with great rejoicing in the
United States, and was celebrated with cannon-firing and the ringing
of bells. At Boston, the fourth Sunday in March was set for a day of
general rejoicing; and on that day huge crowds gathered in State
Street, and after salutes had been fired, and the city's bells pealed,
the people, at a given signal, joined in three mighty cheers, that
fairly shook the surrounding houses, for Truxton, the "Constellation,"
the blue-jackets, and the success of the wooden walls of America.

Even after the "Insurgente" had struck her flag, the tars of the
"Constellation" found they had an elephant on their hands. The work of
transferring the prisoners was begun, and actively prosecuted; but,
when night fell, there were still nearly two hundred Frenchmen on the
prize. The wind was rising fast, and the long rollers of the Atlantic
were being lashed into foaming breakers by the rising gale. It was
hazardous for the two vessels to continue near each other; and
Lieutenant Rodgers, with Midshipman Porter and eleven men, was
detailed to take charge of the prize, and bring her into port. When
the officers boarded the prize, they found that they had indeed a
desperate undertaking before them. It was difficult enough for
thirteen men to handle the great ship, without having to keep in
subjection one hundred and seventy-three captives. To add to the
clanger, the gratings had been thrown overboard, and there was no way
of confining the captives in the hold. A careful search for handcuffs
resulted only in failure. But Rodgers was a man of decision, and
Porter, though but a boy, was bold and determined; and between them
they solved the problem. The prisoners were ordered below; and a
sentinel was placed at each hatchway, with orders to shoot the first
man who should attempt to come on deck. Howitzers loaded with grape
were trained upon the hatchway, for use in case of an organized
movement of the prisoners. For three days the officers sustained this
fearful strain, without a moment's sleep; but their labors were
finally crowned by successfully bringing the ship and prisoners into
St. Kitts.

In the second pitched battle of the war, the "Constellation" was again
the American combatant; but this time, though the fight was a glorious
one, it did not terminate so fortunately for the American ship. It was
on the 1st of February, 1800, that the gallant frigate, under the same
commander, was cruising about her old hunting-grounds, near
Guadaloupe. A sail was sighted, which, after a careful examination
through his marine-glass, Commodore Truxton pronounced to be an
English merchantman. As an invitation to the stranger to approach,
English colors were hoisted on the "Constellation," but had only the
effect of causing the stranger to sheer off; for she was, indeed, a
French war-vessel. Perplexed by the actions of the mysterious ship,
the "Constellation" gave chase, and soon came near enough to see that
she had caught a Tartar; for the vessel was the French frigate "La
Vengeance," mounting fifty-two guns. Although a more powerful vessel
than the American, she continued her flight; while the gallant
Truxton, caring nothing for the odds against him, kept on in hot
pursuit. All the remainder of that day, and until noon of the next,
the chase continued, with but little change in the position of the
ships. "A stern chase is a long chase," thought the jackies on the
"Constellation;" but they were not discouraged, and only crowded on
the more sail. On the afternoon of the second day, the American began
to gain rapidly; and by eight at night the two ships were within
speaking distance of each other. Truxton mounted the rail, and shouted
through a speaking-trumpet, "What ship is that?" The only answer was a
shot from the stern-port of the Frenchman, and the fight was opened.

It was then growing dark, though the faint glow of the long tropic
twilight still lingered on the western horizon. Above the towering
masts of the two great frigates, the stars gleamed with a brilliancy
seldom seen in more northern latitudes. As the ships rushed through
the water, the waves broke against the bows, and fell back in masses
of phosphorescent light; while the wakes of the vessels could be
traced far back into the darkness,--two parallel paths of light, that
glowed and sparkled like the milky way that spanned the starry sky
above.

Side by side the two frigates ploughed through the water. The creaking
of their cordage, and the rushing of the wind through the rigging,
mingled with the thunder of the cannonade, which, though slow, and
made up of single reports, when the "Constellation" was confined to
the use of her bow-chasers, soon rose to thunderous broadsides as the
two ships came side to side. As the twilight died away, the two
contestants were enveloped in almost total darkness, save for the
fitful flashes of the cannon, and the red glare of the battle-lanterns
that hung from the shrouds. The gunners had for a target nothing but a
black, shapeless mass, that could be seen rushing through the waves
some hundreds of yards away. But this did not prevent fearful
execution being done on both sides. For five hours the two ships kept
up the running fight. The ponderous eighteen and forty-two pound shot
of the enemy crashed into the "Constellation," or swept her decks,
doing dreadful damage. The deck was strewn with dead and dying men,
and the surgeons down in the cock-pit soon had their tables full of
moaning sufferers. No one could tell what might be the condition of
"La Vengeance;" but her regular fire told that she was in no wise
disabled. At one o'clock in the morning, the sound of her guns seemed
to be more distant; and by the flash of the cannon it was seen that
she was drawing out of the fight. The Americans cheered lustily, and
Truxton ordered that his ship be braced up in chase.

But the fire of the enemy had been rapid and well directed; and now,
at this critical moment, its results were to rob the "Constellation"
of her victory. As the ships were brought about, to follow in the
track of the flying "Vengeance," an officer came rushing to the
quarter-deck, and reported that all the shrouds and braces of the
foremast had been shot away, and the mast was in momentary danger of
falling. The rigging had been so literally cut in pieces by the fire
of the enemy, that splicing was out of the question; but Truxton, in
the hope of saving his mast, called all hands from the guns, and the
fire of the "Constellation" stopped.

Up in the foretop was stationed Midshipman Jarvis, with a dozen or
more of jackies, whose duty it was to mend the cordage of the topmast,
and to keep up a musketry fire upon the enemy. Long before the officer
of the deck had reported the danger of the foremast, one of the topmen
had told Jarvis, who was but a lad, that the mast was likely to fall.

"Ay, ay, my lad," responded the plucky young officer; "but our place
is here, and we must go with it."

The sailors on the deck below worked manfully: but, notwithstanding
all their efforts, the mast soon went by the board; and Jarvis and his
brave comrades were thrown far out into the black water, never to be
seen again.

The fall of the foremast ended the battle for the "Constellation."
Helpless, and cumbered by the wreck, she tossed about on the water
while her foe made good her escape. What might have been the outcome
of the conflict, had it continued, it is impossible to tell. "La
Vengeance" carried heavier metal and a larger crew than the American
frigate; and Truxton, with all his dash, found no mean adversary in
Capt. Pitot. Yet the condition of the French ship when she came into
port at Curacoa showed that the fire of the Yankee gunners had been
rapid and accurate. Fifty of the enemy were killed, and one hundred
and ten wounded; while, of the Americans, only thirty-nine appeared on
the lists of killed and wounded. It was said at the time, that Capt.
Pitot reported having struck his flag three times; hoisting it again,
on finding that in the darkness the "Constellation" took no notice of
the surrender. But this seems, on the face of it, improbable; and the
action can hardly be awarded to either ship, although the gallantry
shown on either side was enough to win a victory.

It may well be imagined that this brilliant action, together with the
capture of "L'Insurgente," made the "Constellation" the most popular
ship of the navy; a place which she held until the stirring events of
the war with England pushed the "Constitution" so far to the front,
that even now, when she lies dismantled and rotting at the Brooklyn
navy-yard, Americans still think of "Old Ironsides" as the typical
ship of our once glorious navy.

The actions between the "Constellation" and the "Vengeance" and
"Insurgente" were the chief contests between regularly commissioned
ships of the two nations in the war with France. But the West Indies
were filled with privateers and semi-piratical craft, with which the
navy waged a ceaseless warfare, which well prepared the blue-jackets
for the graver struggle which was yet to come with Great Britain. The
half-savage population of the French islands was a fruitful source of
trouble to the American seaman. These gentry, known as Picaroons,
seemed to have a natural inclination for piracy; and the unlucky
merchant-captain who should come to anchor, or be becalmed, near one
of the islands, was sure to see his vessel boarded, and his cargo
plundered, by a lawless horde of Frenchmen and mulattoes, whose
dialect was an unmusical combination of French and African tongues.
The custom of the Picaroons was to do their cruising in huge barges
propelled by sweeps. With these they would often cut out a
merchant-vessel from beneath the guns of a protecting man-of-war, and
tow her off to be plundered at leisure. Occasionally, however, their
well-laid plans failed in the execution.

One of the most noted of these occasions was the repulse of ten
Picaroon barges that attacked the United States topsail schooner
"Experiment," and a fleet of merchantmen under her charge. The
"Experiment," with her convoy, was lying becalmed in the Bight of
Leogane, in the island of San Domingo. Not a breath of air was
stirring; and the vessels, drifting about at the mercy of the
currents, soon became widely separated, and were an easy prey for the
hordes of Picaroons that swarmed in that region. In no way could the
"Experiment" secure a position which would enable her to protect all
the merchantmen. In this dilemma it was determined to disguise the
war-vessel, in the hopes that the pirates, taking her for a
merchantman, would attack her first. This was done; and, as luck would
have it, the Picaroons fell into the trap.

Although not the captain of the ship, Lieut. David Porter was in
command on this occasion; and, on hearing that ten Picaroon barges
with swivels in the bows, and crews of forty men each, were
approaching, he sent his crew to quarters, and prepared for a
desperate resistance. Onward over the smooth waters came the huge
barges, each with its twenty-six oars, looking like a mighty
centipede. On the ship every thing was quiet, as the jackies stood to
their guns, with the prospect of a deadly struggle before them. Should
the barges get to close quarters, and surround the schooner, no
earthly power could prevent their boarding, when their numbers would
surely bring them success. But the painful pause before the battle was
not long. Suddenly Porter, ever on the alert, cried out to fire. From
every gun that could be brought to bear, a storm of grape and canister
was rained upon the advancing boats; and the yells that went up from
the astounded Picaroons told of the deadly work done in the crowded
boats. For a moment, the fleet of barges fell into confusion; some
retreating, some advancing, and others drifting about helpless.
Although the murderous fire was kept up, the pirates formed again, and
attempted to get alongside, but were repeatedly beaten back. With
musketry and swivels they attempted to answer the fire of the
Americans; but with little effect, for the crew of the "Experiment"
kept close under the bulwarks. Men were precious then, and Porter
would not let one expose himself unnecessarily; but he himself, from
his prominent post of observation, was an easy mark, and a Picaroon's
bullet soon lodged in his shoulder. Notwithstanding the painful wound
he never left his post. The unexpected opposition only maddened the
Picaroons, and they made desperate attempts to get alongside; but to
no avail. Now the stern and now the bow of the "Experiment" was chosen
as the point of attack; but still the rapid fire of the jackies beat
the pirates back.

On the low-lying shores of the islands, some hundreds more of the
Picaroons had gathered to watch the conflict; and, as the boats became
short-handed from the carnage, they put back to the shore, and
returned to the fight fully re-enforced. The bodies of the dead were
thrown overboard without ceremony, and soon attracted great schools of
the fierce sharks that abound in the waters of the tropics. Then a new
horror was added to the scene. At a moment when the barges wavered and
floated for a moment without motion, Porter ordered his gunners to
load with solid shot. Two or three broadsides rang out; and, when the
smoke cleared away, two barges were seen to be sinking. The affrighted
crews bent to their oars, and strained every muscle to reach the
shore; but, while yet in deep water, the barges sunk, and the
Picaroons were left floundering in the sea. All struck out manfully
for the shore; but suddenly one sprung half from the water, and with a
horrid yell sunk from sight. One after another disappeared in the same
way; for the sharks had tasted blood, and were not to be appeased. For
seven hours the conflict raged fiercely; but at last the Picaroons
confessed themselves beaten, and sullenly relinquished their attacks
upon the "Experiment." But they were not to be wholly robbed of their
plunder; and two merchant-vessels fell a prey to their piratical
violence, before a breeze, springing up, enabled the squadron to
escape.

Before the year was over, the Picaroons had another serious defeat to
mourn over; and on this second occasion they were well punished for
their many piracies. The "Boston," a twenty-eight-gun ship, was
convoying a merchant-brig to Port au Prince, when the lookout
discovered nine large barges skulking along the shore, ready to pounce
upon the two vessels when a favorable moment should arrive. Porter was
again in command. His tactics were at once determined upon; and the
ports of the "Boston" were closed, and the ship thoroughly disguised.
The Picaroons were deceived sufficiently to make a dash upon the two
ships, and approach boldly within easy gunshot; then, discovering
their mistake, they turned and fled in panic. This time no calm
hampered the ship-of-war; and, making all sail, she dashed into their
midst. For two hours she kept within easy range of the barges; and her
gunners, working deliberately, did fearful execution in the ranks of
the enemy, and sunk three barges before the wretched fugitives could
reach the shore. After dealing out this summary justice, the "Boston"
continued her voyage, and, after leaving her convoy in the port of her
destination, began a cruise about the islands and the Spanish Main. In
the course of this cruise she met the French corvette "Le Berceau,"
which struck after a plucky action of two hours. The Frenchman was
badly cut up in hull and rigging, and shortly after the surrender her
fore and main masts went by the board. The "Boston" was but little
injured, and took her prize safely into port.

After this the fighting was chiefly confined to short, sharp affrays
between the smaller United States ships and the French privateers,
which were generally good sailers and well manned, although deficient
in metal. The great frigates like the "Constellation" found no more
adversaries worthy of their fighting qualities, and only the sloops
and topsail-schooners gave their crews a chance to smell gunpowder.
Some of these smaller actions, however, were sharp and gallant,
although their details have not been preserved like those of the
famous naval duels.

The "Experiment," after her adventure with the Picaroons, fought two
gallant battles, and was successful in each, although the second for a
time threatened to lead to international difficulties. While cruising
on her station, the vessel made two sail, which, as they came nearer,
proved to be a brig of eighteen guns and a three-masted schooner of
twenty guns, both flying the French tricolor, and both intent on
mischief. The American fled, but laid her course in such a way as to
separate the two pursuers. When night had fallen, Lieut.-Commander
Stewart, who commanded the "Experiment," saw that the enemy's forces
were divided by about a league of green water, and at once determined
to strike a blow. Doubling on his course, he ran his vessel alongside
the schooner, and poured in two or three broadsides with such rapidity
and haste that the Frenchman struck before his consort could come to
his aid. Hastily throwing Lieut. Porter and a prize-crew aboard the
prize, Stewart dashed off after the brig, which fled incontinently,
and proved too good a sailer to be overtaken. Pure audacity had
carried the day for the "Experiment," for the brig was powerful enough
to have blown her pursuer to bits in a short engagement.

The second exploit of the "Experiment" was no less gallant than this,
but in the end proved far less satisfactory. Late in a summer's
afternoon a suspicious sail was made; and the chase, begun at once,
had continued until nightfall. When darkness settled over the ocean,
Stewart calculated the course laid by the stranger, and ordered his
helmsman to keep the ship on that course until midnight, when, if the
fugitive was not overhauled, the chase would be abandoned. Just before
midnight a sail was seen near by and to windward. The men were sent to
quarters; and with guns shotted, and battle-lanterns burning, the
"Experiment" ran up under the stranger's lee, and hailed. No answer
was returned. Perplexed and irritated, Stewart ordered a shot fired
into the stranger, which was no sooner done than a broadside was
returned, which made the schooner reel. Both vessels were then plunged
into conflict, though neither knew the name or nationality of the
opponent. For a time the "Experiment" was handicapped by the heavy
wind, which laid her over so far that her guns were elevated skyward,
and her shot whistled through the enemy's tops. To obviate this,
planks were thrust under the breeches of the guns, until at last the
proper range was secured, when an active cannonade soon forced the
stranger to strike. Lieut. Porter was sent to take possession of the
prize; but the report he brought back put all thought of prize-money
out of the minds of the victors, for the stranger was a Bermudian
privateer, flying the British flag, and under the protection of a
nation with which the United States was at peace. The fault lay with
the privateers for not responding to the hail, but the Americans did
all in their power to repair the damage done. All the next day they
lay by their vanquished adversary, and the sailors of two ships worked
side by side in patching up the injuries done by the shot. By night
the privateer was able to continue her cruise, resolving, doubtless,
to avoid future conflicts with the ships of the American navy.

But to enter into the details of each of the naval duels of the French
war of 1798, would require a volume devoted exclusively to its
consideration. Although there was never a declaration of war between
the two countries, yet the warfare on the ocean was earnest, and even
desperate. Both nations went to work with a will, and the results were
of incalculable benefit to the then pygmy navy of the United States.
In their newspapers the Americans read with wonder and pride of the
successes of their new vessels and young sailors, against the trained
seamen and best frigates of France. When the war closed, the country
rang with the praises of the blue-jackets. Indeed, a record of
sixty-four French vessels captured, besides many American vessels
which were recaptured from their captors, was enough to arouse
feelings of pride throughout the nation; and the celerity with which
France seized upon the proposal for peace showed well the reputation
which our navy had gained beyond the ocean. For months after the peace
was signed, the names of Bainbridge, Truxton, Stewart, and Talbot were
household words throughout the nation; and the deeds of the gallant
ships along the Spanish Main were the favorite stories of the boys of
the land. Three of the oaken veterans, however, never came home; but
against their names must be put the saddest of all naval records:
foundered at sea. The captured "Insurgente," the "Saratoga," and the
"Pickering" simply vanished from the ocean. Over fourscore years have
passed; and of them, and the gallant lads that manned them, nothing
has ever been known. Whether they perished by the fury of the tropical
typhoon, whether a midnight collision sent them suddenly to the
bottom, or whether the ships were destroyed and the crews murdered by
the piratical desperadoes of the West Indies, can never be known.
Somewhere on the coral-strewn bed of the blue seas of the tropics lie
the mouldering hulks of those good ships, and the bones of their
gallant crews. There will they lie, unknown and unsought, until
earthly warfare is over for all men, and the sea gives up its dead.




CHAPTER III.

     PROPOSED REDUCTION OF THE NAVY. -- RENEWAL OF BRITISH
     OUTRAGES. -- THE AFFAIR OF THE "BALTIMORE." -- ATTACK ON THE
     "LEANDER." -- ENCOUNTER BETWEEN THE "CHESAPEAKE" AND
     "LEOPARD."


Not many months had elapsed after the close of the war between the
United States and France, when the pride of the nation in the navy
that had won such laurels in that conflict began to wane. In the place
of poems and editorials singing the praises and pointing out the value
of the navy, the newspapers began to be filled with demands for its
reduction. It was an unwarrantable expense, exclaimed the critics of
the press, for a nation so young, and so far from the warring peoples
of Europe, to maintain a navy at all. A few gunboats to guard the
coast would be enough. All the consequences of the reduction of the
navy at the close of the Revolution were forgotten in an instant. A
penny-wise and pound-foolish spirit came over all the political
leaders; and the Democratic party, then newly come into power,
determined to endear itself to the hearts of the people by cutting
down the expenses of the Government, and to this end they attacked
first the appropriations for the navy. A gallant fight was made
against the total abolition of the navy; and finally it was decided to
retain thirteen of the ships-of-war on the list, while the others
should be sold. With these thirteen vessels, of which the most noted
were the "Constitution," the "Constellation," and the "United States,"
the navy was placed upon a peace footing. Even this moderate squadron,
however, brought out much opposition from economically minded
statesmen; but the aggressions of the Barbary pirates, and the war
with Tripoli which opened in 1801, gave the sailor lads active
employment, and for the time the outcry of the economists against the
navy ceased.

Of the various wars with Tripoli and the other states of Barbary, we
have already given some account. The political bearing of the
Tripolitan war upon the war which afterwards followed with Great
Britain was slight; but, as discipline for the sterner reality of
naval warfare with the nation long reputed to be "mistress of the
seas," the experience of the Yankee tars with the turbaned infidels
was invaluable.

Let us, then, return to the shameful recountal of the injuries
committed by the British upon the American flag on the high seas. Even
while the United States was at war with France, and thus aiding the
British, the outrages never ceased. American sailors were still
impressed. American vessels were boarded, and often seized, on the
slightest pretexts. Even the ships of the Government were not exempt,
for the British respected no right save that of greater power.

It was in November, 1798, that the United States sloop-of-war
"Baltimore," of twenty guns, and under command of Capt. Phillips, was
in charge of a convoy of merchantmen bound to Havana. On the morning
of the 16th of that month, the sloop, with her convoy, were in sight
of their destination, and could even see the solid, towering walls of
the Moro, rising high above the low-lying shores about Havana. The
breeze was fresh and fair; and all hands expected to cast anchor
before night in the beautiful bay, oh the shores of which stands the
chief city of the island of fruits and spices. On the "Baltimore" the
jackies were busily at work holystoning the decks, until they
glistened with the milky whiteness dear to the eye of the sailor of
the days before the era of yellow pine or black, unsightly iron ships.
The shrouds and standing rigging had been pulled taut with many a "Yo,
heave ho!" until the wind hummed plaintively through the taut cordage,
as through the resounding strings of an AEolian harp. The brasswork and
polished breeches of the guns were polished by the vigorous rubbing by
muscular sailors, until they shone again. All told of a coming season
in a friendly port.

While the work of preparation for port was thus going busily on, the
lookout hailed the deck, and reported a squadron in sight. A moment's
glance convinced Capt. Phillips that the strangers were British
war-vessels; and, as they were still accustomed to annoy American
merchantmen, he hastily signalled his convoy to carry sail hard, and
make port before the British came up, while the "Baltimore" bore up to
speak to the British commodore.

Before the merchantmen could escape, however, the British cut off
three of them, under some peculiar and mistaken ideas of the law of
blockades. More than this, when Capt. Phillips paid his visit to the
English commodore in the latter's cabin, he was calmly informed that
it was intended to take from the "Baltimore" into the British service
every sailor who had not a regular American protection; this under the
new English doctrine, that every sailor was an Englishman unless
proved to be otherwise. The avowal by the British captain of this
intention filled Phillips with indignation, and he warmly protested
against any such action.

[Illustration: The British Squadron.]

It would, he insisted, be an outrage on the dignity of the nation
which he served; and, as the overpowering force of the British
rendered resistance impossible, he should insist upon surrendering his
ship should they persist in their undertaking, which was no more nor
less than open warfare. With this he arose from his seat, and leaving
the cabin, to which he had been invited as the guest of a friendly
nation, returned to his own ship.

Here he found a state of affairs that still further added to his
indignation. At the foot of the gangway of the "Baltimore" floated a
boat from one of the British ships, and on the deck of the sloop was a
lieutenant in British uniform in the act of mustering the American
crew. Capt. Phillips at once seized the muster-roll, and ordered the
officious Briton to walk to leeward, while the crew of the "Baltimore"
were sent to their quarters.

But, having done this, he became doubtful as to the course for him to
pursue. Successful resistance was out of the question; for he was
surrounded by five British vessels, one of which carried ninety-eight
guns, while the smallest mounted thirty-two, or twelve more than the
"Baltimore." Even had the odds against him been less great, Capt.
Phillips felt grave doubts as to his authority to resist any armed
vessel. He had sailed under instructions that "the vessels of every
other nation (France excepted) are on no account to be molested; and I
wish particularly to impress upon your mind," wrote the Secretary of
the Navy, "that should you ever see an American vessel captured by the
armed ship of any nation at war, with whom we are at peace, you cannot
lawfully interfere, for it is to be taken for granted that such nation
will compensate for such capture, if it should prove to have been
illegally made." After some deliberation over this clause in his
instructions, Capt. Phillips concluded that for him to make even a
formal resistance would be illegal; and accordingly the flag of the
"Baltimore" was lowered, and the British were told that the ship was
at their disposal. They immediately seized upon fifty-five men from
the American crew, who were taken away to the British fleet. But in
this wholesale impressment they did not persist. Fifty of the men were
sent back; and the squadron set sail, carrying away the five pressed
men, and leaving the men of the "Baltimore," from the captain down to
the smallest cabin-boy, smarting under the sense of an indignity and
insult offered to the flag under which they served.

Capt. Phillips hoisted his flag again, and continued his cruise. News
travelled slowly in those days; and the tidings of this latest
British insult did not reach the United States until the "Baltimore,"
returning home, brought it herself. Hardly had the ship reached port,
when Capt. Phillips hastened to Philadelphia, then the national
capital, and laid his report of the affair before the Government. In a
week's time, without even the formality of a trial, he was dismissed
from the navy.

After the lapse of more than eighty years it is impossible to look
back upon this affair without indignation, mortification, and regret.
That the naval officers of Great Britain should have been able, by the
mere force of arms, to inflict so cruel an insult upon our flag, can
but arouse indignation in the breast of every true American. And the
humiliation was great enough, without having added to it the obviously
hasty and unjust action of the authorities, in dismissing, without a
trial, an officer who had faithfully served his country. It is indeed
possible that Capt. Phillips erred gravely in his course; but justice
alone demanded for him a fair trial, and the nature of his
instructions certainly afforded him some justification for his action.

The years that opened the nineteenth century were full of events that
exerted the greatest influence over the growth of the United States.
The continuance of the Napoleonic wars in Europe, our own war with the
Barbary powers, the acquisition of Louisiana,--all these had their
effect on the growth of the young Republic of the West. But, at the
same time, England was continuing her policy of oppression. Her
cruisers and privateers swarmed upon the ocean; and impressment of
seamen and seizure of vessels became so common, that in 1806 memorials
and petitions from seamen and merchants of the seaport towns poured in
upon Congress, begging that body to take some action to save American
commerce from total destruction. Congress directed the American
minister in London to protest; but to no avail. Even while the
correspondence on the subject was being carried on, the British gave
renewed evidence of their hostility to their former Colonies, and
their scorn for the military or naval power of the United States. From
the far-off shores of the Mediterranean came the news that boats from
the fleet of the British Admiral Collingwood had boarded the United
States gunboat No. 7, and taken from her three sailors, under the
pretence that they were Englishmen. But an occurrence that shortly
followed, nearer home, threw this affair into oblivion, and still
further inflamed the national hatred of the English.

A small coasting sloop, one of hundreds that made voyages along the
American coast from Portland to Savannah, was running past Sandy Hook
into New York Bay, when she was hailed by the British ship "Leander,"
and ordered to heave to. The captain of the coaster paid no attention
to the order, and continued on his way, until a shot from the cruiser
crashed into the sloop, and took off the head of the captain, John
Pearce of New York. This was murder, and the action of the British in
firing upon the sloop was gross piracy. Such an outrage, occurring so
near the chief city of the United States, aroused a storm of
indignation. The merchants of New York held meetings at the old
Tontine Coffee-House, and denounced not only the action of the British
cruiser, but even impeached the Government of the United States;
declaring that an administration which suffered foreign armed ships to
"impress, wound, and murder citizens was not entitled to the
confidence of a brave and free people." The fact that the captain of
the offending cruiser, on being brought to trial in England, was
honorably acquitted, did not tend to soothe the irritation of the
Americans.

Occurrences such as this kept alive the American dislike for the
English, and a year later an event happened which even the most ardent
peace-lover could not but condemn and resent with spirit.

In 1807 the United States frigate "Chesapeake," then lying at the
navy-yard at Washington, was put in commission, and ordered to the
Mediterranean, to relieve the "Constitution." Nearly a month was
consumed in making necessary repairs to hull and cordage, taking in
stores, shipping a crew, and attending to the thousand and one details
of preparation for sea that a long time out of commission makes
necessary to a man-of-war. While the preparations for service were
actively proceeding, the British minister informed the naval
authorities that three deserters from His British Majesty's ship
"Melampus" had joined the crew of the "Chesapeake;" and it was
requested that they should be given up. The request was made with due
courtesy; and, although there is no principle of international law
which directs the surrender of deserters, yet the United States, as a
friendly nation, was inclined to grant the request, and an inquiry was
made into the case. The facts elicited put the surrender of the men
out of the question; for though they frankly confessed to have
deserted from the "Melampus," yet they claimed to have been impressed
into the British service, and proved conclusively that they were free
Americans. This was reported to the British minister; and, as he made
no further protests, it was assumed that he was satisfied.

Some weeks later the vessel left the navy-yard, and dropped down the
river to Hampton Roads. Even with the long period occupied in
preparation for sea, the armament of the ship was far from being in
order; a fact first discovered as she passed Mount Vernon, as she was
unable to fire the salute with which at that time all passing
war-vessels did honor to the tomb of Washington. After some days stay
at Hampton Roads, during which time additional guns and stores were
taken on, and the crew increased to three hundred and seventy-five
men, the ship got under way, and started on her voyage.

It was on a breezy morning of June that the "Chesapeake" left the
broad harbor of Hampton Roads, the scene of so many of our naval
glories. From the masthead of the frigate floated the broad pennant of
Commodore Barron, who went out in command of the ship. The decks were
littered with ropes, lumber, and stores, which had arrived too late to
be properly stowed away. Some confusion is but natural on a ship
starting on a cruise which may continue for years, but the condition
of the "Chesapeake" was beyond all excuse; a fact for which the
fitting-out officers, not her commander, were responsible.

As the American ship passed out into the open ocean, there was a great
stir on the decks of four English cruisers that lay quietly at anchor
in Lynn Haven Bay; and almost immediately one of these vessels hoisted
her anchor, set her sails, and started out in the track of the
frigate. A stiff head-wind blowing, the American was forced to tack
frequently, in order to get ahead; and her officers noticed that the
British ship (the "Leopard," of fifty guns) tacked at the same time,
and was evidently following doggedly in the wake of the "Chesapeake."
No suspicion that the pursuer had other than peaceful motives in view
entered the minds of the American officers; and the ship kept on her
course, while the sailors set about putting the decks in order, and
getting the vessel in trim for her long voyage. While all hands were
thus busily engaged, the "Leopard" bore down rapidly, and soon hailed,
saying that she had a despatch for Commodore Barron. The "Chesapeake"
accordingly hove to, and waited for a boat to be sent aboard.

The two ships now lay broadside to broadside, and only about a half
pistol-shot apart. No idea that the Englishman had any hostile designs
seems to have occurred to Commodore Barren; but some of the younger
officers noticed that the ports of the "Leopard" were triced up, and
the tompions taken out of the muzzles of the cannon. The latter fact
was of the gravest import, and should have been reported at once to
the commander; but it appears that this was not done.

In a few moments a boat put off from the "Leopard," and pulled to the
American ship, where an officer stood waiting at the gangway, and
conducted the visitor to Barron's cabin. Here the English lieutenant
produced an order, signed by the British Admiral Berkeley, commanding
all British ships to watch for the "Chesapeake," and search her for
deserters. Commodore Barron immediately responded, that the
"Chesapeake" harbored no deserters, and he could not permit his crew
to be mustered by the officer of any foreign power. Hardly had this
response been made, when a signal from the "Leopard" recalled the
boarding officer to his ship.

The officers of the "Chesapeake" were now fully aroused to the dangers
of the situation, and began the attempt to get the ship in readiness
for action. Commodore Barron, coming out of his cabin for the first
time, was forcibly struck by the air of preparation for action
presented by the "Leopard." Capt. Gordon, the second in command, was
ordered to hasten the work on the gun-deck, and call the crew to
quarters. The drummers began to beat the call to quarters, but hasty
orders soon stopped them; and the men went to their places quietly,
hoping that the threatening attitude of the "Leopard" was mere
bravado.

The most painful suspense was felt by all on board the American ship.
The attitude of the "Leopard" left little doubt of her hostile
intentions, while a glance about the decks of the "Chesapeake" told
how little fitted she was to enter into action. Her crew was a new
one, never exercised at the guns, and had been mustered to quarters
only three times. On the gun-deck lay great piles of cumbrous cables,
from the coiling of which the men had been summoned by the call to
quarters. On the after-deck were piles of furniture, trunks, and some
temporary pantries. What little semblance of order there was, was due
to the efforts of one of the lieutenants, who, suspecting trouble when
the "Leopard" first came up, had made great exertions toward getting
the ship clear. While the captain stood looking ruefully at the
confusion, still more serious troubles were reported. The guns were
loaded; but no rammers, powder-flasks, matches, wads, or gun-locks
could be found. While search was being made for these necessary
articles, a hail came from the "Leopard." Commodore Barron shouted
back that he did not understand.

"Commodore Barron must be aware that the orders of the vice-admiral
must be obeyed," came the hail again.

Barron again responded that he did not understand. After one or two
repetitions, the British determined to waste no more time in talking;
and a single shot fired from the bow of the "Leopard" was quickly
followed by a full broadside. The heavy shot crashed into the sides of
the "Chesapeake," wounding many of the men, and adding to the
confusion on the gun-deck. No answer came from the American frigate;
for, though the guns were loaded, there was no way of firing them.
Matches, locks, or loggerheads were nowhere to be found. Mad with rage
at the helpless condition in which they found themselves, the officers
made every effort to fire at least one volley. Pokers were heated
red-hot in the galley-fire, and carried hastily to the guns, but
cooled too rapidly in the rush across the deck. In the mean time, the
"Leopard," none too chivalric to take advantage of an unresisting foe,
had chosen her position, and was pouring in a deliberate fire. For
nearly eighteen minutes the fire was continued, when the flag of the
"Chesapeake" was hauled down. Just as it came fluttering from the
masthead, Lieut. Allen, crying, "I'll have one shot at those rascals,
anyhow," ran to the galley, picked up a live coal in his fingers, and
carried it, regardless of the pain, to the nearest gun, which was
successfully discharged. This was the only shot that the "Chesapeake"
fired during the affair,--battle it cannot be called.

A boat with two British lieutenants and several midshipmen on board
speedily boarded the "Chesapeake," and the demand for the deserters
was renewed. Four seamen were seized, and borne away in triumph; but
the British commander refused to receive the ship as a prize, and even
went so far as to express his regret at the loss of life, and proffer
his aid in repairing the damages. Both sympathy and assistance were
indignantly rejected; and the disgraced ship went sullenly back to
Norfolk, bearing a sorely mortified body of officers and seamen. Of
the four kidnapped sailors, it may be stated here, that one was
hanged, and the other three forced to enter the British service, in
which one died. His comrades, five years later, were restored to the
deck of the ship from which they had been taken.

[Illustration: Lieut. Allen Fires A Shot.]

The news of this event spread like wildfire over the country, and
caused rage and resentment wherever it was known. Cities, towns, and
villages called for revenge. The President issued a proclamation,
complaining of the habitual insolence of British cruisers, and
ordering all such vessels to leave American waters forthwith. As in
the reduced state of the navy it was impossible to enforce this order,
he forbade all citizens of the United States to give aid to, or have
any intercourse with, any such vessels or their crews. War measures
were taken both by the Federal and State Governments. As usual, the
popular wrath was vented upon the least culpable of the people
responsible for the condition of the "Chesapeake." Commodore Barren
was tried by court-martial, and sentenced to five years' suspension
from the service, without pay. The cool judgment of later years
perceives the unjustness of this sentence, but its execution cast a
deep shadow over the remainder of the unhappy officer's life.

For some years after this episode, little occurred to change the
relations of the two nations. The war spirit grew slowly, and was kept
alive by the occasional reports of impressments, or the seizure of
American ships by British privateers. The navy held its place amid the
national defences, although a plan devised by President Jefferson came
near putting an end to the old organization. This plan provided for
the construction of great numbers of small gunboats, which should be
stationed along the coast, to be called out only in case of attack by
an armed enemy. A contemporary writer, describing the beauties of this
system, wrote, "Whenever danger shall menace any harbor, or any
foreign ship shall insult us, somebody is to inform the governor, and
the governor is to desire the marshal to call upon the captains of
militia to call upon the drummers to beat to arms, and call the
militia men together, from whom are to be _drafted_ (not impressed) a
sufficient number to go on board the gunboats, and drive the hostile
stranger away, unless during this long ceremonial he should have taken
himself off." Fortunately the gunboat system did not work the total
extinction of the old navy.

In 1811 the British aggressions began again, and the situation became
more and more warlike. So bold had the privateers become, that they
captured a richly laden vessel within thirty miles of New York.
Shortly after, the British frigate "Guerriere" stopped an American
brig eighteen miles from New York, and took from her a young sailor.
The sea was running very rough, and a stiff breeze blowing, when the
"Spitfire" was halted by the frigate; but the American captain went
with the captured lad to the war-vessel, and assured the commander
that he had known the young man as a native of Maine from his boyhood.
The reply was, "All that may be so; but he has no protection, and that
is enough for me." With these memories fresh, it is not surprising
that Americans rejoiced when the news of an encounter terminating in
favor of the United States ship was received.

On May 7, 1811, the United States frigate "President" was lying
quietly at anchor off Fort Severn, Annapolis. Every thing betokened a
state of perfect peace. The muzzles of the great guns were stopped by
tompions. The ports were down. In the rigging of the vessel hung
garments drying in the sun. At the side floated half a dozen boats.
Many of the crew were ashore on leave. The sailing-master was at
Baltimore, and the chaplain and purser were at Washington. From the
masthead floated the broad pennant of Commodore Rodgers, but he was
with his family at Havre de Grace; and the executive officer, Capt.
Ludlow, was dining on the sloop-of-war "Argus," lying near at hand.
But the captain's dinner was destined to be interrupted that bright
May afternoon; for in the midst of the repast a midshipman entered,
and reported that the commodore's gig was coming up rapidly, with
Rodgers himself on board. The dinner party was hastily broken up, and
the captain returned to his ship to receive his superior officer. On
his arrival, Commodore Rodgers said that he had received orders to
chase the frigate that had impressed the sailor from the "Spitfire,"
and insist upon the man's being liberated, if he could prove his
citizenship. This was good news for every man on the frigate. At last,
then, the United States was going to protect its sailors.

Three days were spent in getting the crew together and preparing for
sea; then the stately frigate, with all sails set and colors flying,
weighed anchor, and stood down the Chesapeake with the intention of
cruising near New York. She had been out on the open ocean only a day,
when the lookout, from his perch in the cross-trees, reported a
strange sail on the horizon. The two vessels approached each other
rapidly; and, as the stranger drew near, Rodgers saw, by the
squareness of her yards and the general trim, symmetrical cut of her
sails, that she was a war-vessel. Perhaps she may be the offender,
thought he, and watched eagerly her approach.

As the stranger came up, the "President" set her broad pennant and
ensign; on seeing which the stranger hoisted several signal flags, the
significance of which was not understood by the Americans. Finding her
signals unanswered, the stranger wore ship, and bore away to the
southward, hotly followed by the "President." During all these
manoeuvres, Rodgers's suspicion of the strange vessel had increased;
and her apparent flight only convinced him the more of the hostile
character of the stranger. It was a stern chase and a long one, for at
the outset the stranger was hull down on the horizon. After an hour it
became evident that the "President" was gaining, for the hull of the
fugitive was plainly seen. The breeze then died away, so that night
had fallen over the waters before the ships were within hailing
distance.

A little after eight in the evening the "President" was within a
hundred yards of the chase, which could be seen, a dark mass with
bright lights shining through the rows of open ports, rushing through
the water directly ahead. Rodgers sprang upon the taffrail, and
putting a speaking-trumpet to his lips, shouted, "What ship is that?"
A dead silence followed. Those on the "President" listened intently
for the answer; but no sound was heard save the sigh of the wind
through the cordage, the creaking of the spars, and the rush of the
water alongside. Rodgers hailed again; and, before the sound of his
words had died away, a quick flash of fire leaped from the stern-ports
of the chase, and a shot whizzed through the rigging of the
"President," doing some slight damage. Rodgers sprang to the deck to
order a shot in return; but, before he could do so, a too eager gunner
pulled the lanyard of his piece in the second division of the
"President's" battery. The enemy promptly answered with three guns,
and then let fly a whole broadside, with discharges of musketry from
the deck and the tops. This exhausted Rodgers's patience. "Equally
determined," said he afterwards, "not to be the aggressor, or to
suffer the flag of my country to be insulted with impunity, I gave a
general order to fire." This time there was no defect in the ordnance
or the gunnery of the American ship. The thunderous broadsides rang
out at regular intervals, and the aim of the gunners was deliberate
and deadly. It was too dark to see what effect the fire was having on
the enemy, but in five minutes her responses began to come slowly and
feebly. Unwilling to continue his attack on a ship evidently much his
inferior in size and armament, Rodgers ordered the gunners to cease
firing; but this had hardly been done when the stranger opened again.
A second time the guns of the "President" were run out, and again they
began their cannonade. The stranger was soon silenced again; and
Commodore Rodgers hailed, that he might learn the name of his
adversary. In answer came a voice from the other vessel,--

"We are his Majesty's ship ----." A gust of wind carried away the
name, and Rodgers was still in doubt as to whom he had been fighting.
Hoisting a number of bright lights in her rigging, that the stranger
might know her whereabouts, the "President" stood off and on during
the night, ready to give aid to the disabled ship in case of need.

[Illustration: Commodore Rodgers Hails.]

At early dawn every officer was on deck, anxious to learn the fate of
their foe of the night before. Far in the distance they could see a
ship, whose broken cordage and evident disorder showed her to have
been the other party to the fight. A boat from the "President" visited
the stranger, to learn her name and to proffer aid in repairing the
damages received in the action. The ship proved to be the British
sloop-of-war "Little Belt;" and her captain stated that she was much
damaged in her masts, sails, rigging, and hull, and had been cut
several times between wind and water. He declined the proffered aid,
however, and sailed away to Halifax, the nearest British naval
station. Commodore Rodgers took the "President" to the nearest
American port.

When the "President" reached home, and the news of her exploit became
known, the exultation of the people was great, and their commendations
of Rodgers loud. "At last," they cried, "we have taught England a
lesson. The insult to the 'Chesapeake' is now avenged." Rodgers
protested that he had been forced unwillingly into the combat, but his
admirers insisted that he had left port with the intention of humbling
the pride of some British ship. Indeed, the letter of an officer on
the "President," printed in "The New York Herald" at the time, rather
supported this theory. "By the officers who came from Washington,"
wrote this gentleman, "we learn that we are sent in pursuit of a
British frigate, who had impressed a passenger from a coaster.
Yesterday, while beating down the bay, we spoke a brig coming up, who
informed us that she saw the British frigate the day before off the
very place where we now are; but she is not now in sight. We have made
the most complete preparations for battle. Every one wishes it. She is
exactly our force; but we have the "Argus" with us, which none of us
are pleased with, as we wish a fair trial of courage and skill. Should
we see her, I have not the least doubt of an engagement. The commodore
will demand the person impressed; the demand will doubtless be
refused, and the battle will instantly commence.... The commodore has
called in the boatswain, gunner, and carpenter, informed them of all
circumstances, and asked if they were ready for action. Ready, was the
reply of each."

No consequences beyond an intensifying of the war spirit in America
followed this rencounter. Before dismissing the subject, however, it
is but fair to state that the account as given here is in substance
Commodore Rodgers's version of the matter. The British captain's
report was quite different. He insisted that the "President" fired
the first shot, that the action continued nearly an hour, that it was
his hail to which no attention was paid, and finally he intimated that
the "President" had rather the worse of the encounter. The last
statement is easily disproved, for the "President" was almost
unscathed, and the only injury to her people was the slight wounding
of a boy, in the hand. On the "Little Belt," thirty-one were killed or
wounded. The other points led to a simple question of veracity between
the two officers. Each government naturally accepted the report of its
officer; and, so far as the governments were concerned, the matter
soon passed into oblivion.

Not long after this episode, a somewhat similar occurrence took place,
but was happily attended with no such serious consequences. The
frigate "United States," cruising under the broad pennant of Commodore
Decatur, fell in with two British ships near New York. While the
commanders of the vessels were amicably hailing, a gun was suddenly
fired from the battery of the "United States," owing to the
carelessness of a gunner in handling the lanyard. It was a critical
moment, for the British would have been justified in responding to the
fire with broadsides. Happily, they were cool and discreet, and
Decatur made such explanations as showed that no attack or insult was
intended. This little incident is interesting, as showing the distrust
of the British which led an American captain to keep his guns primed
and cocked, while conversing with English men-of-war.

Another incident showed that the hatred of the British service that
prevailed among seamen was a matter of deep-seated conviction. While
the United States ship "Essex" was lying in an English port, it became
known that one of her crew was a deserter from the British navy, and
his surrender was immediately demanded. Although the man stoutly
protested that he was an American, yet no proof could be shown; and,
as the ship was in British waters, it was determined to surrender him.
A British officer and squad of marines boarded the "Essex" and waited
on the deck while the sailor went below to get his kit. Bitterly
complaining of the hardness of his fate, the poor fellow went along
the gun-decks until he passed the carpenter's bench. His eye fell upon
an axe; and after a minute's hesitation he stepped to the bench,
seized the axe in his right hand, and with one blow cut off the left.
Carrying the severed member in his hand, he again sought the deck and
presented himself, maimed, bleeding, and forever useless as a sailor,
to the British officer. Astonished and horrified, that worthy left the
ship, and the wounded man was sent to the sick-bay. The incident was a
forcible commentary on the state of the British service at that time,
and left a deep impression on the minds of all beholders.

In the next contest over deserters, however, the Americans rather
secured the best of the argument. The "Constitution" was lying at
anchor in Portsmouth roads, when one of the crew slily slipped
overboard and swam down with the tide to the British ship "Madagascar"
that lay at anchor near by. When he had reached the Englishman, he was
too exhausted to speak; and the officers, supposing that he had fallen
overboard accidentally, sent word to the "Constitution" that her man
had been saved, and awaited the orders of his commander. The next
morning a boat was sent down to the "Madagascar" to fetch the man
back; but, to the astonishment of the visiting officer, he was told
that the sailor claimed to be a British subject and wished to escape
from the American service.

"Have you any evidence," asked the American officer of the British
admiral, "beyond the man's own word, that he is an Englishman?"

"None whatever, sir," was the response, "but we are obliged to take
his declaration to that effect."

The American officer returned to his ship, vowing vengeance on the
harborers of the deserter. His opportunity came that very night.

In the dead watches of the night, when all was still on deck save the
monotonous tramp of the sentries, there suddenly rang out on the still
air the sharp crack of a musket. The officer of the deck rushed to see
what was the matter, and was shown a dark object floating near the
ship, at which a sentry had fired. A boat was lowered and soon came
back, bringing in it a sailor who had deserted from the "Madagascar,"
and reached the "Constitution" by swimming. Capt. Hull asked the
fellow his nationality.

"Sure, O'im a 'Merricun, your honor," he answered in a rich brogue
that would have branded him as a Paddy in any part of the world. With
a twinkle in his eye, Hull sent the Irishman below, and told the
sailors to take good care of him.

Early in the morning, a boat came from the "Madagascar;" and a trim
young lieutenant, clambering aboard the American frigate, politely
requested that the deserter be given up. With great dignity, Capt.
Hull responded that the man was a citizen of the United States, and
should have protection. The visiting officer fairly gasped for breath.
"An American!" he exclaimed. "Why, the man has never been out of
Ireland except on a British man-of-war."

"Indeed!" responded Hull blandly. "But we have his statement that he
is an American, and we are obliged to take his declaration to that
effect." And the man was never given up.

During the day, two British frigates cast anchor so near the
"Constitution" that Capt. Hull suspected them of hostile intentions,
and moved his ship to a new anchorage. A frigate followed closely in
her wake. At eight in the evening, Capt. Hull determined to meet the
show of force with force. The drums beat, and the men were called to
quarters. The battle-lanterns were lighted fore and aft. The tops were
crowded with sailors, armed with short carbines, to pick off the men
on the enemy's decks. Along the gun-deck stood the men at the guns;
and an officer, describing the scene, says they took hold of the ropes
as if they were about to jerk the guns through the ship's sides. All
were enthusiastic over the prospect of the coming action.

"Now, then, my lads," said an officer to a group of sailors, "if a
fight comes of this, it will be in the cause of you sailors; and I
expect you to fight like men."

"Ay, ay, sir," was the response. "Let the quarter-deck look out for
the colors, and we'll keep the guns going."

All the preparations for battle were made openly, and the attitude
taken by the "Constitution" was an open challenge. No notice of it was
taken by the British ship; and, after maintaining her hostile attitude
for some time, the "Constitution" hoisted her anchor, and left the
harbor.

The time of the formal declaration of war was now rapidly approaching.
The long diplomatic correspondence between the two nations had failed
to lead to any amicable solution of the difficulties that were fast
urging them to war. Great Britain still adhered to her doctrine that a
man once an Englishman was always an English subject. No action of
his own could absolve him from allegiance to the flag under which he
was born. Upon the trade of the United States with France, the English
looked with much the sentiments with which, during our civil war, we
regarded the thriving trade driven with the Confederacy by the British
blockade-runners. Upon these two theories rested the hateful "right of
search" and the custom of impressment.

It is needless to say that the views of the United States on these
questions were exactly contrary to those of the English. Such vital
differences could, then, only be settled by war; and war was
accordingly declared in June, 1812. It was a bold step for the young
nation, but there was enough of plausibility in the English claims to
make it evident that they could never be set aside by diplomacy; and
so, with hardly a thought of the odds against her, the United States
dashed in to win justice at the muzzles of her cannon.

That the odds were tremendous, is not to be denied. Of the military
strength of the two nations, it is not the purpose of this book to
treat. Indeed, a recountal of the land battles of the war of 1812
would hardly be pleasant reading for Americans. It was on the sea that
our laurels were chiefly won. Yet, at the time of the declaration of
war, the navy of the United States consisted of twenty vessels, of
which the largest carried forty-four guns, and the majority rated
under thirty. For years this navy had been a butt of ridicule for all
the European naval powers. The frigate "Constitution" was scornfully
termed by an English newspaper "a bunch of pine boards sailing under a
bit of striped bunting." Not long after the publication of this
insolent jeer, the "Constitution" sailed into an American port with a
captured British frigate in tow. Right merrily then did the Americans
boast of their "bunch of pine boards."

This miniature navy of the United States was about to be pitted
against the greatest naval power of the world. The rolls of the navy
of Great Britain bore at this time the names of over one thousand
ships. Of these, no less than two hundred and fifty-four were
ships-of-the-line, mounting over seventy-four guns each. Behind this
great navy were the memories of long years of conquests, of an almost
undisputed supremacy upon the ocean. Small wonder was it, then, that
the British laughed at the idea of the Americans giving battle to
their hitherto unconquered ships.

What, then, was the secret of the success which, as we shall see,
attended the American arms on the sea? The answer is, that men, not
ships, carried the day. Yet Great Britain had the more sailors on her
muster-rolls. True, but they were only too often unwilling slaves.
Instead of enlisting, like free men, they were hunted down like brutes
and forced to enter the service. No sailor was safe from the
press-gang, and even sober citizens were often kidnapped to serve the
'King' on the ocean. From the ships of other nations, from their homes
and from taverns, the unlucky sailors were dragged away. Even in the
streets of populous cities, they were not safe; and it was no uncommon
sight to see pitched battles being fought between the press-gangs and
sailors whom they were trying to capture. Generally, the inhabitants
and landsmen sided with the victims; and a sailor running through the
streets of the town would be given every assistance by people, who
filled with obstacles the path of his pursuers. Could he reach the
water-side, the fugitive would find every boat at his service; while
his pursuers, on coming up, found every water-man very busy and very
gruff. But the wonder is, that, with this unjust and repulsive system
of impressments, the British sailors were so loyal, and fought with
the dogged courage that they invariably showed.

In the American navy, on the contrary, the enlistments were voluntary.
The service was popular, and the seamen entered it without the feeling
of outraged liberty inspired by the British system. Officers were
readily obtained from the ranks of the adventurous American
navigators. Officers and men alike often brought into the service
personal memories of British oppression; and this, with their free and
independent spirit, enabled them to wage an unequal war with glorious
results for the supporters of the stars and stripes.




CHAPTER IV.

     THE WAR ON THE OCEAN. -- COMMODORE RODGERS'S CRUISE. -- THE
     LOSS OF THE "NAUTILUS." -- FIRST SUCCESS FOR THE BRITISH. --
     THE ESCAPE OF THE "CONSTITUTION." -- THE "ESSEX" TAKES THE
     "ALERT." -- THE "CONSTITUTION AND THE "GUERRIERE."


At the time when the declaration of war was made public, a small
squadron of United States vessels was lying in the port of New York,
under the command of Commodore Rodgers. The warlike tendency of the
popular mind had long been evident, and the captain of every
war-vessel had been for some time making active preparations for
service. Some apprehension was felt in naval circles, lest the small
size of the navy should lead the authorities to lay up the vessels in
port during the continuance of the war. This apprehension was well
founded; for not only had such a course been debated in the cabinet,
but orders had been prepared, directing Commodore Rodgers to hold his
vessels in port. This decision was actively opposed by the officers
of the navy, who felt that, though inconsiderable in numbers, the
United States navy could make a brave fight for the honor of the
nation; and with one accord all protested against the action
contemplated. Two officers, Capt. Bainbridge and Capt. Stewart, went
to Washington and sought an interview with the Secretary of the Navy,
Paul Hamilton, who assured them that the plans of the Government were
well matured and would not be changed. The United States could not
afford, said the secretary, that its few frigates and men-of-war
should be snapped up by the enormous fleets of the British, as would
surely be the case, if they ventured upon the ocean. But it was not
intended to materially reduce the lists of naval officers. The
frigates, with all their loose spars and top-hamper taken down, were
to be anchored at the entrances of the principal harbors of the
country, and operated as stationary batteries.

This prospect was far from agreeable to the two officers. It was
intolerable for them to imagine the graceful frigates, with towering
masts and snowy canvas, reduced to mere shapeless hulks, and left to
guard the entrance of a placid harbor. Finding the secretary
inexorable, they went to the President and put the case before him.
They assured him, that, small though the list of American ships was,
it bore the names of vessels able to cope with any thing of their
class in the British navy. Both officers and seamen were proud of the
service, and burned to strike a blow for its honor. President Madison
seemed much impressed by their representations, and agreed to take the
matter into consideration; and, if it seemed wise, to change the plan.
But, before any definite action was taken by him, war was declared.

Within an hour after he had received news of the declaration of war,
Commodore Rodgers had his squadron under way, and dropped down New
York Bay to the ocean. Under his command were the flag-ship
"President" of forty-four guns, the "Essex" thirty-two, and the
"Hornet" eighteen. In the lower bay these vessels were joined by the
"United States" forty-four, the "Congress" thirty-eight, and the
"Argus" sixteen. On June 21, 1812, three days after the declaration of
war, the whole squadron passed Sandy Hook, and stood out into the
ocean.

It is probable that the remarkable celerity of Commodore Rodgers's
departure was due, in part, to the fear that the authorities would
revive the obnoxious order laying up the ships in port. His chief
object, however, was to overhaul a large fleet of British merchantmen
that had recently left the West Indies, and, according to all
calculations, should have been in the vicinity of New York at that
time. All sail was accordingly crowded upon the ships, and the
squadron set out in hot pursuit.

For two days the monotony of the horizon was broken by no sail; but on
the third a ship was espied in the distance, which was made out to be
an enemy's frigate, after which chase was made by the whole squadron.
A fresh breeze was blowing, and both chase and pursuers were running
free before the wind. As sail after sail was crowded upon the ships,
the smaller vessels, with their lesser expanse of canvas, began to
fall behind; and in a few hours the frigate "President" had gradually
drawn away from the fleet, and was rapidly gaining on the enemy. The
sail had been spied at six o'clock in the morning, and at four P.M.
the flag-ship had come within gunshot of the chase. The wind then
fell; and the chase, being long out of port and light, began to gain
on her heavier adversary. Both vessels now began to prepare for a
little gunnery. On the English vessel, which proved to be the
"Belvidera," thirty-six, the sailors were busily engaged in shifting
long eighteens and carronades to the stern, making a battery of
stern-chasers mounting four guns.

The action was opened by a gun from the bow of the "President,"
sighted and fired by Commodore Rodgers himself; so that this officer
may be said to have fired the first gun of the war. His shot was a
good one, hulling the enemy. A second shot from one of the guns of the
first division broke off the muzzle of one of the "Belvidera's"
stern-chasers; and a third shot, fired by Commodore Rodgers, crashed
into the stern of the chase, killing two men, and wounding several
others. Certainly in their first action the Yankees showed no lack of
skill in gunnery.

The chase was slow in responding to the fire; and although her
commander, Capt. Byron, sighted the guns for the first few discharges
himself, his aim was by no means so good as that of the Americans. The
British showed great energy, however, in defending their ship. Not
content with the stern guns already mounted, they shifted to the stern
ports two long eighteen-pounders on the main deck, and two
thirty-two-pound carronades on the quarter-deck. With these they kept
up a brisk fire, which soon became effective, many shots cutting the
rigging of the "President," while one plunged down upon the deck,
killing a midshipman and two or three men. But the superiority of the
American gunnery was beginning to tell, when, at a critical moment, a
main-deck gun, on the "President," burst with a stunning report; and
the flying fragments killed or wounded sixteen men. The force of the
explosion shattered the forecastle deck. Commodore Rodgers was thrown
high into the air, and, falling heavily on the deck, suffered a
painful fracture of the leg. The crew was at once thrown into
confusion and almost panic. Every gun was looked upon with suspicion.
Encouraged by this confusion, the enemy worked his stern guns with
renewed vigor, and at the same time lightened his ship by cutting away
boats and anchors, and starting fourteen tons of water. Thus
lightened, she began to draw away from the "President;" perceiving
which, the latter ship yawed several times, and let fly full
broadsides at the escaping chase. The shot rattled among the spars of
the "Belvidera," but the nimble topmen quickly repaired all damages;
and the British ship slowly but steadily forged ahead. Seeing no hope
of overtaking her, Rodgers ordered the chase abandoned; and the
American squadron again took up its search for the fleet of British
merchantmen.

But this, the first cruise of the United States navy in the war was
destined to be a disappointment to all concerned. The key-note set by
the affair just related--in which the "President" lost twenty-two men,
and permitted her adversary to escape--was continued throughout the
voyage. Always finding traces of the enemy they were seeking, the
Americans never succeeded in overhauling him. One day great quantities
of orange-peel, cocoanut-shells, and similar fragments of tropical
fruits gave the jackies assurance of the proximity of the long-sought
enemy, and urged them on to renewed energy and watchfulness. Then the
master of an English letter-of-marque, captured by the "Hornet,"
reported that the day before he had passed a fleet of eighty-five
sail, of which four were men-of-war. That night there was no room in
the minds of the sailors for any thoughts other than those of big
prize-money. But their golden dreams were never to be fulfilled; for,
although the chase was continued until within a day's run of the
English Channel, no sight of the Jamaica fleet was ever gained.
Abandoning this chase, the squadron returned to Boston by a Southern
route; and, although constantly in the very highway of commerce, few
sails were sighted. When port was reached, the results of a cruise
that had occupied seventy days amounted only to the capture of one
letter-of-marque, seven merchantmen, and the recapture of one American
ship. But Rodgers heard, that, while he had been scouring the ocean
with such meagre results, events of more importance had occurred
nearer home.

[Illustration: Explosion On The "President."]

The British ship "Belvidera," after her lucky escape from the
"President," had made her way to Halifax, the chief naval station of
Great Britain on the American coast. Her report was the first news of
the declaration of war, for at that day news travelled slowly. Once
alarmed, the British were prompt to act; and in a few days a squadron
left Halifax in search of Commodore Rodgers. The force thus hurriedly
gathered was quite formidable. The "Africa" of sixty-four guns, the
"Shannon," thirty-eight, the "Guerriere," thirty-eight, the
"Belvidera," thirty-six, and the "AEolus," thirty-two, made up the
fleet despatched to chastise the headstrong Americans for their
attempt to dispute with Great Britain the mastery of the ocean. Early
in July, this force made its appearance off New York, and quickly made
captures enough to convince the American merchantmen that a season in
port was preferable to the dangers of the high seas in war-times. To
this same fleet belongs the honor of the first capture of a war-vessel
during the war; for the American brig "Nautilus," fourteen guns, was
suddenly overhauled by the entire fleet, and captured after a plucky
but unavailing attempt at flight.

Fourteen-gun brigs, however, were rather small game for a squadron
like that of the British; and it is probable that His Britannic
Majesty's officers were heartily glad, when, some days, later the
United States frigate "Constitution" hove in sight, under
circumstances which seemed certain to make her an easy prey to the
five British ships.

It was on the 17th of July, 1812, that the "Constitution," after
receiving a new crew at Annapolis, was standing northward under easy
sail on her way to New York. About noon four sails were sighted on the
horizon, and an hour later the appearance of a fifth sail was duly
reported. A careful scrutiny of the strangers convinced Capt. Hull
that they were men-of-war, although their nationality could not be
determined. Night fell before the ships could come within hailing
distance; and, though Hull set private signals, no answer was
returned. When day broke, Hull found himself fairly surrounded by
British frigates. In addition to the squadron which has been described
as leaving Halifax, there was the captured "Nautilus" with her guns
turned against her own nation, and a captured American schooner which
had been likewise pressed into the service. Clearly the "Constitution"
was outnumbered, and nothing was left for her but flight.

The events of that three days' chase are told with great minuteness in
the log-book of the "Constitution" to which many of those on board
have, in later publications, added more interesting personal
reminiscences. When the rising mists showed how completely the
American frigate was hemmed in, hardly a breath of air was stirring.
Although every sail was set on the ship, yet she had not steerage way;
and Hull ordered out the boats, to pull the ship's head around and tow
her out of range of her enemies. At the same time, gangs of sailors
with axes cut away the woodwork about the cabin windows, and mounted
two stern guns in the cabin and one on the upper deck. The enemy, in
the mean time, were keeping up a vigorous fire, but without effect.
Their ships were rapidly gaining, as they were enabled to set the
boats of the whole squadron to towing the two foremost vessels. Hull
saw that some new means of getting ahead must be devised.

Soundings were taken, and the ship found to be in twenty-six fathoms
of water. All the available rope in the ship was then bent on to a
kedge and carried far ahead, when the kedge was lowered to the bottom.
The sailors then shipped their capstan-bars, and tramped about the
capstan, until the ship was dragged up to the kedge, which was then
hoisted and again carried ahead and let fall. This manoeuvre was
repeated several times with marked success; for the "Constitution" was
rapidly drawing away from her pursuers, who could not discover her
means of propulsion. Out of sight of land as they were, the British
did not for some time suspect the true cause of the sudden speed of
the fugitive. When, after long scrutiny through their marine-glasses,
they finally did discover the stratagem, the "Constitution" was far
ahead; and though the pursuers adopted the same device, yet their
awkwardness was so great, that even the superior force they were
enabled to employ did not bring them up to their chase.

While the ships were thus being urged on by towing, kedging, and
occasionally by sweeps, an intermittent fire was kept up by the
British, and responded to by the "Constitution" from her stern ports.
The guns which had been mounted by the Americans in the cabin, they
were soon forced to abandon, as the explosions threatened to blow out
the whole stern frame. With the stern-chasers on the gun-deck,
however, a constant fire was maintained, in the hopes of crippling the
enemy by a lucky shot.

For more than forty-eight hours the chase maintained this aspect of
monotony. A dead calm prevailed the greater part of the time.
Occasionally, light breezes filled the sails, and wafted the ships
ahead for a few minutes; then, dying away, left the sea unruffled,
and the sails flapping idly against the masts. British historians
concur with those of our own country, in saying that the
"Constitution," in seizing the advantages of the breeze, showed far
better seamanship than did her enemies. While the British vessels lay
to, to pick up their boats, the "Constitution" forged ahead, picking
up her boats while under way. Later in the chase, the British totally
abandoned their boats, and, when the American frigate had fairly
escaped them, went about for some days picking up such boats as were
found drifting on the broad ocean.

The morning of the second day of the chase dawned with a light breeze
ruffling the water, and filling out the sails of the ships. Before the
breeze died away, which it did in a few hours, the "Constitution" had
gained on her pursuers so that she led them by more than four miles.
Then the calm again held the ships quiet; and again the Americans saw
their enemies closing in upon them by the aid of sweeps, and towing
with their boats. There was little rest for the crew of the American
frigate. On the gun-deck, about the carriages of the great cannon, lay
such of the men as were not assigned to duty in the boats or at the
capstan. Wearied with the constant strain, they fell asleep as soon as
relieved from active duty; though they knew that from that sleep they
might be awakened to plunge into the fierce excitement of desperate
battle. Exhausted as the men were, their officers were forced to
endure a still more fearful strain. No sleep came to the eyelids of
Capt. Hull, throughout the chase. Now encouraging the men, now
planning a new ruse to deceive the enemy, ever watchful of the
pursuing ships, and ready to take advantage of the slightest breath of
air, Capt. Hull and his able first lieutenant Morris showed such
seamanship as extorted admiration even from the British, who were
being baffled by their nautical skill.

By skilful manoeuvring, the Americans managed to keep to the windward
of their enemies throughout the chase; and to this fact the success of
Capt. Hull's most astute stratagem was due. Ever alert for any sign of
a coming breeze, he saw on the water far to windward that rippling
appearance that betokens the coming of a puff. Hull determined to
utilize it for himself, and, if possible, trick the British so that
they would lose all benefit of the breeze. The clouds that were coming
up to windward seemed to threaten a squall, and driving sheets of
rain were rapidly advancing toward the ship. With great ostentation,
the "Constitution" was made ready for a severe gale. The enemy could
see the nimble sailors taking in sail, and furling all the lighter
canvas. Then the driving rain swept over the ship, and she was shut
out of sight. Immediately all was activity in the tops of the British
frigates. Reefs were rapidly taken in the larger sails, while many
were closely furled. All forsook their course, and steered in
different directions in preparation for the coming squall, which,
indeed, was far less violent than the action of the "Constitution"
seemed to indicate. But the shrewd Yankees on that craft, protected
from spying British eyes by the heavy rain, were now shaking out the
reefs they had just set; and under full sail the ship was soon flying
away towards home. After an hour of driving thunder-shower, the clouds
passed by; and the wall-like edge of the shower could be seen moving
rapidly away before the wind. The tars on the "Constitution" watched
eagerly to see the British fleet appear. Farther and farther receded
the gray curtain, and yet no ships could be seen. "Where are they?"
was the thought of every eager watcher on the deck of the
"Constitution." At last they appeared, so far in the distance as to be
practically out of the chase. Two were even hull down; while one was
barely visible, a mere speck on the horizon.

Though now hopelessly distanced, the British did not give up the
pursuit, but held valiantly on after the American frigate. She had so
long been within their very grasp that it was a bitter disappointment
for them to be balked of their prey. But, as the wind now held, the
American gained on them so rapidly that at last they unwillingly
abandoned the chase; and, disbanding the fleet, each ship set off on
an individual cruise, in the hopes that the enemy which had shown such
ability in flight when overpowered would not deign to fly if
encountered by a single hostile ship. This expectation was fully
realized some weeks later, when the "Constitution" fell in with the
British frigate "Guerriere."

Thus, after a chase of more than sixty-four hours, the "Constitution"
evaded her pursuers, and made her way to Boston. Although they reaped
no glory by their labors, the British did not come out of the chase
altogether empty-handed. As the course of the vessels was along the
New England coast, they were in the direct path of American commerce;
and more than one wretched coaster fell into their clutches. At one
time, a fine, full-rigged ship, flying the stars and stripes, came
within sight; and the British, to lure her to her destruction, hoisted
the American flag over all their vessels. But Hull was a match for
them at strategy; and he promptly set the British colors at his
masthead, and began so vigorous a cannonade that the stranger
concluded that a merchantman had no business in that quarter, even
though the Americans did appear to be rather in the majority.

By his able seamanship in this chase Capt. Hull gained for himself a
national reputation. The newspapers of the day vied with each other in
pointing out the manoeuvres in which he had excelled his enemies,--how
he had picked up his boats while under way, though the enemy were
forced to cut theirs adrift; how he had come out of the chase without
injury, and after parting with only a few gallons of water, though a
less cool-headed commander would have thrown overboard guns,
ammunition, and every thing movable, in the face of so great a danger.
A modest sailor, as well as a skilful one, Capt. Hull showed himself
to be; for, while the popular adulation was at its height, he inserted
a card in the books of the Exchange Coffee-House at Boston, begging
his friends to "make a transfer of a great part of their good wishes
to Lieut. Morris and the other brave officers and crew under his
command, for their very great exertions and prompt attention to orders
while the enemy were in chase."

Leaving the "Constitution" thus snugly in port at Boston, we will turn
aside to follow the fortunes of a ship, which, though belated in
getting out to sea, yet won the honor of capturing the first British
war-vessel taken during the war.

When Commodore Rodgers set sail from New York with his squadron, in
the fruitless pursuit of the fleet of Jamaica men, he left in the
harbor the small frigate "Essex," under the command of Capt. David
Porter. The ship was thoroughly dismantled,--stripped of her rigging,
her hold broken out, and provided neither with armament, ammunition,
nor crew. Her captain, however, was a man of indomitable energy; and
by dint of much hard work, and constant appeals to the authorities at
Washington, he managed to get his ship in order, and leave the harbor
within a fortnight after the departure of the squadron under Rodgers's
command.

The "Essex" was a small frigate, lightly sparred, rating as a
thirty-two-gun ship, but mounting twenty-six guns only, of which six
were twelve-pounders, and the remainder carronades of thirty-two
pounds. A carronade is a short cannon of large calibre, but of very
short range. Capt. Porter protested vigorously against being furnished
with a battery so useless except at close quarters: but his protests
were unheeded; and the "Essex" put to sea, trusting to her ability to
get alongside the enemy, where her carronades would be of some use.

Among the midshipmen who bunked, messed, and skylarked together in the
steerage of the "Essex," was one lad whose name in later days was to
be inscribed on the roll of the greatest naval heroes of history.
David Glasgow Farragut was a child of seven years of age when he was
adopted by Capt. Porter, and began his training for a naval career. In
1810 the boy secured his appointment of midshipman; and now, in 1812,
we find him enrolled among the "young gentlemen" who followed the
fortunes of the "Essex." In those days the midshipmen were often mere
boys. Farragut himself was then but eleven years old. But, boys as
they were, they ordered the hardy old tars about, and strutted the
streets when on shore-leave with all the dignity of veterans.

That the discipline of the "Essex" was of the strictest, and that the
efficiency of her crew was above criticism, we have the testimony of
Farragut himself to prove. "Every day," he writes, "the crew were
exercised at the great guns, small arms, and single stick; and I may
here mention the fact, that I have never been on a ship where the crew
of the old "Essex" was represented, but that I found them to be the
best swordsmen on board. They had been so thoroughly trained as
boarders, that every man was prepared for such an emergency, with his
cutlass as sharp as a razor, a dirk made by the ship's armorer out of
a file, and a pistol."

Hardly were the Highlands of Navesink lost to sight below the horizon,
when Porter began to receive evidences that his cruise was to be a
lucky one. Several brigs were captured, and sent into New York; but
the tars of the "Essex" were beginning to grow weary of small game,
and hoped, each time a sail was sighted, that it might be a British
man-of-war. At last a small squadron hove into sight, the appearance
of which seemed to indicate that the jackies might smell gunpowder to
their hearts content before the next day.

It was late at night when the strange fleet was sighted; and the
"Essex" was soon running down upon them, before a fresh breeze.
Although the moon was out, its light was obscured by dense masses of
cloud, that were driven rapidly across the sky; while over the water
hung a light haze, that made difficult the discovery of objects at any
distance. The "Essex" soon came near enough to the squadron to
ascertain that it was a fleet of British merchantmen and transports
convoyed by a frigate and bomb-vessel. The frigate was at the head of
the line; and the "Essex," carefully concealing her hostile character,
clapped on all sail and pressed forward, in the hopes of bringing on
an action. After passing the hindermost transport, however, the
American ship was hailed by a second transport, which soon suspected
her hostile character and threatened to give the alarm. Instantly the
ports of the "Essex" were knocked out, the guns trained on the enemy,
and the transport was ordered to haul out of the line at once, and
silently, under penalty of being fired into. The defenceless ship
complied, and was at once taken possession of, and the soldiers on
board were transferred to the "Essex." This operation took so much
time, that, by the time it was concluded, day dawned over the ocean;
and the attack upon the British frigate was abandoned.

Again the "Essex" continued her cruise in search of an enemy worthy of
her metal. For two or three days she beat about the ocean in the usual
track of ships, without sighting a single sail. The ship had been so
disguised, that the keenest-eyed lookout would never have taken her
for a ship-of-war. The top-gallant masts were housed, the ports of the
gun-deck closed in, and her usually trim cordage and nicely squared
yards were now set in a way that only the most shiftless of merchant
skippers would tolerate. Not many days passed before the enemy fell
into the trap thus set for him.

When on the 13th of August Capt. Porter learned that a sail to
windward, apparently a British man-of-war, was bearing down upon the
"Essex," he carried his little bit of acting still further. Instead of
the great crowd of agile sailors that spring into the rigging of a
man-of-war, at the order to make sail, only a handful, in obedience to
Porter's orders, awkwardly set on the "Essex" all the sail she would
carry. Two long, heavy cables dragging in the water astern so retarded
the ship, that the stranger, coming down gallantly, thought he had
fallen in with a lumbering old American merchantman, which was making
frantic, but futile, efforts to escape.

Had the British captain been able to look behind the closed ports of
the "Essex," he would have formed a very different idea of the
character of his chase. He would have seen a roomy gun-deck,
glistening with that whiteness seen only on the decks of well-kept
men-of-war. Down either side of the deck stretched a row of heavy
carronades, each with its crew of gunners grouped about the breech,
and each shotted and primed ready for the opening volley. From the
magazine amidships, to the gun-deck, reached a line of stewards,
waiters, and cooks, ready to pass up cartridges; for on a man-of-war,
in action, no one is an idler. Active boys were skurrying about the
deck, barefooted, and stripped to the waist. These were the "powder
monkeys," whose duty it would be, when the action opened, to take the
cartridges from the line of powder-passers and carry it to the guns.
On the spar-deck, only a few sailors and officers were visible to the
enemy; but under the taffrail lay crouched scores of blue-uniformed
jackies, with smooth-faced middies and veteran lieutenants, ready to
spring into the rigging at the word of command, or to swarm over the
side and board the enemy, should the gunwales of the vessels touch.

All this preparation, however, was unknown to the "Englishman," who
came boldly on, doubting nothing that the "Essex" would that day be
added to his list of prizes. As he drew nearer, the American sailors
could see that their foe was much their inferior in size and armament;
and the old tars who had seen service before growled out their
dissatisfaction, that the action should be nothing but a scrimmage
after all. In a few minutes, the bold Britons gave three ringing
cheers, and let fly a broadside at the "Essex." In an instant the
ports of the sham merchantman were knocked out; and, with a warlike
thunder, the heavy carronades hurled their ponderous missiles against
the side of the assailant. The astonished Englishmen replied feebly,
but were quickly driven from their posts by the rapidity of the
American fire; and, in eight minutes after the action was opened, the
British hauled down their flag. The captured ship proved to be the
sloop-of-war "Alert," mounting twenty eighteen-pounder carronades. The
boarding officer found her badly cut up, and seven feet of water in
the hold. The officers were transferred to the "Essex," and the
"Alert" taken in tow. Circumstances, however, forced the Americans to
part in a very few days.

The chief cause which led to the separation of the two vessels was an
incipient mutiny, which was discovered by Midshipman Farragut, and was
only averted by the perfect discipline of the American crew. An
exercise to which the greatest attention was given was the
"fire-drill." When the cry of fire was raised on the ship, every man
seized his cutlass and blanket, and went to quarters as though the
ship were about to go into action. Capt. Porter was accustomed, that
his men might be well prepared for any emergency, to raise this cry of
fire at all hours of the night; and often he caused a slight smoke to
be created in the hold, further to try the nerves of his men. Shortly
after the "Alert" was captured, and while the "Essex" was crowded with
prisoners, some of the captives conspired to seize the ship, and carry
her to England. One night, as Farragut was sleeping in his hammock, a
strange feeling of fear came over him; and he opened his eyes to find
the coxswain of the captain's gig of the "Alert" standing over him
with a pistol in his hand. The boy knew him to be a prisoner, and,
seeing him armed, was convinced that something was wrong. Expecting
every moment to be killed, he lay still in his hammock, until the man
turned on his heel and walked away. Then Farragut slipped out, and ran
to the captain's cabin to report the incident. Porter rushed upon the
berth-deck in an instant. "Fire! fire!" shouted he at the top of his
voice; and in an instant the crew were at their quarters, in perfect
order. The mutineers thought that a bad time for their project, and it
was abandoned. The next day the prisoners were sent on board the
"Alert," and that vessel sent into St. Johns as a cartel.

The capture of the "Alert" reflected no great glory upon the
Americans, for the immense superiority of the "Essex" rendered her
success certain. It is, however, of interest as being the first
capture of a British war-vessel. The action made the honors easy
between the two nations; for while the Americans had the "Alert," the
British were captors of the brig "Nautilus." This equality was not of
long duration, however; for an action soon followed which set all
America wild with exultation.

After her escape from the British fleet, the "Constitution" remained
at Boston only a few days, and then set out on a cruise to the
eastward along the New England coast. Bad luck seemed to follow her,
and she had reached a point off Cape Sable before she made a prize.
Here two or three prizes of little value were taken; and an English
sloop-of-war was forced to relinquish an American brig, which had been
recently captured. Shortly afterwards, a Salem privateer was
overhauled, the captain of which reported an English frigate cruising
in the neighborhood; and Capt. Hull straightway set out to discover
the enemy.

The frigate which had been sighted by the Salem privateer, and for
which Hull was so eagerly seeking, was the "Guerriere," a
thirty-eight-gun ship commanded by Capt. Dacres. With both ship and
captain, Capt. Hull had previously had some little experience. The
"Guerriere" was one of the ships in the squadron from which the
"Constitution" had so narrowly escaped a few weeks before, while Capt.
Dacres was an old acquaintance. A story current at the time relates,
that, before the war, the "Guerriere" and the "Constitution" were
lying in the Delaware; and the two captains, happening to meet at some
entertainment on shore, fell into a discussion over the merits of
their respective navies. Although even then the cloud of war was
rising on the horizon, each was pleasant and good-natured; and the
discussion assumed no more serious form than lively banter.

"Well," said Hull at last, "you may just take good care of that ship
of yours, if ever I catch her in the 'Constitution.'"

Capt. Dacres laughed good-humoredly, and offered to bet a sum of
money, that in the event of a conflict his confident friend would find
himself the loser.

"No," said Hull, "I'll bet no money on it; but I will stake you a hat,
that the 'Constitution' comes out victorious."

"Done," responded Dacres; and the bet was made. War was soon declared;
and, as it happened, the two friends were pitted against each other
early in the hostilities.

It was not long after the American frigate parted from the privateer
when the long-drawn hail of "Sail ho-o-o!" from the lookout aloft
announced the discovery of another vessel. The course of the
"Constitution" was at once shaped toward the stranger. In half an hour
she was made out to be a frigate, and from her actions was evidently
anxious to come alongside the American ship. As more than an hour must
elapse before the ships could come together, Capt. Hull made his
preparations for action with the greatest deliberation. The
top-gallant sails were furled, and the lighter spars lowered to the
deck. Through their glasses, the officers could see the enemy making
similar preparations, and waiting deliberately for the "Constitution"
to come down.

At five o'clock in the afternoon the two ships were rapidly nearing,
and the drums on the American frigate beat to quarters. Then followed
the rush of barefooted men along the deck, as they ran hastily, but in
perfect order, to their stations. As the roll of the drums died away,
the shrill voices of the boyish midshipmen arose, calling off the
quarter-bills, and answered by the gruff responses of the men at their
posts. Every man, from the cook to the captain, knew his place, and
hurried to it. The surgeon, with his assistants, descended to the
cock-pit. The carpenter and his mates made ready their felt-covered
plugs, for stopping holes made by the enemy's shot. The topmen
clambered to their posts in the rigging, led by the midshipmen who
were to command them. The line of powder-passers was formed; and the
powder-monkeys gave up skylarking, and began to look sober at the
thought of the business in hand.

The "Guerriere" was not behindhand in her preparations for action.
Capt. Dacres had suspected the character of the American vessel, from
the first moment she had been sighted. On board the English frigate
was Capt. William B. Orne, a Marblehead sailor who had been captured
by the "Guerriere" some days before. "Capt. Dacres seemed anxious to
ascertain her character," wrote Capt. Orne, shortly after the battle,
"and after looking at her for that purpose, handed me his spy-glass,
requesting me to give him my opinion of the stranger. I soon saw, from
the peculiarity of her sails and her general appearance, that she was
without doubt an American frigate, and communicated the same to Capt.
Dacres. He immediately replied, that he thought she came down too
boldly for an American; but soon after added, 'The better he behaves,
the more credit we shall gain by taking him.'

"The two ships were rapidly approaching each other, when the
'Guerriere' backed her main topsail, and waited for her opponent to
come down and commence the action. He then set an English flag at each
masthead, beat to quarters, and made ready for the fight.

"When the strange frigate came down to within two or three miles
distant, he hauled upon the wind, took in all his light sails, reefed
his topsails, and deliberately prepared for action. It was now about
five in the afternoon, when he filled away and ran down for the
'Guerriere.' At this moment Capt. Dacres said politely to me, 'Capt.
Orne, as I suppose you do not wish to fight against your own
countrymen, you are at liberty to retire below the water-line,' It was
not long after this, before I retired from the quarter-deck to the
cock-pit." It may be well here to supplement Capt. Orne's narrative by
the statement that Capt. Dacres, with a chivalric sense of justice not
common in the British navy of that day, allowed ten American sailors
who had been impressed into his crew to leave their quarters and go
below, that they might not fight against their country. Though an
enemy, he was both gallant and generous.

The action was opened by the "Guerriere" with her weather broadside;
the shot of which all falling short, she wore around, and let fly her
port broadside, sending most of the shot through her enemy's rigging,
though two took effect in the hull. In response to this, the
"Constitution" yawed a little, and fired two or three of her bow-guns;
after which the "Guerriere" again opened with broadsides. In this way
the battle continued for about an hour; the American ship saving her
fire, and responding to the heavy broadsides with an occasional shot.

During this ineffectual firing, the two ships were continually drawing
nearer together, and the gunners on the "Constitution" were becoming
more and more restive under their inaction. Capt. Hull was pacing the
quarter-deck with short, quick steps, trying to look cool, but
inwardly on fire with excitement. As the shot of the enemy began to
take effect, and the impatience of the gunners grew more intense,
Lieut. Morris, the second in command, asked leave to respond with a
broadside.

"Not yet," responded Capt. Hull with cool decision. Some minutes
later, the request was repeated, and met with the same response, while
the captain never ceased his pacing of the deck. When within about
half pistol-shot, another broadside came from the "Guerriere." Then
the smothered excitement in Hull's breast broke out.

"Now, boys, pour it into them!" he shouted at the top of his lungs,
gesticulating with such violence that the tight breeches of his naval
uniform split clear down the side. Lieut. Morris seconded the captain
in cheering on the crew.

"Hull her, boys! Hull her!" he shouted; and the crew, catching up the
cry, made the decks ring with shouts of "Hull her!" as they rapidly
loaded and let fly again.

[Illustration: "Hull Her, Boys!"]

The effect of their first broadside was terrific. Deep down in the
cock-pit of the "Guerriere," Capt. Orne, who had been listening to the
muffled thunder of the cannonade at long range, suddenly "heard a
tremendous explosion from the opposing frigate. The effect of her shot
seemed to make the 'Guerriere' reel and tremble, as though she had
received the shock of an earthquake. Immediately after this, I heard a
tremendous shock on deck, and was told that the mizzen-mast was shot
away. In a few moments afterward, the cock-pit was filled with wounded
men."

Though in his retreat in the cock-pit the captive American could hear
the roar of the cannon, and see the ghastly effects of the flying
missiles, he could form but a small idea of the fury of the conflict
which was raging over his head. Stripped to the waist, and covered
with the stains of powder and of blood, the gunners on the two ships
pulled fiercely at the gun-tackle, and wielded the rammers with
frantic energy; then let fly the death-dealing bolt into the hull of
an enemy only a few yards distant. The ships were broadside to
broadside, when the Englishman's mizzen-mast was shot away, and fell,
throwing the topmen far out into the sea. The force of the great spar
falling upon the deck made a great breach in the quarter of the ship;
and, while the sailors were clearing away the wreck, the
"Constitution" drew slowly ahead, pouring in several destructive
broadsides, and then luffed slowly, until she lay right athwart the
enemy's bow. While in this position, the long bowsprit of the
"Guerriere" stretched far across the quarter-deck of the American
ship, and was soon fouled in the mizzen-rigging of the latter vessel.
Then the two ships swung helplessly around, so that the bow of the
Englishman lay snugly against the port-quarter of the Yankee craft.
Instantly, from the deck of each ship rang out the short, sharp blare
of the bugle, calling away the boarders, who sprang from their guns,
seized their heavy boarding caps and cutlasses, and rushed to the
side. But a heavy sea was rolling and tossing the two frigates, so
that boarding seemed impossible; and, as Dacres saw the crowd of men
ready to receive his boarders, he called them back to the guns.
Although each party stuck to its own ship, the fighting was almost
hand to hand. Pistols were freely used; and from the tops rained down
a ceaseless hail of leaden missiles, one of which wounded Capt. Dacres
slightly. So near to each other were the combatants, that the commands
and the cries of rage and pain could be heard above the deep-toned
thunder of the great guns and the ceaseless rattle of the musketry.
The protruding muzzles of the guns often touched the sides of the
opposing ship; and when the cannon were drawn in for loading, the
sailors on either side thrust muskets and pistols through the ports,
and tried to pick off the enemy at his guns.

While the fight was thus raging, a cry of "Fire!" horrified every one
on the "Constitution." Flames were seen coming from the windows of the
cabin, which lay directly beneath the bow-guns of the "Guerriere." The
fire had been set by the flash from the enemy's cannon, so close were
the two ships together. By the strenuous exertions of the men on duty
in the cabin, the flames were extinguished, and this, the greatest of
all dangers, averted. Shortly after, the gun which had caused the
trouble was disabled by a skilful shot from one of the Yankee's guns.

While the flames in the cabin were being extinguished, the Americans
were making a valiant attempt to board and Lieut. Morris with his own
hands was attempting to lash the two ships together. Abandoning this
attempt, he leaped upon the taffrail, and called upon his men to
follow him. Lieut. Bush of the marines, and Mr. Alwyn, were soon at
the side of the intrepid officer, when, at a sudden volley of musketry
from the British, all three fell back, poor Bush dead, and the two
others badly wounded. The ships then drifted asunder; and the
"Guerriere's" foremast was shot away, and dragged down the main-mast
with it in its fall. The shattered ship now lay a shapeless hulk,
tossing on the waves, but still keeping a British ensign defiantly
flying from the stump of her fallen mizzen-mast.

The "Constitution" drew away, firing continually, and soon secured a
raking position; seeing which, the British hauled down their colors.
Lieut. Read was sent on board the prize, and, on the appearance of
Capt. Dacres, said,--

"Capt. Hull presents his compliments, sir, and wishes to know if you
have struck your flag."

Dacres looked significantly at the shattered masts of his ship, and
responded dryly,--

"Well, I don't know. Our mizzen-mast is gone, our main-mast is gone;
and I think, on the whole, you may say that we have struck our flag."

After looking about the ship, the boarding officer stepped to the
side, to return to his own vessel. Before leaving, he said to Capt.
Dacres,--

"Would you like the assistance of a surgeon, or surgeon's mate, in
caring for your wounded?"

Dacres looked surprised, and responded,--

"Well, I should suppose you had on board your own ship business enough
for all your medical officers."

"Oh, no!" answered Read. "We have only seven wounded, and they have
been dressed long ago."

Dacres was astounded, as well he might be; for on the decks of his
ship lay twenty-three dead or mortally wounded men, while the surgeons
were doing their best to alleviate the sufferings of fifty-six
wounded, among whom were several officers. Indeed, the ship looked
like a charnel-house. When Capt. Orne, freed by the result of the
battle, came on deck, he saw a sight that he thus describes: "At
about half-past seven o'clock, I went on deck, and there beheld a
scene which it would be difficult to describe. All the 'Guerriere's'
masts were shot away; and, as she had no sails to steady her, she was
rolling like a log in the trough of the sea. Many of the men were
employed in throwing the dead overboard The decks were covered with
blood, and had the appearance of a ship's slaughter-house. The
gun-tackles were not made fast; and several of the guns got loose, and
were surging from one side to the other. Some of the petty officers
and seamen got liquor, and were intoxicated; and what with the groans
of the wounded, the noise and confusion of the enraged survivors on
board of the ill-fated ship, rendered the whole scene a perfect hell."

For some time after the "Guerriere" had been formally taken possession
of, it seemed as though the "Constitution" would have to fight a
second battle, to keep possession of her prize. A strange sail was
seen upon the horizon, bearing down upon the "Constitution" in a way
that seemed to threaten hostilities. Again the drums beat to quarters,
and once again the tired crew went to their stations at the guns. But
the strange ship sheered off, and the gallant crew were not forced to
fight a second battle. All hands then set to work to remove the
prisoners from the "Guerriere," which was evidently in a sinking
condition.

In the first boat-load from the sinking ship came Capt. Dacres, who
was politely shown into Capt. Hull's cabin. Unclasping his sword from
its place at his hip, the conquered seaman handed it silently to Capt.
Hull. The victor put it gently back, saying,--

"No, no, captain: I'll not take a sword from one who knows so well how
to use it. But I will trouble you for that hat."

For a moment a shade of perplexity passed over the brow of the British
captain; then he recollected the wager of a year or two before, and
all was clear again. Unfortunately, the veracious chronicler who has
handed this anecdote down to modern times has failed to state whether
the debt was duly paid.

After some hours of hard work with the boats, the last of the
prisoners, with their effects, were brought on board the
"Constitution." Torches were then set to the abandoned frigate; and
the sailors watched her blaze, until the fire reached her magazine,
and she vanished in the midst of a tremendous explosion. Then,
leaving behind her the floating mass of ruin, the "Constitution"
headed for Boston, where she arrived after a few days of sailing.

Great was the excitement and exultation aroused among the people by
the arrival of the noble ship with her prisoners. She had, indeed,
come at a time when the public mind required cheering; for from the
interior came the reports of British successes by land, along the
Canadian frontier about Detroit, and for weeks the papers had been
unable to record any success for the American arms. But the report of
the engagement with the "Guerriere" changed wholly the tide of popular
feeling. Boston--the city which at the declaration of war had hung its
flags at half-mast, in token of mourning and humiliation--Boston
welcomed the conquerors with an ovation like to a triumph in the days
of imperial Rome.

When the ship came up the harbor, she was met and surrounded by a
great flotilla of gayly decorated boats; while the flags on the
surrounding vessels were dipped in salutation as the war-scarred
veteran made her stately way to the wharf. Here a volunteer artillery
company was assembled; and, as the ship came up, they fired a national
salute, which was returned from the guns so lately employed in
defending the national honor. Quarters had been prepared for Capt.
Hull in the city; and, as he landed, he found the streets through
which he must pass decked with bright bunting, and crowded with
people. His progress was accompanied by a great wave of cheers; for,
as the people saw him coming, they set up a shout, which was not ended
until he had passed from sight. At night came a grand banquet to the
officers of the ship, at which six hundred sat down to the feast. The
freedom of the city was presented to the captain; and at a later date
came the news of sword presentations from citizens of New York, plate
from the people of Philadelphia, and gold medals from Congress. Amid
all the exultation, the rash arrogance of the British writers was not
forgotten; and many a bumper was emptied to the success of the frigate
described by British journalists as "a bunch of pine boards under a
bit of striped bunting."




CHAPTER V.

     AN INTERNATIONAL DEBATE. -- THE "WASP" AND THE "FROLIC." --
     THE "UNITED STATES" AND THE "MACEDONIAN." -- OVATIONS TO THE
     VICTORS.


The rejoicing over the success of the "Constitution" had not died away
in the United States when the English newspapers began to appear with
elaborate articles, showing just why the battle had terminated as it
did. "The 'Constitution' is the crack frigate of the American navy,"
cried the apologists; but to this the Americans retorted by quoting
the British description of the ship as "a bunch of pine boards." The
"Guerriere" was an "old worn-out frigate," responded the English,
returning to the charge. "She was on her way to Halifax to refit, when
attacked." Again they were refuted by their own statements; for, but a
month before, the "Guerriere" was said to be "able to drive the
insolent striped bunting from the seas." Throughout the discussion,
the shrewdness of the Americans enabled them to meet the arguments of
the British at every point; but not until the charge was made, that
the "Constitution" was chiefly manned by British sailors, did the
people become thoroughly in earnest in the war of words.

Such a charge as this was adding insult to injury. Was not the British
navy full of Americans who were forced against their will to serve
against their own country, while the few Englishmen on the
"Constitution" were enlisted with their own consent? For Capt. Dacres
to say that his ship was weakened by allowing the ten Americans to go
below, and then beaten by the efforts of the Englishmen on the
"Constitution," was merely tantamount to saying that the victory
hinged on the fact that Americans would not fight against their own
country, while Englishmen did so willingly. But for Great Britain to
exclaim against the American navy because it harbored a few
Englishmen, was the rankest hypocrisy. So said the American
journalists of the day; and, in support of their statement, they
printed long letters from American seamen impressed into and held in
the British naval service. One writes that he was impressed into his
British Majesty's ship "Peacock," in 1810, and after serving two years
he heard of the declaration of war. After a consultation with two
fellow-seamen, both Americans, all decided to refuse to serve longer,
claiming to be prisoners of war. But the captain under whom they were
enrolled looked upon the matter in a different light. He heard their
claim, pronounced it a bit of "confounded insolence," and straightway
ordered that they be put in irons. After some hours for meditation in
"the brig," the three sailors were taken to the gangway, stripped
naked, and tied up, while a sturdy boatswain's mate laid on a dozen
and a half blows of the cat. Later, when the ship went into action
with a United States vessel, the three sailors asked to be sent below,
that they might not fight against their own countrymen; but the
captain's sole response was to call up a midshipman, and order him to
do his duty. This duty proved to consist in standing over the three
malcontents with a loaded pistol, threatening to blow out the brains
of the first who should flinch from his work.

Three sailors were impressed after the war had begun. Learning that
the ship on which they found themselves was to cruise upon the
American station, they with one accord refused to serve. The response
to this was "five dozen lashes well laid on." Being still mutinous,
they received four dozen lashes two days later, and after the lapse of
two more days were flogged with two dozen more. But all the beating to
which they were subjected could not compel them to serve against their
country; and they were accordingly ironed and thrown into "the brig,"
where they lay for three months. When released from "the brig," they
found the ship at London. Here they heard of the glorious victory of
the "Constitution," and determined to celebrate it. By ripping up
their clothing into strips, and sewing the strips together, a rude
American flag was made; and with the most astonishing audacity the
three sailors hung this emblem over a gun, and gave three cheers for
the stars and stripes. This naturally brought them another flogging.

Flogging, however, could not always be resorted to in order to bring
American sailors into subjection. It is estimated, that, when war was
declared, there were five times as many American seamen in the British
navy as were in the whole navy of the United States. To attempt to
keep this immense body of disaffected seamen in order by the lash,
would have been impracticable; and soon the custom arose of sending
the more refractory tars into confinement at some English prison.
Dartmoor prison was for a time the principal place of detention for
pressed men; but, as it soon became crowded, it was given over to
prisoners of war, and the hapless seamen were sent to languish in
dismantled ships, known as "hulks." These hulks were generally old
naval vessels, dismasted and stripped of all their fittings. Anchored
midstream in tidal rivers, the rotting hulks tugged at their rusty
chains, as the tide rose and fell, groaning in their bondage, and
seeming as much imprisoned as the wretched sailors by whom they were
tenanted. The captives lived in misery and squalor. Crowded together
in stifling quarters between decks, they were the prey of vermin of
all kinds. Their miserable diet, and lack of proper exercise, caused
the scurvy in its most repulsive forms to break out among them. The
only breath of fresh air they could obtain was when, in gangs, they
were allowed to go on deck, and pace up and down under the watchful
eyes of soldiery; then back to the crowded quarters below, to swelter
in summer or freeze in winter. Such was their punishment for the crime
of being loyal to their country.

[Illustration: Engagement Of The Frigates "United States" And
"Macedonian," Christmas Day, 1812. Copyright, 1892, by C. Klackner]

Careful estimates show that at this time there were at least twenty
thousand American sailors in the British navy, each one of whom was
liable at any moment to be ordered into this inhuman captivity. A
British official document of 1812 reported that 2,548 American seamen
had been imprisoned for refusing to serve against their country.
Hundreds of these were sent to the living death in the hulks. Was it
any wonder that, with such facts, before their eyes, Americans grew
indignant at hearing that the victory of the "Constitution" had been
won by the prowess of British seamen? But before many days had passed,
a victory was recorded for the stars and stripes, which not even the
acuteness of an English naval historian could ascribe to any cause
other than the naval superiority of the victor.

This was the capture, by the United States sloop-of-war "Wasp," of the
British sloop-of-war "Frolic," after a battle ever memorable for the
extraordinary dash and bravery shown by each combatant. In size, the
"Wasp" was one of the inferior vessels of the United States navy. In
her architecture and appointments, however, she was the pride of the
navy, and was often cited as a model ship of her class. Her armament
consisted of sixteen thirty-two-pounder carronades, and two "long
twelves."

When the war broke out, the "Wasp" had just left the coast of Europe,
bearing despatches from the foreign diplomatic representatives of the
United States to the Government. It was accordingly near the middle of
October before the sloop had been refitted, and, with a crew of one
hundred and thirty-five men, left the Delaware, on her first cruise
against the English. Her commander was Capt. Jacob Jones, who had
served in the war with Tripoli, and had himself been a captive among
the barbarians of Northern Africa.

After a few days' cruising, with one or two unimportant captures, a
bunch of sails was sighted at some distance. The most careful
examination failed to reveal the character of the strangers, and Jones
determined to run down cautiously toward the squadron, to reconnoitre.
The wind was blowing fiercely at the time, and a heavy sea was
running, from the effects of a gale of the day before, in which the
"Wasp" lost her jib-boom, together with two sailors who were upon it.
As the vessel bore down upon the strangers, Jones could see through
his marine glasses that they were a convoy of merchantmen, under the
protection of a British sloop-of-war. The merchantmen were evidently
armed, and some seemed to carry as many as twelve guns. Deeming it
unwise to attack at that moment, Capt. Jones kept on a course parallel
with that of the enemy, during the remainder of that day and through
the night. With the break of day, every officer of the "Wasp" was on
deck, and all eyes were turned towards the quarter in which the
Englishmen should be found. There, sure enough, they were. Six
merchant ships and a bluff little brig, the port-holes in the sides of
which showed her to be a war-vessel rating as a sloop. Signs of
activity on board made it evident that the Englishmen had caught sight
of the vessel which had been dogging them for the last day, and were
making ready to give her battle. The British, too, had suffered in the
gale, and the sailors could be seen shipping a new main-yard, and
setting new topsails. On the "Wasp," the jackies were hard at work,
getting in a spar to take the place of the jib-boom, which had been
lost in the storm. Both ships were under short canvas, for the wind
was still high. Instead of the English ensign, a Spanish flag
fluttered from the halliards of the Englishman,--an unnecessary ruse
to draw on an adversary already seeking a conflict.

[Illustration: Loading.]

It was half-past eleven in the morning when the action began. The day
was an ideal October morning at sea,--cool, clear, and a breeze
blowing fresh and constantly stiffening. The two vessels were running
on the starboard tack, not sixty yards apart. As they ploughed
through the waves, great clouds of spray dashed over the bows; and
every now and then a wave would sweep over the forecastle, drenching
the jackies as they stood at their quarters. As they sped along, the
two ships exchanged broadsides, the "Frolic" firing three to the
"Wasp's" two. After every broadside, the gunners cheered as they saw
the damage done by their fire. When the state of the sea is
considered, it seems marvellous that the broadsides should have done
any execution whatever. The vessels were rolling terribly, now
wallowing in the trough of the sea, and again tossed high on the crest
of some enormous wave. At one instant the muzzles of the guns would be
pointed toward the skies, then actually submerged under the waves,
from which they rose dripping, to be loaded and fired before another
dip should soak the charge. Yet, with all this rolling to spoil their
aim, the gunners of both ships pointed their pieces with most
destructive effect. Within five minutes from the time of opening fire,
the main topmast of the "Wasp" was shot away, and hung tangled in the
rigging, despite the active efforts of the topmen, headed by the
nimble midshipmen, to clear away the wreck. This greatly hampered the
movements of the American vessel; and when, a few minutes later, the
gaff and the main top-gallant mast fell, the chances of the American
ship seemed poor indeed. The effects of the "Wasp's" fire were chiefly
to be seen in the hull of her antagonist; but the first twenty minutes
of the fight seemed to give the Englishman every chance of victory,
since his fire had so cut away the rigging of the "Wasp" that she
became unmanageable. It is said that the difference between the
execution done by the two batteries was due to the fact that the
British fired as their ship was rising on the crest of the wave, while
the Americans fired from the trough of the sea, sending their shot
into the hull of the enemy.

While the fight was raging, the two ships were constantly drawing
nearer together; and just as it seemed as though the destruction
wrought in the "Wasp's" rigging would inevitably lead to her defeat,
the two vessels fouled. For an instant they lay yard-arm to yard-arm,
and at that very moment the American gunners poured in a terrific
broadside. So close were the two vessels to each other, that, in
loading, the rammers were shoved up against the sides of the "Frolic."
Before the gunners of the "Frolic" could respond to this broadside,
their ship swung round so that her bow lay against the "Wasp's"
quarter; and her bowsprit passed over the heads of Capt. Jones and
his officers as they stood on the quarter-deck. That was the moment
for a raking volley; and with deadly aim the Americans poured it in,
and the heavy iron bolts swept the decks of the "Frolic" from stem to
stern.

This turn in the tide of battle fairly crazed with excitement the
sailors of the "Wasp." With ringing cheers they applauded the success
of the last volley, and, springing into the hammock-nettings, called
loudly for their officers to lead them on board the English ship. From
the quarter-deck, Capt. Jones, with shouts and gestures, strove to
hold back the excited men until another broadside could be given the
enemy. But the enthusiasm of the sailors was beyond all control. All
at once, they saw a sailor from New Jersey, named Jack Lang, spring on
a gun, cutlass in hand, ready to board. All were about to follow him,
when Capt. Jones called him down. Only for a minute did Jack's sense
of duty overcome his enthusiasm; and then, remembering that he had
once been impressed on the "Frolic," his rage blazed up, and in an
instant he was clambering over the nettings, calling for followers.
Capt. Jones saw that the ardor of his crew was beyond his control, and
ordered the bugler to call away the boarders. Headed by their
officers, the bold tars swarmed over the nettings, and through the
tangled rigging, to the deck of the enemy's ship. Each man clutched
his cutlass viciously, for he felt that a desperate conflict was
imminent. But when they dropped upon the deck of the "Frolic," a most
unexpected spectacle met their eyes.

The broad deck stretched out before them, untenanted save by a few
wounded officers near the stern, and a grim old British seaman at the
wheel. Instead of the host of armed men with whom the boarders
expected to dispute the possession of the ship, they saw before them
only heaps of dead sailors lying about the guns which they had been
serving. On the quarter-deck lay Capt. Whinyates and Lieut. Wintle,
desperately wounded. All who were unhurt had fled below, to escape the
pitiless fire of the American guns, and the unerring aim of the
sailors stationed in the "Wasp's" tops. Only the old helmsman stood
undaunted at his post, and held the ship on her course, even while the
Americans were swarming over the nettings and clambering down the
bowsprit. The colors were still flying above the ship; but there was
no one left, either to defend them or to haul them down, and they were
finally lowered by the hands of Lieut. Biddle, who led the boarding
party.

No action of the war was so sanguinary as this short conflict between
two sloops-of-war. The "Frolic" went into action with a crew of one
hundred and ten men, fully officered. When the colors were hauled
down, only twenty men were uninjured. Every officer was wounded, and
of the crew thirty lost their lives. They had stood to their guns with
the dogged courage of the English sailor at his best, and had been
fairly mowed down by the destructive fire of the Americans. On the
"Wasp," the loss of life was slight. The shot of the enemy took effect
in the rigging chiefly. The three sailors who were killed were topmen
at their posts, and the five wounded were almost all stationed in the
rigging.

[Illustration: Ready To Board.]

The Americans were not destined to enjoy their triumph long. Shattered
though the "Frolic" was, Lieut. Biddle, with a prize-crew, took
charge of her, and was in hopes of taking her safely to port; but his
plan was rudely shattered by the appearance of an English frigate,
only a few hours after the action ceased. For the "Frolic" to escape,
was out of the question. Both her masts had gone by the board shortly
after her flag was struck; and, when the new enemy hove in sight, the
prize-crew was working hard to clear from her decks the tangled mass
of rigging, wreckage, and dead bodies, that made the tasks of
navigation impossible. The ship was rolling like a log, in the trough
of the sea, and was an easy prize for an enemy of even less strength
than the man-of-war which was then bearing down upon her.

The vessel which came rapidly down before the wind was the
"Poictiers," a British seventy-four-gun ship, which would have been
more than a match for the little "Wasp," even though the latter had
been fresh and ready for battle, instead of shattered by desperate
fight. Seeing no chance for a successful resistance, Capt. Jones
determined upon flight, and ordered all hands aloft, to make sail. But
the sails when shaken out were found to have been cut to pieces by the
"Frolic's" shot; and the "Poictiers" soon came alongside, and changed
the triumph of the Americans to defeat.

Though Capt. Jones and his gallant crew were thus deprived of their
hard-won conquest, they received their full meed of praise from their
countrymen. They were soon exchanged, voted twenty-five thousand
dollars prize-money by Congress, and lauded by every newspaper and
legislative orator in the country. The song-writers of the day
undertook to celebrate in verse the famous victory, and produced
dozens of songs, of which the following stanza may be taken for a fair
sample:--

        "Like the fierce bird of Jove the 'Wasp' darted forth,
          And he the tale told, with amazement and wonder.
        She hurled on the foe from her flame-spreading arms,
          The fire-brands of death and the red bolts of thunder.
        And, oh! it was glorious and strange to behold
          What torrents of fire from her red mouth she threw;
        And how from her broad wings and sulphurous sides,
          Hot showers of grape-shot and rifle-balls flew!"

Let us now turn to Commodore John Rodgers, whose unlucky cruise at the
opening of the war we have already noted. Having refitted his squadron
in the port of New York, he set sail on a second cruise, leaving
behind him the "Hornet." Again he seemed to have fallen upon
unprofitable times, for his ships beat up and down in the highway of
commerce without sighting a single sail. After several days of
inaction, it was determined to scatter the squadron; and to this end
the frigate "United States," Commodore Decatur, and the sixteen-gun
brig "Argus," Capt. Sinclair, left the main body of ships and started
off on a cruise in company. After the two ships left the main body,
Commodore Rodgers met with better success, capturing a Jamaica packet
with two hundred thousand dollars in her hold, and chasing a British
frigate for two hours, but without overhauling her.

In the mean time, the "Argus" had parted from her consort, and was
cruising to the eastward on her own account, meeting with fair
success. During her cruise she captured six merchantmen, and was
herself chased by a British squadron. This chase was almost as
memorable as that of the "Constitution;" for the little brig was hotly
pursued for three days and nights, and, to escape her pursuers, was
obliged to cut away her boats and anchors, and part with every thing
movable save her guns. She escaped at last, however, and was for many
months thereafter a source of continual annoyance to the commerce of
the enemy.

After parting with the "Argus," the "United States" had made her
course toward the south-east, in the hopes of intercepting some of the
British West-Indiamen. But what the plucky sailors would consider
better luck fell to the lot of the frigate.

At dawn on a bright Sunday morning, the lookout of the "United States"
descried a sail about twelve miles away, on the weather-beam. Sail was
crowded on the American frigate, and, urged along by a rattling
breeze, she made towards the stranger. As the distance between the
ships lessened, and the rigging of the stranger showed her to be a
frigate, the enthusiasm among the gallant tars of the "United States"
grew apace. Visions of battle, of glory, and, above all, of resultant
prize-money, arose in their minds; and their shouts could be heard by
the crew of the distant frigate before the two vessels came within
range of each other.

The vessel toward which the "United States" was advancing was the
"Macedonian," a British frigate rating thirty-eight guns, but said to
have been carrying forty-nine at this time. She had for some time been
reckoned a crack ship of her class in the British navy, and her crew
was in admirable training. From her quarter-deck and forecastle groups
of officers and seamen were watching the on-coming of the American
frigate. One of the powder monkeys, named Samuel Leech, of the British
ship, told graphically and simply the story of that day's doings on
the "Macedonian."

"Sunday (Dec. 25, 1812) came, and it brought with it a stiff breeze,"
so runs the powder-monkey's tale. "We usually made a sort of holiday
of this sacred day. After breakfast it was common to muster the entire
crew on the spar-deck, dressed as the fancy of the captain might
dictate,--sometimes in blue jackets and white trousers, or blue
jackets and blue trousers; at other times in blue jackets, scarlet
vests, and blue or white trousers; with our bright anchor-buttons
glancing in the sun, and our black, glossy hats ornamented with black
ribbons, and the name of our ship painted on them. After muster we
frequently had church-service read by the captain; the rest of the day
was devoted to idleness. But we were destined to spend the rest of the
sabbath just introduced to the reader in a very different manner.

"We had scarcely finished breakfast before the man at the masthead
shouted 'Sail, ho!'

"The captain rushed upon deck, exclaiming, 'Masthead, there!'

"'Sir?'

"'Where away is the sail?'

"The precise answer to this question I do not recollect; but the
captain proceeded to ask, 'What does she look like?'

"'A square-rigged vessel, sir,' was the reply of the lookout.

"After a few minutes, the captain shouted again, 'Masthead, there!'

"'Sir?'

"'What does she look like?'

"'A large ship, sir, standing toward us.'

"By this time, most of the crew were on deck, eagerly straining their
eyes to obtain a glimpse of the approaching ship, and murmuring their
opinions to each other on her probable character.

"Then came the voice of the captain, shouting, 'Keep silence, fore and
aft!'

"Silence being secured, he hailed the lookout, who to his question of
'What does she look like?' replied, "A large frigate bearing down upon
us, sir.'

"A whisper ran along the crew, that the stranger ship was a Yankee
frigate. The thought was confirmed by the command of 'All hands clear
the ship for action, ahoy!' The drum and fife beat to quarters,
bulkheads were knocked away, the guns were released from their
confinement, the whole dread paraphernalia of battle was produced;
and, after the lapse of a few minutes of hurry and confusion, every
man and boy was at his post ready to do his best service for his
country, except the band, who, claiming exemption from the affray,
safely stowed themselves away in the cable tier. We had only one sick
man on the list; and he, at the cry of battle, hurried from his cot,
feeble as he was, to take his post of danger. A few of the junior
midshipmen were stationed below on the berth-deck, with orders, given
in our hearing, to shoot any man who attempted to move from his
quarters.

"As the approaching ship showed American colors, all doubt of her
character was at an end. 'We must fight her,' was the conviction of
every breast. Every possible arrangement that could insure success was
accordingly made. The guns were shotted, the matches lighted; for,
although our guns were all furnished with first-class locks, they were
also furnished with matches, attached by lanyards, in case the lock
should miss fire. A lieutenant then passed through the ship, directing
the marines and boarders--who were furnished with pikes, cutlasses,
and pistols--how to proceed if it should be necessary to board the
enemy. He was followed by the captain, who exhorted the men to
fidelity and courage, urging upon their consideration the well-known
motto of the brave Nelson, _'England expects every man to do his
duty.'_ In addition to all these preparations on deck, some men were
stationed in the tops with small-arms, whose duty it was to attend to
trimming the sails, and to use their muskets, provided we came to
close action. There were others, also, below, called sail-trimmers, to
assist in working the ship, should it be necessary to shift her
position during the battle."

Thus, with her men at their quarters, her guns primed, and matches
lighted, the "Macedonian" bore down to open the action. On the "United
States," very similar scenes were being enacted. In some respects,
the American frigate was a more formidable ship than the adversary she
was about to engage. Her battery consisted of fifty-four guns, and
some were of heavier calibre than those of the "Macedonian." Her crew,
too, was rather larger than that of her adversary. But, in most
respects, the ships were well matched. Indeed, the commanders of the
two ships had met before the opening of the war, and, in conversation,
agreed that their vessels were well fitted to test the comparative
valor of Yankee and English sailors. Capt. Carden of the "Macedonian"
had asked Decatur what would be the probable result, if the two ships
were to meet in battle.

"Why, sir," responded the American captain, "if we meet with forces
that might be fairly called equal, the conflict would be severe; but
the flag of my country on the ship I command shall never leave the
staff on which it waves, as long as there is a hull to support it."

Such sentiments as this were ever in the heart of the gallant Decatur,
whose service in the war of 1812 was but the continuation of his
dashing career during the war with Tripoli. A captain of such ardent
bravery could not fail to inspire his crew with the same enthusiasm
and confidence.

In the crew of the "United States" were many young boys, of ages
ranging from twelve to fourteen years. At that time many a lad
received his warrant as midshipman while still in his tenth year; and
youngsters who wished to join the navy as "ship's boys," were always
received, although sometimes their extreme youth made it illegal for
their names to be formally enrolled upon the roster of the crew. Such
was the station of little Jack Creamer, a ten-year-old boy, who had
been serving on the ship for some weeks, although under the age at
which he could be legally enlisted. When Jack saw the English frigate
looming up in the distance, a troubled look came over his face, and he
seemed to be revolving some grave problem in his mind. His comrades
noticed his look of care, and rallied him on what they supposed to be
his fear of the coming conflict. Jack stoutly denied this charge, but
said he was anxious to speak to the captain before going into action.
An old quartermaster marched him up to the quarter-deck, and stood
waiting for Capt. Decatur's attention. In a moment the captain noticed
the two, and said cheerily,--

"Well, Jack, what's wanting now?"

Touching his hat, the lad replied, "Commodore, will you please to have
my name put down on the muster-roll?"

"Why, what for, my lad?"

"So that I can draw my share of the prize-money, when we take that
Britisher, sir."

Amused and pleased with the lad's confidence in the success of the
"United States" in the coming battle, Decatur gave the necessary
order; and Jack went back to his post with a prouder step, for he was
now regularly enrolled.

The two ships were now coming within range of each other, and a slow,
long-distance cannonade was begun, with but little effect; for a long
ground-swell was on, and the ships were rolling in a manner fatal to
the aim of the gunners. After half an hour of this playing at long
bowls, the Englishman's mizzen topmast was shot away; and the
cannon-balls from the "States" whizzed through the rigging, and
splashed into the water about the "Macedonian," in a way that proved
the American gunners had the range, and were utilizing it. Capt.
Carden soon saw that at long range the American gunners were more than
a match for his men, and he resolved to throw prudence to the winds;
and, disdaining all manoeuvring, bore straight down on the American
ship that lay almost stationary on the water, pouring in rapid and
well-aimed broadsides.

Though a gallant and dashing movement, this course led to the defeat
of the English ship. The fire of the Americans was deadly in its aim,
and marvellous in rapidity. So continuous was the flashing of the
discharges from the broadside ports, that the sailors on the
"Macedonian" thought their adversary was on fire, and cheered lustily.
But the next instant their exultation was turned to sorrow; for a
well-directed shot cut away the mizzen-mast, which fell alongside,
suspended by the cordage.

"Huzza, Jack!" cried the captain of a gun on the "United States."
"We've made a brig of her."

"Ay, ay, my lad," said Decatur, who stood near by; "now aim well at
the main-mast, and she'll be a sloop soon."

A few minutes later, the captain shouted to the nearest gunner, "Aim
at the yellow streak. Her spars and rigging are going fast enough. She
must have a little more hulling."

This order was immediately passed along the gun-deck, until every
gunner was striving his utmost to plant his shot in the hull of the
enemy. The effect was terrible. The great missiles crashed through the
wooden sides of the English frigate, and swept the decks clear of men.
She was coming down on the American bravely, and with manifest
intention of boarding; but so skilfully was the "United States"
manoeuvred, and so accurate and rapid was her fire, that the
"Macedonian" was unable to close, and was fairly cut to pieces, while
still more than a pistol-shot distant. The "United States," in the
mean time, was almost unscathed. The aim of the English gunners was
usually too high, and such shots as took effect were mainly in the
rigging. After pounding away at the "Macedonian" until the chocks of
the forecastle guns on that ship were cut away, her boats cut to
pieces, and her hull shattered with more than one hundred shot-holes,
the American ship drew away slightly. The British thought she was in
retreat, and cheered lustily, but were soon undeceived; for, after a
little manoeuvring, the "United States" ranged up under her
adversary's lee, securing a raking position. Before a broadside could
be fired, the British hauled down their flag; and the action was
ended, after just an hour and a half of fighting.

The slaughter on the British frigate had been appalling. From the
official accounts, we glean the cold reports of the numbers of the
killed and wounded; but for any picture of the scene on the decks of
the defeated man-of-war, we must turn to such descriptions as have
been left by eye-witnesses. Sailors are not much given to the habit of
jotting down the descriptions of the many stirring scenes in which
they play parts in their adventurous careers; and much that is
romantic, much that is picturesque, and much that is of historic
value, has thus been lost to history. But of the details of the action
between the "Macedonian" and "United States," the sailor-lad already
quoted has left an account, probably as trustworthy as should be
expected of a witness in his situation. He was stationed at one of the
guns on the main-deck; and it was his duty, as powder-boy, to run to
the magazine for powder for his gun. Before the entrance to the
magazine was a heavy wooden screen, pierced with a hole through which
the cartridges were passed out to the fleet-footed powder-monkeys, as
they rushed up for more powder. Each boy, on getting his cartridge,
wrapped it in his jacket, that no stray spark might touch it, and
dashed off at full speed for his gun, quickly returning for further
supplies.

With the men all standing pale and silent at the guns, the
"Macedonian" came on doggedly towards her foe. Three guns fired from
the larboard side of the gun-deck opened the action; but the fire was
quickly stopped by the gruff order from the quarter-deck, "Cease
firing: you are throwing away your shot!" Then came the roar of the
opening volley from the American frigate.

"A strange noise such as I had never heard before next arrested my
attention," wrote the English sailor-lad. "It sounded like the tearing
of sails just over our heads. This I soon ascertained to be the wind
of the enemy's shot. The firing, after a few minutes' cessation,
recommenced. The roaring of cannon could now be heard from all parts
of our trembling ship; and, mingling as it did with that of our foes,
it made a most hideous noise. By and by I heard the shot strike the
sides of our ship. The whole scene grew indescribably confused and
horrible. It was like some awfully tremendous thunderstorm, whose
deafening roar is attended by incessant streaks of lightning, carrying
death in every flash, and strewing the ground with the victims of its
wrath; only in our case the scene was rendered more horrible than that
by the presence of torrents of blood, which dyed our decks. Though the
recital may be painful, yet, as it will reveal the horrors of war, and
show at what a fearful price the victory is won or lost, I will
present the reader with things as they met my eye during the progress
of this dreadful fight. I was busily supplying my gun with powder,
when I saw blood suddenly fly from the arm of a man stationed at our
gun. I saw nothing strike him: the effect alone was visible; and in an
instant the third lieutenant tied his handkerchief round the wounded
arm, and sent the poor fellow below to the surgeon.

"The cries of the wounded now rang through all parts of the ship.
These were carried to the cock-pit as fast as they fell, while those
more fortunate men who were killed outright were immediately thrown
overboard. As I was stationed but a short distance from the main
hatchway, I could catch a glance at all who were carried below. A
glance was all I could indulge in; for the boys belonging to the guns
next to mine were wounded in the early part of the action, and I had
to spring with all my might to keep three or four guns supplied with
cartridges. I saw two of these lads fall nearly together. One of them
was struck in the leg by a large shot; he had to suffer amputation
above the wound. The other had a grape or canister sent through his
ankle. A stout Yorkshire man lifted him in his arms, and hurried with
him to the cock-pit. He had his foot cut off, and was thus made lame
for life. Two of the boys stationed on the quarter-deck were killed.
They were both Portuguese. A man who saw one killed afterwards told me
that his powder caught fire, and burnt the flesh almost off his face.
In this pitiable situation the agonized boy lifted up both hands, as
if imploring relief, when a passing shot instantly cut him in two."

But the narrative of this young sailor, a boy in years, is almost too
horrible for reproduction. He tells of men struck by three or four
missiles at once, and hacked to pieces; of mangled sailors, mortally
wounded, but still living, thrown overboard to end their sufferings;
of the monotonous drip of the blood on the deck, as desperately
wounded men were carried past. The brave seaman who left his bed of
sickness for the post of duty had his head carried away by a
cannon-ball. The schoolmaster who looked after the education of the
midshipmen was killed. Even a poor goat, kept by the officers for her
milk, was cut down by a cannon-ball, and, after hobbling piteously
about the deck, was mercifully thrown overboard. And this was Sunday,
Christmas Day!

The spot amidships where our sailor-lad was stationed must have been
the hottest station in the whole ship. Many years later, as Herman
Melville, the author of several exciting sea-tales, was walking the
deck of a man-of-war with an old negro, "Tawney," who had served on
the "Macedonian," the veteran stopped at a point abreast the
main-mast. "This part of the ship," said he, "we called the
slaughter-house, on board the 'Macedonian.' Here the men fell, five
and six at a time. An enemy always directs its shot here, in order to
hurl over the mast, if possible. The beams and carlines overhead in
the 'Macedonian' slaughter-house were spattered with blood and brains.
About the hatchways it looked like a butcher's stall. A shot entering
at one of the port-holes dashed dead two-thirds of a gun's crew. The
captain of the next gun, dropping his lock-string, which he had just
pulled, turned over the heap of bodies, to see who they were; when,
perceiving an old messmate who had sailed with him in many cruises, he
burst into tears, and taking the corpse up in his arms, and going to
the side with it, held it over the water a moment, and eying it,
cried, 'O God! Tom'--'Hang your prayers over that thing! Overboard
with it, and down to your gun!' The order was obeyed, and the
heart-stricken sailor returned to his post."

Amid such scenes of terror, the British tars fought on doggedly,
cheering loudly as they worked their guns, but not knowing why they
cheered; for the officers, at least, could see how surely the battle
was going against them. When the "United States" drew away to repair
damages, the British officers held a consultation on the quarter-deck.
They could not but see that their position was hopeless; and, knowing
all further resistance to be folly, the flag was hauled down. To the
pride of the officers, the surrender was doubtless a severe blow. But
Sam Leech remarks pithily, that to him "it was a pleasing sight; for
he had seen fighting enough for one Sabbath,--more, indeed, than he
wished to see again on a week-day."

Decatur at once hailed, to learn the name of his prize, and then sent
off a boat with Lieut. Allen to take possession. He found the decks of
the ship in a fearful state. Many of the crew had found liquor, and
were drinking heavily. Others were throwing the dead into the sea,
carrying the wounded below, and sprinkling the deck with hot vinegar,
to remove the stains and odor of blood. The dead numbered forty-three,
and sixty-one were wounded. An eye-witness of the terrible spectacle
writes of it: "Fragments of the dead were distributed in every
direction, the decks covered with blood,--one continued, agonizing yell
of the unhappy wounded. A scene so horrible of my fellow-creatures, I
assure you, deprived me very much of the pleasure of victory." Yet,
with all this terrific destruction and loss of life on the
"Macedonian," the "United States" was but little injured; and her loss
amounted to but seven killed, and five wounded. Indeed, so slight was
the damage done to the American ship, that an hour's active work by
her sailors put her in trim for a second battle.

While Lieut. Allen was examining the muster-rolls of the "Macedonian,"
a sailor pushed his way toward the quarter-deck, and cried out that he
was an impressed American, and that he had seven mates aboard, all
pressed into the British service. They had all been forced to serve
against their country, and in the battle three had been killed. Just
before the battle began, they had begged to be sent below, but were
peremptorily ordered to stand by their guns, or expect to be treated
as mutineers. Now that the battle was over, the five who were left
alive begged to be taken into the crew of the "United States," which
was accordingly done.

After the "Macedonian" had been formally taken possession of by
Lieut. Allen, the British officers were removed to the American ship.
Some of them were inclined to be very surly over their defeat, and by
words and actions showed their contempt for the Americans, whose
prisoners they were. In the first boat which went from the prize to
the victor was the first lieutenant of the "Macedonian." As he
clambered down the side of his vessel, he noticed that his baggage had
not been put in the boat which was to bear him to the American
frigate. Turning to Lieut. Allen, he said surlily,--

"You do not intend to send me away without my baggage?"

"I hope," responded Allen courteously, "that you do not take us for
privateersmen."

"I am sure I don't know by whom I have been taken," was the rude
reply, which so angered Allen that he peremptorily ordered the fellow
to take his place in the boat, and be silent.

Whatever may have been the demeanor of the British captives, they met
with nothing but the most considerate treatment from the American
officers. Capt. Carden, on his arrival upon the deck of the victorious
frigate, was received with the consideration due his rank and the
brave defence of his vessel. He was conducted at once to Decatur's
cabin, on entering which he took off his sword, and mutely held it out
for Decatur's acceptance. Decatur courteously refused to accept it,
saying, "Sir, I cannot take the sword of a man who has defended his
ship so bravely; but I will take your hand." As long as Carden and his
officers remained on the ship, they were treated with the greatest
consideration, and were allowed to retain all their personal property.
Every attempt was made to take away from them the bitter remembrance
of their defeat. The innate nobility of Decatur's nature is well shown
in a letter written to his wife a few days after the action. "One-half
of the satisfaction," he says, "a-rising from this victory is
destroyed in seeing the mortification of poor Carden, who deserved
success as much as we did who had the good fortune to obtain it." When
Carden left the ship, he thanked Decatur for his consideration, and
expressed a desire to do likewise by the Americans, should he ever be
able to turn the tables.

Amid the heat of battle and the excitement of success, Decatur did not
forget little Jack Creamer, the lately enrolled ship's boy. Shortly
after the close of the conflict, he sent for Jack to come to his
cabin. Soon a much abashed small boy stood before the captain.

"Well, Jack," said the great man, "we did take her, after all."

"Yes, your Honor," responded Jack. "I knew we would, before we gave
her the first broadside."

"And your share of the prize-money," continued Decatur, "may amount to
two hundred dollars, if we get her safe into port. Now, what are you
going to do with so much money?"

Jack's eyes had lighted up at the thought of such great wealth.

"Please, sir," he cried, "I'll send half of it to my mother; and the
rest will get me a bit of schooling."

"Well said, Jack," said Decatur warmly; and the interview closed for
the time. But the captain's interest in the boy was aroused, and for
years he showed an almost fatherly regard for the lad. Jack had his
"bit of schooling," then received a midshipman's warrant, and for
years served with Decatur, giving promise of becoming an able officer.
At last, however, his career was ended by the accidental upsetting of
a boat when on a pleasure excursion in the Mediterranean.

After putting in for a short time at New London, the two ships, captor
and captive, proceeded down the Sound to New York. Here they arrived
on the 1st of January, 1813; and the news-writers of the day
straightway hailed the "Macedonian" as "a New Year's gift, with the
compliments of old Neptune." However, the news of the victory had
spread throughout the land before the ships came up to New York; for
Decatur had sent out a courier from New London to bear the tidings to
Washington. A curious coincidence made the delivery of the despatch as
impressive as a studied dramatic scene.

It so happened that the people of Washington had chosen the night of
Dec. 28 for a grand ball, to be tendered to the officers of the navy,
and particularly to Capt. Stewart of the "Constellation." A brilliant
company was gathered, in honor of the occasion. The Secretary of the
Navy, and other cabinet officers, lent their presence to the
festivities. Capt. Hull of the victorious "Constitution" was present;
and, to make the affair even more of a triumph, the captured colors of
the "Alert" and the "Guerriere" were draped on the wall of the hall.
Near midnight, the revelry was at its height. The brilliant toilets of
the ladies; the men, gorgeous in the uniforms of the army, navy, or
diplomatic corps; the light of a thousand wax-candles flashing from a
myriad of sconces,--made the scene one of the utmost splendor. All at
once, in the midst or the stately measures of the old-fashioned
minuet, a murmur rose near the entrance to the hall, and spread until
every one was whispering, that news had come of a great naval battle,
a victory. Word was brought to the Secretary of the Navy. He directed
that the bearer of the despatches should be at once admitted; and,
amid cheers and clapping of hands, Lieut. Hamilton entered the hall,
and delivered his despatches to his father, the Secretary of the Navy.
The tenor of the despatch was soon known to all; and Lieut. Hamilton
turned from the greetings of his mother and sisters, who were present,
to receive the congratulations of his brother-officers. He had brought
the colors of the captured ship with him to the city; and Capts.
Stewart and Hull immediately went in search of them, and soon
returned, bearing the flag between them. The two veteran sailors
marched the length of the hall, amid the plaudits of the gay company,
and laid the colors before Mrs. Madison,--the Dolly Madison who is
still remembered as the most popular of the "ladies of the White
House." Then the company proceeded to the banquet-hall, where, to the
list of toasts already prepared, was added, "The health of Commodore
Decatur and the officers and crew of the 'United States.'"

Two weeks later, Capt. Decatur and his officers and the crew of the
"United States" were sumptuously entertained by the citizens of New
York. The officers were tendered a banquet in the great assembly-room
of the City Hotel, which was decked with laurel and ship's spars and
sails. The chief table at the head of the room, at which sat Mayor De
Witt Clinton and Capts. Hull and Decatur, was a marvel of decoration.
Its centre was taken up by a sheet of water with grassy banks, bearing
on its placid surface a miniature frigate floating at her moorings.
Each of the smaller tables bore a small frigate on a pedestal in the
centre of the board. On the wall at the end of the room hung a heavy
sail, on which was printed the motto,--

  "OUR CHILDREN ARE THE PROPERTY OF THEIR COUNTRY."

After the dinner was ended and the toasts were begun, the health of
the navy was proposed. At the word, the great sail began to ascend,
and, being drawn to the ceiling, disclosed an illuminated transparent
painting, showing vividly the scenes of the three great actions won
by the "Constitution," the "United States," and the "Wasp." The whole
company rose and cheered, until the walls of the hall fairly rung.

Three days later, the jackies from the forecastle of the "United
States" were entertained. They were landed at the Battery, and marched
in procession to the hotel, headed by a brass band which had been
captured with the "Macedonian." Four hundred of the fine fellows were
in the line, clad in the dress uniform of the navy of that time.
Glazed canvas hats with stiff rims, decked with streamers of ribbon;
blue jackets buttoned loosely over red waistcoats; and blue trousers
with bell-buttons,--made up the toggery of the tar of 1812. As they
marched, two by two, through the narrow streets that led to the City
Hotel, the populace assembled on the sidewalks and in the windows
along the route, greeting the jackies with cheers. The rear was
brought up by the usual band of street-urchins, each of whom that day
was firm in his determination to be a sailor.

After the banquet at the hotel, the sailors were marched to the
theatre, where the pit had been set aside for them. The orchestra
opened with "Yankee Doodle;" but the first bar had hardly been played,
when the cheers of the blue-jackets fairly drowned the music, and the
musicians were fain to stop. The programme had been arranged with
special regard to the seafaring audience. Little children bounded upon
the stage, bearing huge letters in their hands, and, after lightly
whirling through the mazes of the dance, grouped themselves so that
the letters formed the words,--

  HULL, JONES,   DECATUR.

Then came more cheers from the pit; and more than one glazed hat
soared over the heads of the audience, and fell on the stage,--a
purely nautical substitute for a bouquet. Late at night, the sailors
returned to their ship, elated with an ovation the like of which has
never since been tendered to the humble heroes of the forecastle or
the ranks.




CHAPTER VI.

     BAINBRIDGE TAKES COMMAND OF THE "CONSTITUTION." -- THE
     DEFEAT OF THE "JAVA." -- CLOSE OF THE YEAR'S HOSTILITIES ON
     THE OCEAN.


As Hull and Decatur sat in the gayly decorated banquet-hall at New
York, and, amid the plaudits of the brilliant assembly, drank bumpers
to the success of the navy, they little thought that thousands of
miles away the guns of an American frigate were thundering, and the
stout-hearted blue-jackets laying down their lives for the honor and
glory of the United States. But so it was. The opening year of the war
was not destined to close without yet a fourth naval victory for the
Americans; and, at the very moment when they were so joyfully
celebrating the glories already won, Capt. Bainbridge in the good ship
"Constitution" was valiantly giving battle to a British frigate far
south of the equator.

Before considering the details of this last action of the year 1812,
let us recount briefly the movements of some American vessels in
commission at this time. After sending the "Guerriere" to the bottom
of the sea, and bringing her officers and crew in triumph into Boston,
Capt. Hull had voluntarily relinquished the command of the
"Constitution," in order that some other officer might win laurels
with the noble frigate. In his place was appointed Capt. Bainbridge,
who had served in the wars with France and Tripoli. After a short time
spent in refitting, Bainbridge sailed from Boston, accompanied by the
"Hornet," eighteen guns. The "Essex," thirty-two, Capt. Porter, was
lying in the Delaware at the time Bainbridge left Boston, and her
captain was ordered to cruise in the track of British West-Indiamen.
After spending some time in this service, he was to turn southward and
visit several South American ports, with a view to joining Bainbridge.
Should he fail to find the "Constitution," he was free to act at his
own discretion. This permission gave Porter an opportunity to make a
cruise seldom equalled in naval annals, and which will form the
subject of a subsequent chapter.

The "Constitution" and "Hornet" left Boston on the 26th of October,
and shaped their course at once for the south. They put in at two or
three ports which had been named to Capt. Porter as meeting-places,
but, finding no trace of the "Essex," continued their cruise. At Port
Praya in the island of St. Jago, and at Fernando Noronha, the two
ships assumed the character of British men-of-war. Officers from whose
uniform every trace of the American eagle had been carefully removed
went ashore, and, after paying formal visits to the governors of the
two islands, requested permission to leave letters for Sir James Yeo
of His Majesty's service. Though directed to this prominent British
naval officer, the letters were intended for Capt. Porter, and
contained directions for his cruise, written in sympathetic ink. After
the letters were deposited, the two vessels left; and we may be sure
that the British colors came down from the masthead as soon as the
ships were out of sight.

The next point at which the American ships stopped was San Salvador,
on the coast of Brazil. Here Bainbridge lay-to outside the harbor, and
sent in Capt. Lawrence with the "Hornet" to communicate with the
American consul. Lawrence returned greatly excited. In the harbor he
had found the British sloop-of-war "Bonne Citoyenne," of twenty guns,
which was on the point of sailing for England. A more evenly matched
adversary for the "Hornet" could not have been found, and the Yankee
sailors longed for an engagement. A formal challenge was sent, through
the American consul, to the captain of the British ship, requesting
him to come out and try conclusions with the "Hornet." Every assurance
was offered that the "Constitution" would remain in the offing, and
take no part in the battle, which was to test the strength of the two
equally matched ships only. Some days later, this challenge was
reduced to writing, and sent to the English captain. But that officer
declined the challenge, giving as his reason the fact that he had in
his ship over half a million pounds in specie, which it was his duty
to convey to England. For him to give battle to the "Hornet," would
therefore be unwise, as he would put in jeopardy this money which it
was his duty to guard. This response was conclusive, and the
Englishman must be admitted to have acted wisely; but the knowledge of
the valuable cargo of the "Bonne Citoyenne" only increased the desire
of the Americans to capture her. The "Hornet" accordingly remained
outside the harbor, as a blockader, while the "Constitution" continued
her cruise alone.

[Illustration: Assuming To Be British Men-of-war.]

She had not far to go in order to meet an enemy well worthy of her
metal. Three days after parting with the "Hornet," two sail were made,
well in shore. One of the vessels so sighted seemed to make for the
land, as though anxious to avoid meeting the American ship; while the
other came about, and made her course boldly toward the
"Constitution."

It was about nine o'clock on a bright December morning that the
"Constitution" encountered the strange vessel, which bore down upon
her. A light breeze, of sufficient force to enable the vessels to
manoeuvre, was blowing; but the surface of the ocean was as placid as
a lake in summer. The build of the stranger left no doubt of her
warlike character, and the bold manner in which she sought a meeting
with the American ship convinced Bainbridge that he had fallen in with
an enemy. The "Constitution" did not for a time meet the enemy's
advances in kind. Back of the advancing frigate could be seen the low,
dark coast-line of Brazil, into whose neutral waters the Englishman
could retreat, and thus gain protection, if the conflict seemed to go
against him. Bainbridge determined that the coming battle should be
fought beyond the possibility of escape for the vanquished, and
therefore drew away gradually as the stranger came on. By noon the two
ships were near enough together for flags to be visible, when
Bainbridge set his colors, and displayed private signals. The enemy
did the same; and, though his signals were unintelligible, the flag
that fluttered at the masthead was clearly the flag of Great Britain.
Bainbridge continued his retreat for an hour longer, then, being far
enough from land, took in his main-sail and royals, and tacked toward
the Englishman.

By this time the strange sail which had been sighted in company with
the English ship had disappeared. The low-lying coast of Brazil had
sunk below the horizon. From the deck of the "Constitution," nothing
could be seen but the vast circle of placid ocean, and the English
frigate about a mile to the windward, bearing down to open the fight.
The drums beat, and the crew went quietly and in perfect order to
their quarters. They were no longer the raw, untrained crew that had
joined the ship some months before. They were veterans, with the
glorious victory over the "Guerriere" fresh in their remembrance, and
now animated with a desire to add to their trophies the strange vessel
then in sight.

As the enemy, which proved to be the "Java," thirty-eight, Capt.
Lambert, came nearer, she hauled down her colors, leaving only a jack
flying. A jack is a small flag hoisted at the bowsprit cap. The Union
jack of the United States navy is a blue flag dotted with stars, but
without the stripes of the national flag; the jack of Great Britain
has the scarlet cross of St. George on a blue field. The Englishman's
action in hauling down his ensigns puzzled Bainbridge, who sent a shot
as an order that they be raised again. The response to this reminder
came in the form of a heavy broadside, and the action opened.

In the light wind that was blowing, the enemy proved the better
sailer, and soon forged ahead. His object was to cross the bows of the
American ship, and get in a raking broadside,--the end and aim of most
of the naval manoeuvring in those days of wooden ships and heavy
batteries. By skilful seamanship, Bainbridge warded off the danger;
and the fight continued broadside to broadside. The firing on both
sides was rapid and well directed. After half an hour of fighting, the
"Constitution" was seriously crippled by a round shot, which carried
away her wheel, and wounded Bainbridge by driving a small copper bolt
deep into his thigh. For a moment it seemed as though the American
ship was lost. Having no control over the rudder, her head fell off,
her sails flapped idly against the spars, and the enemy was fast
coming into an advantageous position. But, though wounded, the
indomitable Yankee captain was equal to the occasion. Tackle was
rigged upon the rudder-post between decks, and a crew of jackies
detailed to work the improvised helm. The helmsmen were far out of
earshot of the quarter-deck: so a line of midshipmen was formed from
the quarter-deck to the spot where the sailors tugged at the
steering-lines.

"Hard-a-port!" Bainbridge would shout from his station on the
quarter-deck.

[Illustration: Marines Picking Off The Enemy.]

"Hard-a-port! Hard-a-port!" came the quick responses, as the
midshipmen passed the word along. And so the ship was steered; and,
notwithstanding the loss of her wheel, fairly out-manoeuvred her
antagonist. The first raking broadside was delivered by the
"Constitution," and did terrible execution along the gun-deck of the
English ship. The two ships then ran before the wind, exchanging
broadsides at a distance of half pistol-shot. At this game the
American was clearly winning: so the Englishman determined to close
and board, in the dashing, fearless way that had made the tars of
Great Britain the terror of all maritime peoples. The frigate bore
down on the "Constitution," and struck her on the quarter; the long
jib-boom tearing its way through the rigging of the American ship.
But, while this movement was being executed, the American gunners had
not been idle; and the results of their labors were very evident, in
the rigging of the "Java." Her jib-boom and bowsprit were so shattered
by shot, that they were on the point of giving way; and, as the ships
met, the mizzen-mast fell, crashing through forecastle and main-deck,
crushing officers and sailors beneath it in the fall, and hurling the
topmen into the ocean to drown. The "Constitution" shot ahead, but
soon wore and lay yard-arm to yard-arm with her foe. For some minutes
the battle raged with desperation. A dense sulphurous smoke hung about
the hulls of the two ships, making any extended vision impossible.
Once in a while a fresher puff of wind, or a change in the position of
the ships, would give the jackies a glimpse of their enemy, and show
fierce faces glaring from the open ports, as the great guns were drawn
in for loading. Then the gray pall of smoke fell, and nothing was to
be seen but the carnage near at hand. The officers on the quarter-deck
could better judge of the progress of the fray; and, the marines
stationed there took advantage of every clear moment to pick off some
enemy with a shot from one of their muskets. High up in the tops of
the "Constitution" were two small howitzers, with which crews of
topmen, under the command of midshipmen, made lively play with grape
and canister upon the crowded decks of the enemy. From the cavernous
submarine depths of the cock-pit and magazine, to the tops of each
ship, not an idler was to be found. Chaplains, surgeons, clerks,
cooks, and waiters--all were working or fighting for the honor of the
flag under which they served.

Again the British determined to board; and the quick, sharp notes of
the bugle calling up the boarders gave warning of their intentions.
The men in the tops of the American frigate, looking down from their
lofty station, could see the crowd of boarders and marines gathered on
the forecastle and in the gang-ways, and could hear the shrill notes
of the boatswain's whistle cheering them on. At that moment, however,
the American fire raked the enemy with fearful effect, and the volleys
of musketry from the marines and topmen made such havoc among the
crowded boarders that the attempt was abandoned. The deadly fire of
the Americans was not slackened. Capt. Lambert was struck down,
mortally wounded; and the command fell upon Lieut. Chads, who, though
himself badly wounded, continued the fight with true British courage.
Over the side of the "Java" hung the wreck of her top-hamper, which
every broadside set on fire. Yet the British tars fought on, cheering
lustily, and not once thinking of surrender, though they saw their
foremast gone, their mizzen-mast shivered, even the last flag shot
away, and the last gun silenced.

When affairs had reached this stage, the "Constitution," seeing no
flag flying on the enemy, hauled away, and set about repairing her
own damages. While thus engaged, the main-mast of the "Java" was seen
to go by the board, and the ship lay a hopeless wreck upon the water.
After making some slight repairs, Bainbridge returned to take
possession of his prize, but, to his surprise, found a jack still
floating over the helpless hulk. It was merely a bit of bravado,
however; for, as the "Constitution" ranged up alongside, the jack was
hauled down.

[Illustration: In The Cross-trees.]

The "Java" proved to be a rich prize. She was one of the best of the
English frigates, and had just been especially fitted up for the
accommodation of the governor-general of Bombay and his staff, all of
whom were then on board. This added to the regular number of officers
and crew more than one hundred prisoners, mostly of high rank in
British military and social circles.

The boarding officer found the ship so badly cut up that to save her
was impossible. Her loss in men, including her captain Henry Lambert,
and five midshipmen, was forty-eight, together with one hundred and
five wounded, among whom were many officers. The "Constitution" had
suffered much less severely, having but twelve killed and twenty
wounded. The ship herself was but little damaged; her chief injury
being the loss of her wheel, which was immediately replaced by that of
the "Java."

Capt. Bainbridge now found himself a great distance from home, with a
disabled ship filled with prisoners, many of whom were wounded. Even
had the wreck of the "Java" been less complete, it would have been
hazardous to attempt to take her back to the United States through the
West India waters that swarmed with British vessels. No course was
open save to take the prisoners aboard the "Constitution," and set the
torch to the disabled hulk.

To do this was a work of no little difficulty. The storm of lead and
iron that had swept across the decks of the British frigate had left
intact not one of the boats that hung from the davits. The
"Constitution" had fared better; but, even with her, the case was
desperate, for the British cannonade had left her but two serviceable
boats. To transfer from the sinking ship to the victorious frigate
nearly five hundred men, over a hundred of whom were wounded, was a
serious task when the means of transfer were thus limited.

Three days the "Constitution" lay by her defeated enemy, and hour
after hour the boats plied between the two ships. The first to be
moved were the wounded. Tackle was rigged over the side of the "Java;"
and the mangled sufferers, securely lashed in their hammocks, were
gently lowered into the waiting boat, and soon found themselves in the
sick-bay of the American ship, where they received the gentlest
treatment from those who a few hours before sought only to slay them.
The transfer of the wounded once accomplished, the work proceeded with
great rapidity: and in the afternoon of the third day the
"Constitution" was filled with prisoners; and the "Java," a deserted,
shattered hulk, was ready for the last scene in the drama of her
career.

The last boat left the desolate wreck, and, reaching the
"Constitution," was hauled up to the davits. The side of the American
frigate next to the abandoned ship was crowded with men, who looked
eagerly across the water. Through the open port-holes of the "Java," a
flickering gleam could be seen, playing fitfully upon the decks and
gun-carriages. The light grew brighter, and sharp-tongued flames
licked the outside of the hull, and set the tangled cordage in a
blaze. With this the whole ship seemed to burst into fire, and lay
tossing, a huge ball of flame, on the rising sea. When the fire was
raging most fiercely, there came a terrific explosion, and the great
hull was lifted bodily from the water, falling back shattered into
countless bits. Guns, anchors, and ironwork dragged the greater part
of the wreckage to the bottom; and when the "Constitution," with all
sail set, left the spot, the captive Englishmen, looking sadly back,
could see only a patch of charred woodwork and cordage floating upon
the ocean to mark the burial-place of the sturdy frigate "Java."

The "Constitution" made sail for San Salvador, where the prisoners
were landed; first giving their paroles not to serve against the
"United States" until regularly exchanged. Bainbridge then took his
ship to Boston, where she arrived in February, 1813.

The substitution of the wheel of the "Java" for that of the
"Constitution," shot away in battle, has been alluded to. In his
biography of Capt. Bainbridge, Fenimore Cooper relates a story of
interest regarding this trophy. It was a year or two after peace was
made with England, in 1815, that a British naval officer visited the
"Constitution," then lying at the Boston navy-yard. The frigate had
been newly fitted out for a cruise to the Mediterranean; and an
American officer, with some pride, showed the Englishman over the
ship, which was then undoubtedly the finest of American naval vessels.
After the tour of the ship had been made, the host said, as they stood
chatting on the quarter-deck,--

"Well, what do you think of her?"

"She is one of the finest frigates, if not the very finest, I ever put
my foot aboard of," responded the Englishman; "but, as I must find
some fault, I'll just say that your wheel is one of the clumsiest
things I ever saw, and is unworthy of the vessel."

The American officer laughed.

"Well, you see," said he, "when the 'Constitution' took the 'Java,'
the former's wheel was shot out of her. The 'Java's' wheel was fitted
on the victorious frigate, to steer by; and, although we think it as
ugly as you do, we keep it as a trophy."

All criticisms on the wheel ended then and there.

The defeat of the "Java" closed the warfare on the ocean during 1812.
The year ended with the honors largely in the possession of the United
States navy. The British could boast of the capture of but two armed
vessels,--the "Nautilus," whose capture by an overwhelming force we
have already noted; and the little brig "Vixen," twelve guns, which
Sir James Yeo, with the "Southampton," thirty-two, had overhauled and
captured in the latter part of November. The capture of the "Wasp" by
the "Poictiers," when the American sloop-of-war was cut up by her
action with the "Frolic," was an occurrence, which, however
unfortunate for the Americans, reflected no particular honor upon the
British arms.

In opposition to this record, the Americans could boast of victory in
four hard-fought battles. In no case had they won through any lack of
valor on the part of their antagonists; for the Englishmen had not
sought to avoid the battle, and had fought with the dogged valor
characteristic of their nation. In one or two instances, it is true
that the Americans were more powerful than the foe whom they engaged;
but, in such cases, the injury inflicted was out of all proportion to
the disparity in size of the combatants. The four great actions
resulting in the defeat of the "Guerriere," the "Frolic," the
"Macedonian," and the "Java," showed conclusively that the American
blue-jackets were equal in courage to their British opponents, and far
their superiors in coolness, skill, discipline, and self-reliance; and
these qualities may be said to have won the laurels for the American
navy that were conceded to it by all impartial observers.

Besides the victories over the four British ships enumerated, the
Americans had captured the "Alert," and a British transport bearing a
considerable detachment of troops. These achievements, as involving no
bloodshed, may be set off against the captures of the "Nautilus" and
"Vixen" by the British. Of the number of British merchant-vessels
captured, the records are so incomplete that no accurate estimate can
be made. To the naval vessels are accredited forty-six captures among
the enemy's merchant-marine, and this estimate is probably very nearly
accurate. But with the declaration of war, Portsmouth, Salem, New
London, New York, Baltimore, and, indeed, every American seaport,
fitted out fleet privateers to prey upon the enemy's commerce. The
sails of this private armed navy fairly whitened the sea, and few
nights were not illuminated by the flames of some burning prize. As
their chief object was plunder, the aim of the privateers was to get
their prize safely into port; but, when this was impossible, they were
not slow in applying the torch to the captured vessel. The injury they
inflicted upon the enemy was enormous, and the record of their
exploits might well engage the industry of painstaking historians. As
an adjunct to the regular navy, they were of great service in bringing
the war to a happy conclusion.

It is not to be supposed that the British men-of-war and privateers
were idle while the Americans were thus sweeping the seas. More than
one American vessel set sail boldly from some little New England port,
freighted with the ventures of all classes of tradesmen, only to be
snapped up by a rapacious cruiser. But the mercantile marine of the
United States was but small, and offered no such rewards to
enterprising privateers as did the goodly fleets of West-Indiamen that
bore the flag of Great Britain. And so, while the American privateers
were thriving and reaping rich rewards of gold and glory, those of the
British were gradually abandoning privateering in disgust. The
American prize-lists grew so large, that the newspapers commenced the
practice of publishing weekly a list of the enemy's ships taken during
the week past. In Baltimore, Henry Niles, in his paper "The Weekly
Register," robbed "The London Naval Chronicle" of its vainglorious
motto,--

        "The winds and seas are Britain's broad domain,
        And not a sail but by permission spreads."

This sentiment Niles printed at the head of his weekly list of British
vessels captured by United States vessels,--a bit of satire not often
equalled in the columns of newspapers of to-day.




CHAPTER VII.

     THE WAR ON THE LAKES. -- THE ATTACK ON SACKETT'S HARBOR. --
     OLIVER HAZARD PERRY ORDERED TO LAKE ERIE. -- THE BATTLE OF
     PUT-IN-BAY.


Let us now abandon for a time our consideration of the progress of the
great naval war on the ocean, and turn our attention to a humbler
theatre, in which the drama of battle was proceeding with no less
credit to the American participants, though with less grand and
inspiring accessories. On the great fresh-water lakes which skirt the
northern frontier of the United States, the two warring powers
contended fiercely for the mastery. But there were no desperate duels
between well-matched frigates; nor, indeed, did either the British or
American squadron of the lake station boast a craft of sufficient
armament to be termed a frigate, until the war was nearly at an end.
Barges, gunboats, sloops, schooners, and brigs made up the squadrons
that fought for the possession of the fresh-water seas; and few either
of the jackies of the forecastle or the officers of the quarter-deck
were bred to the regular service. With such forces it could only
happen that the encounters of the foes should be little more than
skirmishes, and that neither in immediate loss of life nor in direct
results should these skirmishes be important. Such, in fact, was the
general character of the hostilities on the lakes, with two noteworthy
exceptions,--Perry's victory at Put-in-Bay, and McDonough's successful
resistance of the British on Lake Champlain.

That the war should invade the usually peaceful waters of Ontario,
Erie, and Champlain, was inevitable from the physical characteristics
of the northern frontier of the United States. Great Britain held
Canada; and an invasion of her enemy's territory from that province
was a military measure, the advisability of which was evident to the
most untaught soldier. No overland expedition could hope to make its
way through the dense forests of Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, or the
Adirondack region of New York. But the lakes offered a tempting
opening for invasion. Particularly did the placid, navigable waters of
Lake Champlain, stretching, from the Canada line far into the heart of
New York, invite the invader; while Lakes Erie and Ontario afforded an
opportunity for attacking the Americans on what was then, practically,
their western frontier.

The Americans were not slow in perceiving the dangers that threatened
their north-western frontier, and began to prepare for its defence
most energetically at the first declaration of war. It was a work that
taxed to the utmost the resources of the young country. The shores of
the lakes as far west as Detroit were open to the attacks of the
enemy, and, although part of the territory of the United States, were
really more accessible to the invaders than to the American defenders.
The population was sparse, and the means of transportation very
primitive. Before the days of railroads, canals, or even well-kept
turnpikes, troops, seamen, ordnance, and all munitions of war could
only be transported from the cities on the seacoast by the most
laborious hauling over roads hardly worthy of the name. Nor was the
transportation problem solved during the continuance of the war. When
in May, 1814, the new United States frigate "Superior" lay at her dock
at Sackett's Harbor, her ordnance, stores, and cordage had to be
brought from Oswego Falls, some fifty miles away. A clear water-route
by the Oswego River and the lake offered itself; but Sir James Yeo,
with his squadron, was blockading the mouth of the harbor, and the
chance for blockade-runners was small indeed. To carry the heavy
ordnance and cables overland, was out of the question. The dilemma was
most perplexing, but Yankee ingenuity finally enabled the "Superior"
to get her outfit. The equipment was loaded upon a small fleet of
barges and scows, which a veteran lake captain took to a point sixteen
miles from the blockaded harbor. By sailing by night, and skulking up
creeks and inland water-ways, the transports reached this point
without attracting the attention of the blockading fleet. They had,
however, hardly arrived when news of the enterprise came to the ears
of the British, and an expedition was sent to intercept the Americans,
which expedition the Yankees successfully resisted. The question then
arose as to how the stores were to be taken across the sixteen miles
of marsh and forest that lay between the boats and the navy-yard at
Sackett's Harbor. The cannon and lighter stores were transported on
heavy carts with great difficulty, but there still remained the great
cable. How to move this was a serious question. No cart could bear its
ponderous weight of ninety-six hundred pounds. Again Yankee ingenuity
and pluck came to the rescue. Two hundred men volunteered to carry the
great rope on their shoulders, and in this way it actually was
transported. Along the shore of the little creek the great cable was
stretched out with prodigious labor, and lay there looking like a
gigantic serpent. The two hundred men ranged themselves along the line
at regular intervals, and at a given signal hoisted the burden to
their shoulders. At the word of command, all stepped off briskly
together, and the long line wound along the narrow path through the
forests. They started out cheerily enough, enlivening the work with
songs and jests; but at the end of the first mile all were glad enough
to throw down the load, and loiter a while by the roadside. A few
minutes' rest, and up and on again. Now arms began to ache, and
shoulders to chafe, under the unusual burden; but the march continued
until noon of the next day, when the footsore and weary carriers
marched proudly into Sackett's Harbor, to find sailors and soldiers
assembled to greet them with bands and cannon-firing. In accordance
with the custom of the time, these demonstrations of honor were
supplemented by the opening of a barrel of whiskey, in honor of the
arrival of the cable.

This incident, trivial in itself, is typical of that ingenuity and
fertility of resource, which, more than any thing else, contributed
to the success of the Americans, not only in the lake operations of
the war of 1812, but in every war the nation has since undertaken. But
the advantages gained by Yankee enterprise and ingenuity were,
perhaps, more evident in the operations on Lake Ontario and Lake Erie
than in the operations of the armies, or of the fleets upon the ocean.
The great contest lay more in the rapid building of ships than in
fighting them. At the outset the enemy were better equipped for the
struggle than were the Americans. The Canadian frontier had been
longer settled, and could lend more men to the needs of the nation.
More than this, the route to the ocean by the St. Lawrence River made
it really easier to transport naval stores from far-off Liverpool to
the British naval station on the shores of Lake Ontario, than to carry
like goods across the wooded hills of New York. Nor were the British
altogether without naval resources upon the lakes at the hour when war
was declared. On Lake Erie the English flag waved over the "Royal
George," twenty-two; "Prince Regent," sixteen; "Earl of Moira,"
fourteen; "Gloucester," ten; "Seneca," eight; and "Simcoe," eight.
Opposed to this squadron was but one United States vessel,--the
"Oneida," a man-of-war brig carrying sixteen twenty-four-pound
carronades. On Lake Erie the British had a squadron of six vessels,
carrying in all forty-six guns.

Hostilities opened early on Lake Ontario. For some time before the
formal declaration of war, a desultory warfare had been waged by the
Americans and Canadians about Niagara. Canadian schooners had been
seized on account of alleged violations of the revenue and embargo
regulations of the United States. The resentment of the sufferers was
aroused, and they only awaited a suitable opportunity to retaliate.
The opportunity soon came, in the form of the declaration of war; and
a body of Canadian volunteers attacked eight American schooners, near
the Thousand Isles, and burned two of them.

With the opening of the war, the United States authorities had fixed
upon Sackett's Harbor as the naval station for Lake Ontario. In the
harbor, on the 19th of July, 1812, lay the "Oneida," which had lately
come into port after a short cruise in search of British schooners. At
early dawn of the day mentioned, the lookout reported five ships in
the offing, and a few minutes later hailed the deck, to report them to
be British ships-of-war. The alarm quickly spread over the little
town. Puny though the British fleet would have appeared upon the
ocean, it was of ample power to take the "Oneida" and destroy the
village. Before the villagers fairly understood their peril, a small
boat came scudding into the harbor before the wind. It bore a message
from the British commander, demanding that the "Oneida" and the "Lord
Nelson" (a captured Canadian vessel) be surrendered. Should the
squadron be resisted, he warned the inhabitants that their town should
be burned to the ground.

Commander Woolsey, who commanded the "Oneida," was a United States
officer of the regular service, and a man of courage and fertility of
resource. Unable to take his vessel out into the lake, he moored her
at the entrance of the harbor in such a way that her broadside of nine
guns might be brought to bear on the enemy. All hands then set to work
getting the other broadside battery ashore; and, by the aid of the
villagers, these guns were mounted on a hastily thrown up redoubt on
the shore. At the foot of the main street of the village was planted a
queerly assorted battery. The great gun, on which the hopes of the
Americans centred, was an iron thirty-two-pounder, which had lain for
years deeply embedded in the muddy ooze of the lake-shore, gaining
thereby the derisive name of the "Old Sow." This redoubtable piece of
ordnance was flanked on either side by a brass six-pounder; a pair of
cannon that the Yankee sailors had, with infinite pains and
indomitable perseverance, dredged up from the sunken hulk of a British
war-vessel that had filled a watery grave some years. Two brass
nine-pounders completed this novel armament.

It was about eight o'clock in the morning when the British vessels
came up within range. Alarm guns had been firing from the shore all
the morning; and by that time the village was filled with militiamen,
who flocked to the scene of action. Woolsey, who had taken charge of
the shore-batteries, ordered a shot from the thirty-two pounder. The
"old sow" spoke out bravely, but the shot missing, only roused the
enemy to laughter, which could be heard on shore. The British vessels
then began a vigorous cannonade, keeping well out of range of the
small guns on shore; although so weak were the American defences, that
a vigorous onslaught by the enemy would have quickly reduced the town
to submission. As it was, a harmless fire was kept up for about two
hours. Not a shot took effect, and nothing save the noise and
excitement of the cannonading need have deterred the good people of
Sackett's Harbor from observing that Sunday morning in accordance with
their usual sabbath customs. It was reserved for one shot to put an
end to this strange engagement. Just as the artillerists who served
the iron thirty-two pounder were loading the gun, a cannon-ball struck
the ground near the battery. One of the Americans ran, and, picking up
the spent ball, brought it into the battery, saying, "I've been
playing ball with the redcoats, and have caught them out. Let's see
now if they can catch back again." So saying, he rammed the missile
down the muzzle of the long thirty-two, and sent it back with deadly
aim. The captured ball crashed into the stern of the "Royal George,"
raked her from stem to stern, killing fourteen men, and wounding
eighteen in its course. The marksman, watching the course of his shot,
saw the splinters fly from the deck of the British ship; and the
Americans cheered loudly for the "old sow" as the British squadron put
about, and left the Sackett's Harbor people to celebrate their easily
won victory.

Insignificant though this engagement was, it was the chief battle of
the year on Lake Ontario. The Americans strained every nerve to put
more armed vessels afloat, and, being left unmolested by the British,
managed to have quite a flotilla in commission before winter set its
icy seal upon the lake. In September, Capt. Isaac Chauncey was
appointed commander-in-chief of the lake navy; and, on his arrival, he
proved himself the very man for the place. He rushed ahead the
building of new ships, arranged for the transportation of seamen from
the seacoast to man the vessels on the lakes, and then, not content
with attending only to the building of the ships, took command of the
squadron in commission, and fairly swept the lake clear of the enemy's
vessels. He met with little opposition as the British retired to their
naval station at Kingston, remaining there until all further naval
operations were checked by the ice.

Winter, which seriously impeded the work of the British by putting an
end to navigation upon the St. Lawrence, did away with many of the
difficulties of transportation which had so hampered the Americans.
The roads to the seacoast grew hard, and were soon covered with snow,
over which long teams of oxen plodded to and fro until the path was
well broken. Then began the hauling of supplies from the seaboard.
From his post at Sackett's Harbor, Chauncey sent out requisitions for
ship-timber, cordage, ordnance, and ship-carpenters. Long trains of
heavily laden wagons and sledges wound their way across the State from
New York or Albany to the station at Sackett's Harbor. Agents were
appointed in the seacoast towns to enlist seamen for service on the
lakes,--a work that required no small powers of persuasion; for the
true salt-water jack looks with great disfavor upon the "fish-ponds"
of fresh water. But, by dint of munificent offers of bounties and
prize-money, several hundred sailors were induced to leave their ships
on the ocean, and take service in the infant navy of the lakes.

Most of the sailors were sent across the State in the dead of winter.
The trip was made in huge sleds, drawn by several pairs of horses, and
carrying a score or more men each. The jackies enlivened the journey
with rollicking songs and stories as the sleds sped over the
well-packed roads through the sparsely settled country. One of the
largest parties was accompanied by a brass band, with the aid of which
the sailors made their entrance to the villages along the road in
truly royal style. The sleighs and horses were gayly decked with the
national colors. The band led in the first sleigh, closely followed by
three other sledges, filled with blue-coated men. Before the little
tavern of the town the _cortege_ usually came to a halt; and the tars,
descending, followed up their regulation cheers with demands for grog
and provender. After a halt of an hour or two, the party continued its
way, followed by the admiration of every villager, and the envy of
every boy large enough to have seafaring ambitions.

With all his energy and unswerving fidelity to the cause of his
country, Chauncey probably did nothing of more direct benefit to the
United States than writing a letter to a young naval officer, then
stationed at Newport, asking him to come West and take charge of the
naval operations on Lake Erie. The name of this young officer was
Oliver Hazard Perry, and a year later no name in American history
carried with it more fame.

Hostilities on Lake Erie had been unimportant up to the time that
Chauncey sent for Perry. The Americans had no naval vessel to oppose
to the fleet of Canadian craft that held the lake. One war-vessel
only had shown the American flag on the lake; and she had been fitted
out by the army, and had fallen into the hands of the enemy at the
surrender of Detroit. But this prize was not destined to remain long
in the hands of the Canadians. Early in the autumn of 1812, Chauncey
had sent Lieut. Elliott to Lake Erie, with instructions to begin at
once the creation of a fleet by building or purchasing vessels.
Elliott chose as the site of his improvised navy-yard Black Rock, a
point two miles below Buffalo; and there pushed ahead his work in a
way that soon convinced the enemy, that, unless the young officer's
energy received a check, British supremacy on Lake Erie would soon be
at an end. Accordingly, two armed brigs, the "Caledonia" and the
"Detroit," recently captured by the British, came down to put an end
to the Yankee ship-building. Like most of the enemy's vessels on the
lakes, these two brigs were manned by Canadians, and had not even the
advantage of a regular naval commander.

On the morning of the 8th of October, the sentries on the river-side
at Black Rock discovered the two British vessels lying at anchor under
the guns of Fort Erie, a British work on the opposite side of the
Niagara River, that there flows placidly along, a stream more than a
mile wide. Zealous for distinction, and determined to checkmate the
enemy in their design, Elliott resolved to undertake the task of
cutting out the two vessels from beneath the guns of the British fort.
Fortune favored his enterprise. It happened that on that very day a
detachment of sailors from the ocean had arrived at Black Rock. Though
wearied by their long overland journey, the jackies were ready for the
adventure, but had no weapons. In this dilemma Elliott was forced to
turn for aid to the military authorities, from whom he obtained
pistols, swords, and sabres enough to fit out his sailors for the
fray. With the arms came a number of soldiers and a small party of
adventurous citizens, all of whom enlisted under the leadership of the
adventurous Elliott. In planning the expedition, the great difficulty
lay in getting rid of the too numerous volunteers.

By nightfall, the preparations for the expedition were completed. In
the underbrush that hung over the banks of the river, two large boats
were concealed, ready for the embarkation. At midnight fifty men,
armed to the teeth, silently took their places in each of the great
barges, and pushed out upon the black surface of the river. All along
the bank were crowds of eager watchers, who discussed the chances of
success with bated breath, lest the merest whisper should alarm the
British sentries on the farther shore. With steady strokes of the
muffled oars, the two boats made their way toward the two brigs that
could just be seen outlined against the sky. Elliott, in the first
boat, directed the movements of his men, and restrained the too
enthusiastic. So stealthy was the approach, that the foremost boat was
fairly alongside of the "Detroit" before the British took the alarm.
Then the quick hail of the sentry brought an answering pistol-shot
from Elliott; and, amid volleys of musketry, the assailants clambered
up the sides of the brigs, and with pistol and cutlass drove the
startled crew below. So complete was the surprise, that the British
made but little resistance; and the cables of the brigs were cut,
sails spread, and the vessels under way, before the thunder of a gun
from Fort Erie told that the British on shore had taken the alarm.

At the report of the first shot fired, the dark line of the American
shore suddenly blazed bright with huge beacon fires, while lanterns
and torches were waved from commanding points to guide the adventurous
sailors in their navigation of the captured brigs. But the victors
were not to escape unscathed with their booty. The noise of the
conflict, and the shouts of the Americans on the distant bank of the
river, roused the British officers in the fort, and the guns were soon
trained on the receding vessels. Some field-batteries galloped along
the bank, and soon had their guns in a position whence they could pour
a deadly fire upon the Americans. Nor did the spectators on the New
York side of the river escape unharmed; for the first shot, fired by
the field-battery missed the brigs, but crossed the river and struck
down an American officer. Almost unmanageable in the swift current and
light wind, the two brigs seemed for a time in danger of recapture.
The "Caledonia" was run ashore under the guns of an American battery;
but the "Detroit," after being relieved of the prisoners, and deserted
by her captors, was beached at a point within range of the enemy's
fire. The British made several determined attempts to recapture her,
but were beaten off; and, after a day's fighting around the vessel,
she was set on fire and burned to the water's edge. The "Caledonia,"
however, remained to the Americans, and some months later did good
service against her former owners.

It was shortly after this occurrence that Lieut. Perry offered his
services for the lakes; and four months later he received a letter
from Chauncey, saying, "You are the very person that I want for a
particular service, in which you may gain reputation for yourself, and
honor for your country." This letter was quickly followed by orders
from the Secretary of the Navy to report at once for duty to Chauncey
at Sackett's Harbor. Perry was overjoyed. The dull monotony of his
duties at Newport suited little his ardent nature. He longed for
active service, and an opportunity to win distinction. His opportunity
had at last come; and twenty hours after the receipt of his orders, he
and his thirteen-year-old brother were seated in a sleigh and fairly
started on the long drive across the country. Travelling was a serious
matter in those days, and the journey from Newport to Sackett's Harbor
required twelve days.

On his arrival, Perry found that the special service for which he was
needed was the command of a naval force on Lake Erie. He stopped but a
short time at Sackett's Harbor, and then pressed on to Erie, the base
of the naval operations on the lake of the same name. It was late in
March when Perry arrived; and the signs of spring already showed that
soon the lake would be clear of ice, and the struggle for its control
recommence. The young lieutenant was indefatigable in the labor of
preparation. He urged on the building of vessels already begun. He
arranged for the purchase of merchant schooners, and their conversion
into gunboats. He went to Pittsburg for supplies, and made a flying
trip to Buffalo to join Chauncey in an attack upon Fort George at the
mouth of the Niagara River. All the time, he managed to keep up a
constant fire of letters to the Secretary of the Navy and to Chauncey,
begging for more sailors. By summertime, he had five vessels ready for
service, but no men to man them. The enemy blockaded him, and he dared
not accept the challenge. In July he wrote to Chauncey: "The enemy's
fleet of six sail are now off the bar of this harbor. What a golden
opportunity if we had men!... Give me men, sir, and I will acquire
both for you and myself honor and glory on this lake, or perish in the
attempt." Again he wrote: "For God's sake, and yours and mine, send me
men and officers; and I will have them all [the British squadron] in a
day or two." When the men finally did arrive, he was much disgusted
with their appearance, pronouncing them to be "a motley set,--blacks,
soldiers, and boys." Nevertheless, this same motley crew, headed by
the critical young officer, won a victory that effectually crushed the
pretensions of the enemy to the control of Lake Erie.

[Illustration: Perry's Recruits.]

His crews having arrived, Perry was anxious to get out upon the lake,
and engage the enemy at once. But this course of action was for a long
time impossible. The flotilla lay snugly anchored within the harbor of
Erie, the entrance to which was closed by a bar. To cross this bar,
the ships would have been obliged to send all heavy ordnance ashore;
and, as the enemy kept close watch outside the harbor, the American
fleet was practically blockaded. For several weeks the Americans were
thus kept prisoners, grumbling mightily at their enforced inaction,
and longing for a chance to get at the enemy. One morning in August
word was brought to Perry that the blockading fleet had disappeared.
Instantly all was life and bustle in the harbor. The crews of all the
vessels were ordered aboard; and the flotilla dropped down to the bar,
intending to cross early in the morning. At dawn the movement was
begun. The schooners and other small craft were easily taken outside;
but, when it came to the turn of the two gun-brigs, "Lawrence" and
"Niagara," it became evident that mechanical assistance was required.
Accordingly, a powerful "camel" was hastily improvised, by the aid of
which the two vessels were dragged across the bar. Hardly had the
second brig made the passage in safety, when the British fleet
appeared in the offing. Tradition says that the opportune absence of
the enemy's fleet was caused by a public banquet to which the citizens
of Port Dover had invited Commodore Barclay and his officers. While
the dinner was going merrily on, the Americans were hard at work,
escaping from the trap in which the British had left them. In
responding to a toast at the banquet, Barclay said, "I expect to find
the Yankee brigs hard and fast on the bar at Erie when I return, in
which predicament it will be but a small job to destroy them." His
anticipations were not realized; for, on his arrival, he found the
entire squadron safely floating in the deep water outside the bar.

Had Barclay but known it, he would even then have found it "but a
small job to destroy them;" for the two brigs, having been stripped of
their ordnance, would have been easy prey for the British squadron.
But Perry's bold action in sending forward two schooners to engage the
enemy seemed to alarm the too prudent commodore; and the British bore
away, and were soon out of sight.

By night Perry's flotilla was in readiness for cruising, and set out
immediately in pursuit of the foe. Barclay seemed to avoid the
conflict; and, after some weeks' cruising, the Americans cast anchor
at Put-in-Bay, and awaited there the appearance of the enemy.

The little flotilla that lay anchored on the placid waters of the
picturesque bay consisted of nine vessels, ranging in size from the
"Trippe," a puny sloop carrying one gun, to the "Lawrence" and
"Niagara," brigs carrying each two long twelves and eighteen short
thirty-twos. No very formidable armada was that of a handful of pygmy
vessels, commanded by a young officer who had never heard the
thunderous cannonade of a naval battle, or seen the decks of his ships
stained with the blood of friends and daily companions. Yet the work
of the little squadron saved the United States from invasion, won for
the young commander a never-dying fame, and clothed the vine-clad
hills, the pebbly beaches, and the crystal waters of Put-in-Bay with a
wealth of proud, historical associations.

[Illustration: Drilling The Raw Recruits.]

Day after day the vessels lay idly at their anchorage, and the sailors
grew restless at the long inactivity. Perry alone was patient; for to
him had come the knowledge that the hostile fleet was getting short of
supplies, and would soon be starved out of its retreat at Malden.
Knowing this, he spared no pains to get his men into training for the
coming conflict. They were exercised daily at the great guns, and put
through severe drills in the use of the cutlass, in boarding, and
repelling boarders. By constant drill and severe discipline, Perry had
made of the motley crew sent him a well-drilled body of seamen, every
man of whom had become fired with the enthusiasm of his commander.

As the time passed, and the day of battle drew nearer, Perry's
confidence in his men increased; and he looked upon the coming
conflict as one certain to bring glory to his country. At early dawn
the jackies on the ships could see the slender form of their commander
perched upon the craggy heights of one of the islands, called to this
day "Perry's Lookout," eagerly scanning the horizon in the direction
of Malden. On the night of Sept. 9, 1813, the commodore felt convinced
that on the next day the British would come out to battle.
Accordingly, a conference of captains was called in the cabin of the
flag-ship, and each received directions as to his course of action
during the fight. They were urged to force the fighting to close
quarters. Said Perry, "Nelson has expressed my idea in the words, 'If
you lay your enemy alongside, you cannot be out of your place.'" As
the officers were about to depart, Perry drew from a locker a large,
square blue flag, on which appeared, in white letters, the dying words
of the gallant Lawrence, "DON'T GIVE UP THE SHIP!" "This," said Perry,
"shall be the signal for action; and when it appears at the masthead,
remember your instructions." The conference then ended; and the
captains returned to their ships across the bay, silvered by the light
of the moon, to spend the greater part of the night in preparations
for the great danger of the coming day.

Morning dawned bright and clear, with a light breeze blowing, that
broke into ripples the surface of the land-locked bay. The rosy light
of the rising sun was just reddening the eastern horizon, when, from
the lookout in the foretop of the "Lawrence," came the long-drawn hail
of "Sail, ho!" quickly repeated from the other vessels.

Perry was already on deck. "What does it look like?" he shouted to the
lookout.

"A clump of square rigged, and fore and afters, sir," was the
response.

In a few minutes the signals "Enemy in sight," and "Get under way,"
were flying from the masthead of the flag-ship; and the merry piping
of the boatswains' whistles, and the measured tramp of the sailors
around the capstans, told that signals were observed, and were being
obeyed.

The fleet was soon threading its way through the narrow channels,
filled with islands, at the entrance to the bay, and finally came into
line on the open lake. Not a cloud was in the sky. The lake was calm,
with enough wind blowing to admit of manoeuvring, yet gentle enough to
be of advantage to the schooners that made up the greater part of each
fleet.

For some time the Americans held back, manoeuvring to get the
weather-gauge; but Perry's impatience for the fray got the better of
his caution, and he determined to close at once. His first officer
remonstrated, saying, "Then you'll have to engage the enemy to
leeward."

"I don't care," responded the commodore. "Leeward or windward, they
shall fight to-day." Then, turning to the quartermaster, he called for
the battle-flag, which being brought, he mustered the crew aft, and
addressed them briefly, telling them of the task before them, and
urging them to fight bravely for the victory. "My brave lads," he
concluded, "this flag bears the last words of Capt. Lawrence. Shall I
hoist it?"

"Ay, ay, sir!" cried the jackies, in unison; and, as the flag was
swiftly run to the masthead, the cheers of the sailors on the deck of
the "Lawrence" were echoed from the neighboring vessels, as the white
letters showed boldly against the blue flag, bearing to each commander
the exhortation, "Don't give up the ship!"

The battle-signal being thus displayed, the vessels moved onward to
the attack. As the crew of the "Lawrence" stood at their guns, the
cooks passed along the decks, handing to each man a bit of food, that
his strength might not leave him in the coming struggle. Then followed
boys with boxes of sand, which they strewed upon the decks, to afford
a firm foothold for the men at the guns. The hammocks were stowed
along the nettings, to serve as some little protection against flying
shot. The men stood silent and pale at their quarters, each occupied
with his own grave thoughts, but all determined to fight like brave
men and true for the honor of the flag. By Perry's side stood his
brother, a boy thirteen years old, armed and ready to do his duty as
well as the older men.

The British came on gallantly. Barclay had lost all his diffidence,
and brought up his vessels like a veteran. His ships were kept close
together; the ship "Detroit" under short sail, that the pygmy sloop
"Little Belt" might not be left in the rear. The Americans came down
in single file, headed by the schooner "Scorpion." Suddenly through
the still air rang out the sharp notes of a bugle-call on the enemy's
flag-ship. It was the signal for action; and, as the last notes died
away, the bands struck up "Rule, Britannia." The Americans answered
with cheers; and in the midst of the cheering, a jet of smoke and fire
spurted from the side of the "Detroit," and a heavy shot splashed into
the water near the "Lawrence," while a dull, heavy report came booming
over the water.

The battle was opened, but five minutes elapsed before a second shot
was fired. When it did come, it crashed through the bulwarks of the
"Lawrence," and sped across her deck, doing no great damage. "Steady,
lads, steady," cried Perry, from his post on the quarter-deck, as he
saw an uneasy stir among his men, who longed to return the fire. The
commodore was determined to fight at close quarters, and hung out
signals for each ship to choose its antagonist, and fight the fight
out for itself.

It was then high noon, and the battle soon became general. The little
schooners "Scorpion" and "Ariel" pluckily kept their place in the van
of the American line, but the fire of the enemy fell most fiercely
upon the flag-ship "Lawrence." No less than four vessels at one time
were grouped about the "Lawrence," pouring in a destructive fire, and
bent upon destroying the flag-ship and her brave commander; then
taking the smaller vessels in detail. The "Lawrence" fought bravely,
but the odds were too great. The carronades with which she was armed
were no match for the long guns of her adversaries. For two hours the
unequal combat raged, and no American vessel came to the aid of the
sorely smitten flag-ship. Amid the hail of cannon-balls and bullets,
Perry seemed to bear a charmed life. He saw his officers and men
falling all about him. John Brooks, the lieutenant of marines, fought
by the commodore's side. While speaking cheerfully to the commodore, a
cannon-ball struck the young lieutenant on the hip, dashing him across
the deck against the bulwark, and mutilating him so, that he plead
piteously with Perry, imploring that he might be put out of his misery
with a pistol-shot. From this awful spectacle Perry turned to speak to
the captain of a gun, when the conversation was abruptly cut short by
a shot which killed the seaman instantly. Perry returned to the
quarter-deck. The first lieutenant came rushing up, his face bloody,
and his nose swelled to an enormous size from a splinter which had
perforated it. "All the officers in my division are killed," he cried.
"For God's sake, give me more!" Perry sent some men to his aid; but
they soon fell, and the cry for more men arose again. One of the
surgeons who served in the cock-pit on that dreadful day states, that,
in the midst of the roar of battle, Perry's voice was heard calling
down the hatchway, and asking any surgeon's mates who could be spared,
to come on deck and help work the guns. Several went up; but the
appeal was soon repeated, and more responded. When no more men could
be obtained, the voice of the commodore took a pleading tone. "Can any
of the wounded pull a rope?" said he; and such was his ascendency over
the men, that several poor mangled fellows dragged themselves on deck,
and lent their feeble strength to the working of the guns.

[Illustration: Commodore Perry At The Battle Of Lake Erie.]

Amid all the carnage, the sailors were quick to notice the lighter
incidents of the fray. Even the cock-pit, filled with the wounded, and
reeking with blood that dripped through the cracks in the deck above,
once resounded with laughter as hearty as ever greeted a middy's
after-dinner joke in the steerage. Lieut. Yarnall received a bad
scalp-wound, which fairly drenched his face with blood. As he groped
his way towards the cock-pit he passed a lot of hammocks stuffed with
"cat-tails" which had been stowed on the bulwarks. The feathery down
of the "cat-tails" filled the air, and settled thick upon the head and
face of the officer, robbing his countenance of all semblance to a
human face. As he descended the ladder to the cock-pit, his owl-like
air roused the wounded to great shouts of laughter. "The Devil has
come among us," they cried.

[Illustration: Perry's Victory--the Battle Of Lake Erie. September 10,
1813 Copyright, 1893, By C. Klackner.]

While talking to his little brother, Perry to his horror saw the lad
fall at his feet, dashed to the deck by an unseen missile. The
commodore's agony may be imagined; but it was soon assuaged, for the
boy was only stunned, and was soon fighting again at his post. The
second lieutenant was struck by a spent grape-shot, and fell stunned
upon the deck. He lay there for a time, unnoticed. Perry raised him
up, telling him he was not hurt, as no blood could be seen. The
lieutenant put his hand to his clothing, at the point where the blow
had fallen, and discovered the shot lodged in his coat. Coolly putting
it in his pocket, he remarked, "You are right: I am not hurt. But this
is my shot," and forthwith returned to his duty.

It was a strange-looking body of men that fought at the guns of the
"Lawrence." Lean, angular Yankee sailors from the seafaring
communities of New England stood by the side of swarthy negroes, who,
with their half-naked black bodies, in the dense powder-smoke, seemed
like fiends in pandemonium. In the rigging were stationed a number of
Kentucky riflemen, who had volunteered to serve during the battle. The
buckskin shirts and leggings gave an air of incongruity to their
presence on a man-of-war. Their unerring rifles, however, did brave
service for the cause of the stars and stripes. At the opening of the
action, two tall Indians, decked in all the savage finery of war-paint
and feathers, strode the deck proudly. But water is not the Indian's
element, and the battle had hardly begun when one fled below in
terror; the other remained on deck, and was killed early in the
action.

[Illustration: Making Ready To Leave The "Lawrence."]

Courageous and self-confident though the American commander was, the
moment came when he could no longer disguise the fact that his gallant
flag-ship was doomed to destruction before the continuous and deadly
fire of her adversaries. There was but one course of action open, and
upon this he determined at once. He would transfer his flag to the
"Niagara," and from the deck of that vessel direct the movements of
his fleet. Accordingly, the only uninjured boat of the "Lawrence" was
lowered; and Perry sprang into the stern, followed by his little
brother. Before the boat pushed off, the battle-flag was thrown into
her; and, wrapping it about him, Perry took a standing position in the
stern, and ordered the oarsmen to give way. He steered straight for
the "Niagara," through the very centre of the fight. The enemy quickly
grasped the purpose of the movement, and great guns and muskets were
trained on the little boat. Shot of all sizes splashed in the water
about the boat, splintered the oars, and buried themselves in the
gunwale. The crew begged their commander to sit down, and make himself
a less conspicuous target for the fire of the enemy; but Perry paid
but little attention to their entreaties. Suddenly the men rested on
the oars, and the boat stopped. Angrily the commodore demanded the
cause of the stoppage, and was told that the men refused to row unless
he sat down. With a smile he yielded, and soon the boat was alongside
the "Niagara." Perry sprang to the deck, followed by his boat's crew
and a plucky sailor who had swum just behind the boat across the long
stretch of water. Hardly a glance did the commodore cast at the ship
which he had left, but bent all his faculties to taking the new
flag-ship into the battle.

The "Niagara" was practically a fresh ship; for, up to this time, she
had held strangely aloof from the battle. Now all was to be changed.
The battle-flag went to her masthead; and she plunged into the thick
of the fight, striking thunderous blows at every ship she encountered.
As she passed the American lines, the sailors greeted with cheers
their gallant commander. The crippled "Lawrence," an almost helpless
hulk, left far behind, was forced to strike her flag; although her
crew protested loudly, crying out, "Sink the ship, and let us go down
with her." But the conquered vessel was not destined to fall into the
hands of her enemies. Already the sight of their commodore on a fresh
vessel stimulated the American tars; so that in half an hour the
British line was broken, their ships cut to pieces, and the "Detroit,"
their flag-ship, a prize to the "Niagara." A white handkerchief was
waved at the end of a pike by one of the crew of the "Princess
Charlotte." The firing stopped, the flag was again run up to the
masthead of the "Lawrence," while a few feeble cheers came faintly
over the water from the remnant of her crew.

The dense clouds of smoke blowing away, Perry saw, by the disposition
of his squadron, that the victory was secure. Hastily catching off his
navy-cap, he laid upon it a sheet of paper torn from an old letter,
and wrote to Gen. Harrison the famous despatch, "_We have met the
enemy, and they are ours,--two ships, two brigs, one schooner, and one
sloop._"

Then, with true chivalry, he determined that to his flag-ship
"Lawrence," that had so stoutly borne the brunt of battle, should
belong the honor of receiving the British captains, when they came to
surrender their vessels. He returned to the "Lawrence;" but the scene
there was such that even the excitement of victory could raise no
feelings of exultation in his breast. He saw on every side the bodies
of officers with whom, but the night before, he had dined in perfect
health. The decks were red with blood, and from the cock-pit arose
the groans of the wounded.

After the formal surrender, to make which the officers picked their
way over the deck covered with slain to the quarter-deck, the work of
burying the dead of both squadrons was begun. It was about sundown
that the sad ceremonies were held; and, as the deep tones of the
chaplains reading the burial service arose upon the evening air, the
dull, mournful splashing of heavy bodies in the water told that the
last scene in the great victory was drawing to an end.




CHAPTER VIII.

     ON THE OCEAN. -- THE "HORNET" SINKS THE "PEACOCK." -- THE
     BLOCKADE. -- ADVENTURES OF THE "SALLY." -- HOSTILITIES ON
     CHESAPEAKE BAY. -- THE CRUISE OF THE "PRESIDENT."


The year 1813, that brought to American sailors upon the lakes such
well-earned laurels, opened auspiciously for the stars and stripes
upon the ocean. It will be remembered that the "Constitution," while
on the cruise in the South Atlantic that ended with the destruction of
the "Java," had left the "Hornet" off San Salvador, blockading the
British ship "Bonne Citoyenne." For eighteen days the "Hornet"
remained at her post. Her captain continually urged the enemy to come
out and give him battle, but to no avail. The remembrance of his
valuable cargo deterred the Englishman, and he remained snug in his
harbor. Months after, when the occurrence became known in the United
States, an unreasoning outcry was raised against the commander of the
"Bonne Citoyenne" for thus avoiding the conflict; but naval men have
always agreed that his action was wise and commendable.

After eighteen days' service on this blockade, the "Hornet" saw a
British seventy-four bearing down upon her, bent upon releasing the
treasure-ship. Against such odds it would have been folly to contend;
and the Americans, taking advantage of a dark night, slipped away,
and were soon beyond pursuit. The vessel continued her cruise in the
waters south of the equator, meeting with good fortune, and taking
many valuable prizes, from one of which twenty-three thousand dollars
in specie were taken. But her cruise was not destined to proceed
without serious opposition.

On the 24th of February, as the "Hornet" was giving close chase to a
suspicious brig near the mouth of the Demarara River, a second
stranger was sighted in the offing. Giving no heed to the newly
sighted vessel, the "Hornet" continued her chase until the rapidly
approaching vessel was clearly made out to be a brig, flying the
British flag, and evidently a man-of-war. The "Hornet" was immediately
cleared for action; and the two hostile vessels began manoeuvring for
the weather-gage, as two scientific pugilists spar cautiously for an
opening. In this contest of seamanship, Capt. Lawrence of the "Hornet"
proved the victor; and a little after five o'clock in the afternoon,
the two enemies stood for each other upon the wind, the "Hornet"
having the weather-gage. As they rapidly neared each other, no sound
was heard save the creaking of the cordage, and the dashing of the
waves against the vessels' hulls. Not a shot was fired until the
enemies were dashing past each other, going in opposite directions.
The first broadsides were exchanged at half pistol-shot, with very
unequal effects. The shot of the "Hornet" penetrated the hull of her
antagonist, doing terrible execution; while the broadside let fly by
the "Peacock" whistled through the rigging of the American ship,
cutting away the pennant, and killing a topman, who was struck by a
round shot, and dashed from his station in the mizzen-top, to fall
mangled and lifeless into the sea.

Hardly were the ships clear, when the British captain put his helm
hard up,--a manoeuvre executed with the intention of securing a raking
position. But the plan was balked by the cool seamanship of Capt.
Lawrence, who quickly followed up the British vessel, and, getting a
position on his quarter, poured in so rapid and accurate a fire that
the enemy was fain to haul down his colors and confess defeat. The
British ensign had hardly touched the deck, when it was run up again,
with the union down, as a token of distress. At this sight, the Yankee
tars, who had been cheering lustily over their quickly won victory,
stopped their rejoicings, and set about giving assistance to the
injured Britons with as hearty good-will as they had lately shown in
their vigorous cannonade.

With all possible despatch, a boat was lowered, and Lieut. Shubrick
proceeded on board the prize. He found the "Peacock" a complete wreck.
Shortly after the surrender her main-mast had gone by the board, and
her hull was fairly honeycombed with shot-holes. Returning to his
ship, Shubrick reported the condition of the prize. He was immediately
ordered to return to the "Peacock," and make every effort to save her.
Accompanied by three boats' crews of American sailors, he again
boarded the sinking ship, and bent every energy to the attempt for her
salvation. Bulwarks were cut away, and the heavy guns were rolled out
of the gaps thus made, and cast into the sea. Deep down in the hold,
and swinging like spiders over the sides of the vessels, sailors tried
to stop up with felt-covered blocks of wood the great holes through
which the water was pouring. All the time boats were plying between
the sinking vessel and the "Hornet," transferring the wounded and the
prisoners. Twilight fell before the work was ended, and it became
evident to all that the "Peacock" must sink during the night. But the
end came even quicker than had been expected. Some new rent must have
opened in the brig's side; for, with a sudden lurch, she commenced to
sink rapidly, bow foremost. Several of the English crew were below,
searching for liquor; and, caught by the inpouring flood, they found a
watery grave in the sinking hulk. Three Americans were also ingulfed;
and five narrowly escaped death by climbing up the rigging to the
foretop, which remained above water when the hull rested upon the
bottom. In the midst of the excitement and confusion, four British
seamen slyly clambered out of the cabin-windows, and, dropping into a
boat that was made fast to the stern, made off in the darkness. The
Americans, eagerly watching the sinking ship, did not detect the
fugitives until the boat was far beyond the possibility of recapture.

The vessel so quickly destroyed by the "Hornet" was the British
man-of-war brig "Peacock," mounting ten guns, and carrying a crew of
two hundred and ten men. In one respect, she was a model ship. Among
naval men, she had long been known as "the yacht," on account of the
appearance of exquisite neatness she always presented. Her decks were
as white as lime-juice and constant holystoning could keep them. The
brasswork about the cabins and the breeches of the guns was dazzling
in its brilliancy. White canvas lined the breechings of the
carronades. Her decks everywhere showed signs of constant toil in the
cause of cleanliness. The result of the battle, however, seemed to
indicate that Capt. Peakes had erred, in that, while his ship was
perfect, his men were bad marksmen, and poorly disciplined. While
their shot were harmlessly passing through the rigging of the
"Hornet," the Americans were pouring in well-directed broadsides, that
killed and wounded thirty-eight men, and ended the action in fifteen
minutes. The Americans lost but one man in the fight, though three
more went down in the sinking prize.

Capt. Lawrence now found himself far from home, short of water, and
crowded with prisoners. For a time, he feared that to these evils was
to be added a second action, while his crew was still fatigued with
the labors of the first. During the battle with the "Peacock," a
second British man-of-war brig, the "Espiegle," lay quietly at anchor
only four miles away. Why she had not joined in the strife, has never
been explained. She was clearly visible from the tops of the "Hornet"
throughout the action, and Lawrence expected every moment to see her
bear down to the assistance of her consort. But she made no movement;
and even after the fight ended, and the "Peacock" lay on the bottom of
the ocean, the mysterious stranger awoke not from her lethargy. Not
wishing to engage a second adversary while his ship was crowded with
prisoners, Lawrence immediately left the scene of action, and laid his
course for home. The homeward voyage was rapid and uneventful. No
pains were spared to secure the comfort of the prisoners who crowded
the ship. The British officers were treated with the greatest
consideration; so that, as one said on quitting the ship, they "ceased
to consider themselves as captives." The tars, who were consigned to
the care of the blue-jackets in the forecastle, were met with less
courtesy, but certainly with no less good feeling. They were not
spared an occasional taunt or triumphant joke; but when it was learned
that by the sinking of their ship the Britons had lost all their
"toggery," the "Hornet's" lads turned to, and soon collected clothing
enough to fit out each prisoner with a respectable kit.

It was the middle of March before the long, homeward voyage was
ended, and the anchor was dropped in the snug harbor of Holmes's Hole
in the island of Martha's Vineyard. The usual rejoicings followed the
news of the victory. Lawrence was the hero of the hour; and songs
innumerable appeared in the newspapers, extolling the courage and
devotion of the brave lads of the "Hornet."

Indeed, the arrival of the "Hornet" with her glorious news came at an
opportune moment, to cheer the spirits of the American people. The war
had begun to assume a serious aspect. Continued reverses on the ocean
had roused the British ministry to the fact that they were dealing
with no contemptible enemy, and the word had gone forth that the
Americans must be crushed into submission. Troops were hurriedly sent
to Canada, and all the vessels that could be spared were ordered to
the coast of the United States. The English had determined upon that
most effective of all hostile measures,--a rigorous blockade of their
enemy's coast. Up and down the coast from New Jersey to the Carolinas,
British frigates and sloops kept up a constant patrol. Chesapeake Bay
was their chief rendezvous; and the exploits of the blockading
squadron stationed there, under Admiral Cockburn, led often to scenes
more befitting savage warfare then the hostilities of two enlightened
and civilized peoples. On the New England coast, the blockade was less
severely enforced. The people of that section had been loud in their
denunciations of the war; and the British hoped, by a display of
moderation, to seduce the New Englanders from their allegiance to the
United States,--a hope that failed utterly of fulfilment. Even had the
British desired to enforce the blockade along the New England shore,
the character of the coast, and the skill and shrewdness of the Yankee
skippers, would have made the task of the blockaders a most difficult
one.

The annals of the little seafaring-villages along the coast of Maine
and Massachusetts abound in anecdotes of hardy skippers who outwitted
the watchful British, and ran their little schooners or sloops into
port under the very guns of a blockading man-of-war.

Among the blockade-runners of the New England coast, Capt. Dan Fernald
of Portsmouth stood foremost. When a shipload of Maine timber was
needed at the Portsmouth navy-yard, to be converted into a new
man-of-war, to Capt. Fernald was assigned the task of bringing it down
from Portland past the British frigates, that were ever on the watch
for just such cargoes. When the preparations for the building of the
seventy-four-gun ship "Washington" were making at the navy-yard, Capt.
Fernald was sent to Portsmouth for a load of ship's-timber. His cargo
was to consist of forty-eight "knees" and the breast-hook of the
seventy-four. Loaded down with this burden, the schooner "Sally" left
Portland, and headed for her destination. Caution led her captain to
keep his craft close to the shore, and for a day or two she crept
along the coast without being discovered. But head-winds and calms
delayed the "Sally," and on her fourth day out she was sighted by the
British frigate "Tenedos." The "Sally" was not an imposing craft, and
under ordinary circumstances she might have been allowed to proceed
unmolested; but on this occasion a number of the oaken knees for the
new war-vessel were piled on the deck, and the British captain could
clearly make out, through his glasses, that the "Sally" was laden with
contraband of war. Accordingly, he set out in hot pursuit, in the full
expectation of overhauling the audacious coaster. Capt. Fernald,
however, had no idea of letting his schooner fall into the hands of
the British. He was a wily old skipper, and knew every nook and corner
of the Maine and New Hampshire coasts better than he knew the streets
of his native village. Apparently unmoved by the pursuit of the
man-of-war, he stood at the tiller, and, beyond ordering his crew to
shake out the reefs in the sails, seemed to make no great attempt to
elude the enemy. But soon the crew noticed that the skipper was taking
his schooner rather dangerously close to the shore; and a cry came
from a sailor on the bow, that the "Sally" was ploughing through the
kelp, and would soon be on the rocks.

"No matter," sung out the captain; "just heave over a few of them
knees, and I guess she'll float clear."

Overboard went a dozen heavy timbers, and the "Sally" sailed smoothly
on over the rocks. Then the captain glanced back over his shoulder,
and chuckled slyly as the majestic frigate, following closely in his
track, brought up all of a sudden on the rocks, and was quickly left a
fixture by the receding tide. The exasperated Englishman sent two
eighteen-pound shot skipping over the water after the "Sally," but
without effect. One shot buried itself in the sand of the beach; and
Capt. Fernald, after picking up the knees that had been thrown
overboard, coolly went ashore, dug up the ball, and carried it away as
a trophy. He reached his moorings at the navy-yard safely, and was
warmly greeted by Commodore Hull, who asked if the "Sally" had been
fired upon; and, on being presented with the eighteen-pound shot for a
token, exclaimed, "You are a good fellow, and stand fire well."

The "Tenedos" came not so luckily out of the adventure. By the time a
flood tide lifted her clear of the reef, the jagged points of the
rocks had pierced her hull, so that she leaked badly, and was forced
to go to Halifax for repairs.

One more adventure in which the "Sally" and her wily captain figured
is worth recounting. Again the dingy schooner was edging her way along
the rugged shore, bound for the Portsmouth navy-yard. No vessel could
have seemed more harmless. Her patched and dirty canvas was held in
place by oft-spliced ropes and rigging none too taut. Her bluff bows
butted away the waves in clouds of spray, that dashed over the decks,
which seldom received other washing. Her cargo seemed to be cord-wood,
neatly split, and piled high on deck. While off Casco, the wind
dropped down, and the "Sally" was left floating idly upon the glassy
ocean. Far in the distance lay an English man-o'-war, also becalmed;
but from which a long-boat, stoutly manned, soon put out, and made for
the becalmed schooner. The boat was soon within hail, and a trim young
officer in the stern-sheets sung out,--

"What craft's that?"

"Schooner 'Sally' of Portsmouth," came the answer, in the drawling
tones of a down-east skipper.

"Where from?"

"Portland."

"Where bound?"

"Portsmouth."

"What's your cargo."

"Firewood," responded Capt. Fernald with a carelessness he was far
from feeling; for deep down in the hold, under the cord-wood, were two
twenty-four-pounder cannon, thirteen thousand pounds of powder, and
about one hundred boarding pikes and cutlasses.

The British officer hesitated a moment, as if the little coaster was
of too little importance for further examination.

"Well, I think I'll come aboard," said he carelessly, and soon stood
with three or four of his men on the deck of the "Sally."

After glancing contemptuously about the ill-kept decks, he turned to
his men with the sharp order: "Clear away some of that wood from the
hatchways, and see what's in the hold."

The men set to work, passing the cord-wood away from the hatch ways,
and piling it upon the after-deck. Soon they had worked their way into
the hold, and were going deeper and deeper down toward the munitions
of war. Capt. Fernald's blood seemed to stop coursing in his veins. He
knew that but one layer of cord-wood then lay above the cannon, and he
expected every instant to see the black iron uncovered. But the
British officer grew impatient.

"That's enough of that work," said he; "there's nothing but wood
there. Captain, you can proceed on your course."

A momentary murmur arose from the English sailors. The "Sally" was
theirs by right of capture, and they saw no reason for her liberation.
"Why, lads," said the officer, "it would cost just as much to get this
poor fellow's wood-schooner condemned as it would a large ship. As for
the prize-money, it would not make a penny apiece." So, tumbling into
their boat, the jackies pulled away; shouting to the captain of the
"Sally" to stow his cargo again, or his old tub would capsize. Capt.
Fernald took their jeers good-naturedly, for he was the victor in that
encounter.

The occurrence had been observed from the shore; and, when the British
sailors were seen swarming over the side of the "Sally," a horse-man
set off for Portsmouth to notify Commodore Hull that the schooner was
captured. It was a sore blow; for the guns and powder were thought to
be lost, and munitions of war were hard to be had at that time. But
Hull soon threw aside the disappointment, and was busily engaged with
plans for the vessels then building, when a sentry came in, and
reported the "Sally" in sight. Hull rushed to the water-side. Sure
enough, there came the battered old schooner, butting her way through
the waves of the channel; and, before long, the two cannon were safe
in the storehouses, while Capt. Fernald found himself vested with a
reputation for almost superhuman sagacity and luck.

Not all the encounters between the blockaders and the blockade-runners
terminated so happily for the Americans. Many a coasting-vessel was
sent to Halifax to swell the coffers of the British prize-courts, or,
after being set on fire, was left to lie charred and ruined upon the
rocky shore, as a warning to all who violated the blockade.

The capture of one United States war-vessel graced the English naval
annals of January, 1813; for the little brig "Viper," carrying twelve
guns, fell in the way of the British, thirty-two, "Narcissus," and
straightway surrendered to the overwhelming force of her enemy.

Among the United States war-vessels caught and held in port by the
blockade was the frigate "Constellation." She was at the opening of
the war the favorite ship of the American navy; her exploits in the
war with France having endeared her to the American people, and won
for her among Frenchmen the name of "the Yankee race-horse."
Notwithstanding her reputation for speed, she is said to have been
very crank, and had an awkward way of getting on her beam-ends without
much provocation. An almost incredible tale is told of her getting
"knocked down" by a squall while chasing a French privateer, and,
notwithstanding the delay, finally overhauling and capturing the
chase.

When war was declared with England, the "Constellation" was so
thoroughly dismantled, that some months were occupied in refitting
before she was ready to put to sea. In January, 1813, she dropped
anchor in Hampton Roads, expecting to set out on an extended cruise
the next morning. Had she been a day earlier, her career in the War of
1812 might have added new lustre to her glorious record in the war
with France; but the lack of that day condemned her to inglorious
inactivity throughout the war: for on that very night a British
squadron of line-of-battle ships and frigates dropped anchor a few
miles down the bay, and the "Constellation" was fairly trapped.

When, by the gray light of early morning, the lookout on the
"Constellation" saw the British fleet lying quietly at their anchorage
down the bay, he reported to Capt. Stewart; and the latter saw that,
for a time, he must be content to remain in port. Stewart's reputation
for bravery and devotion to his country leaves no doubt that the
prospect of prolonged idleness was most distasteful to him. But he had
little time to mourn over his disappointment. The position of the
frigate was one of great danger. At any moment she might be exposed to
attack by the hostile fleet. Accordingly, she dropped down abreast of
Craney Island, where she was secure from attack by the British
vessels, but still open to the assaults of their boats.

To meet this danger, Capt. Stewart took the most elaborate
precautions. His ship was anchored in the middle of the narrow
channel; and on either side were anchored seven gunboats, officered
and manned by the men of the frigate. Around the gunboats and frigate
extended a vast circle of floating logs, linked together by heavy
chains, that no boarders might come alongside the vessels. The great
frigate towered high above the surrounding gunboats, her black sides
unbroken by an open port; for the gun-deck ports were lashed down, and
the guns housed. Not a rope's end was permitted to hang over the side;
the stern ladders were removed, and the gangway cleats knocked off. An
enemy might as well hope to scale the unbroken front of a massive wall
of masonry, as that dark, forbidding hull. From the bulwarks rose on
all sides, to the ends of the yards, a huge net made of ratlin stuff,
boiled in pitch until it would turn the edge of a cutlass, and further
strengthened by nail-rods and small chains. The upper part of the
netting was weighted with kentledge, the pigs of iron used for
ballast; so that, should the hardy assailants succeed in coming
alongside and scaling the side, a few blows of an axe would let fall
the heavily weighted nettings, sweeping the boarders into the sea, and
covering boats and men with an impenetrable mesh, under which they
would be at the mercy of the sailors on the frigate's decks. The
carronades and howitzers were loaded with grape; and the officers and
men felt that only bravery on their part was essential to the defeat
of any force that Great Britain could send against the ship.

Heedless of these formidable preparations for their reception, the
enemy set under way two expeditions for the capture of the
"Constellation." In neither case did the antagonists actually come to
blows, for the approach of the British was discovered before they came
within pistol-shot; and, as their only chance lay in surprising the
Americans, they retired without striking a blow. The coming of the
first expedition was known upon the "Constellation" the day before it
actually set out. A Portuguese merchantman, trying to beat out of the
bay, had been stopped by the British, and anchored a few miles below
the American frigate. A guard and lookout from the English fleet were
stationed on the Portuguese to watch the "Constellation." In an
unguarded moment, these men let fall a hint of the movement under way;
and an American passenger on the Portuguese vessel quickly carried the
news to Capt. Stewart, and volunteered to remain and aid in the
defence. The next night was dark and drizzly; and the British, to the
number of two thousand, set out in boats for the "Constellation."
Hardly were they within gunshot, when two lanterns gleamed from the
side of a watchful guard-boat; and the roll of drums and sound of
hurrying feet aboard the frigate told that the alarm was given. The
assailants thereupon abandoned the adventure, and returned to their
ship. The next night they returned, but again retreated discomfited.
Several nights later, a third expedition came up. This time the
guard-boat was far down the bay; and, seeing the huge procession of
boats, the Americans calmly edged in among them, and for some time
rowed along, listening to the conversation of the British, who never
dreamed that an enemy could be in their midst. Suddenly a sailor, more
sharp-eyed than the rest, caught sight of the interlopers; and the cry
was raised, "A stranger!" The Americans tugged at their oars, and were
soon lost to sight; but, not being pursued, returned, and accompanied
their foes up the bay, and even anchored with the flotilla at a point
above the "Constellation." The enemy, finding the Americans constantly
on the watch, abandoned their designs on the ship, and vowed that
Capt. Stewart must be a Scotchman, as he could never be caught
napping. Some days later, an officer, sent with a flag of truce to the
British fleet, vastly chagrined the officers there by repeating their
remarks overheard by the guard-boat officers who joined the British
flotilla in the dark. These three escapes confirmed the reputation
borne by the "Constellation," as a "lucky ship;" and although she
remained pent up in port throughout the war, doing nothing for her
country, her luck was unquestioned in the minds of the sailors. With
her they classed the "Constitution" and "Enterprise," while the
"Chesapeake" and "President" were branded as unlucky. Certainly the
career of these ships in the War of 1812 went far to confirm the
superstitious belief of the sailors.

In the course of the next two months, Chesapeake Bay was the scene of
two gallant adventures, in which American privateersmen were opposed
to the British sailors. On Feb. 8, the privateer schooner "Lottery"
was standing down the bay under easy sail, out-bound on a voyage to
Bombay. The schooner was one of the clipper-built craft, for which
Baltimore ship-builders were famous the world over. Her battery
consisted of six twelve-pounder carronades, and her crew numbered
twenty-five men. Near the point at which the noble bay opens into the
Atlantic ocean, a narrow sheet of water extends into the Virginia
shore, winding in sinuous courses several miles inland. This is known
as Lynnhaven Bay; and on its placid surface there lay, on the morning
of the "Lottery's" appearance, four powerful frigates flying the
British flag. From their tops the approaching schooner could be seen
across the low-lying neck of land that separated the smaller bay from
the main body of water. The cry of "Sail, ho!" roused the fleet to
sudden activity; and an expedition of two hundred men was quickly
organized to proceed against the privateer. Fortune seemed to favor
the British; for hardly had the boats left the fleet, when the fresh
breeze died away, and the schooner was left at the mercy of the boats,
which, propelled by the long, swinging strokes of man-o'-war oarsmen,
bore down rapidly upon her. Capt. Southcomb of the "Lottery" was an
American sailor, who had smelt powder before; and he had no idea of
yielding up his ship without a struggle. The formidable force sent
against him merely moved him to more desperate resistance. When the
boats came within range, the guns of the "Lottery" opened upon them
with a hail of grape and round shot. Still the assailants pressed on,
and soon came beneath the schooner's lee. Dropping their oars, the
plucky British tars sprang into the chains, swarmed up the bobstay and
over the bow, and used each other's backs as ladders to aid them to
reach the schooner's deck. The little crew of privateersmen fought
viciously, guarding the side with cutlasses and pistols, hurling the
boarders back into the sea, or cutting them down as they reached the
deck. Cold shot and kentledge were dashed upon the boats, in the hopes
of sinking them; while the carronades poured a destructive fire upon
such boats as could be reached by their shot. But the conflict was too
unequal to last long. The English sailors swarmed over the gunwale on
all sides, and, cheering lustily, drove the small remnant of defenders
below. Capt. Southcomb was cut down, and lay mortally wounded upon the
deck when the enemy took possession of the ship. When the victors came
to look about the captured vessel, they found such proofs of a
desperate resistance, that their admiration was open and pronounced.
Five only of the schooner's crew were unhurt, while the British paid
for their success with the loss of thirteen men. Capt. Southcomb, in a
dying condition, was taken aboard the frigate "Belvidera," where he
received the tenderest treatment, and was shown marked respect on
account of his bravery.

[Illustration: Awaiting The Boarders.]

In the next encounter between the blockaders and a privateer, the
British bore away the palm for gallantry. This time the privateersmen
had every advantage, while the British carried the day by pure
courage. The captured vessels were the privateer schooner "Dolphin,"
of twelve guns, and the letters-of-marque "Racer," "Arab," and "Lynx,"
of six guns each. The crews of the four vessels aggregated one hundred
and sixty men. Against this force came five boats manned by one
hundred and five British sailors, who pulled fifteen miles in order to
attack their foes. Wearied though they were by the long pull, the
sight of the privateers seemed to arouse new strength in the plucky
tars; and, without a thought of the odds against them, they dashed
forward, cheering, and calling upon the Americans to surrender. Had
the four schooners been manned by such brave men as those who defended
the "Lottery," the assailants might have been beaten off. As it was,
two vessels surrendered without firing a shot. The crew of the "Racer"
fought pluckily for a time, but were soon overpowered, and the
vessel's guns turned upon the "Dolphin." When fire was opened upon
this last vessel, her crew, affrighted, leaped overboard from every
side; and the "Dolphin" was soon in the hands of her enemies, who had
lost but thirteen men in the whole action.

Many a gallant adventure, such as this, is to be laid to the credit of
the British tars on the American station during the continuance of the
blockade. Right dashing fellows were they, at cutting out a
coasting-schooner as she lay under the guns of some American
earthworks. The lads that have won for England her supremacy upon the
seas have never been behindhand at swarming up the sides of an enemy,
leaping his taffrail, and meeting him on his own deck with the cold
steel. And as the year rolled on, and the blockade along the American
coast was made more strict, the meetings between the enemies became
more frequent. From every seaport town, Yankee privateers were waiting
to escape to sea; and they seldom won clear without a brush with the
watchful enemy. The British, too, had begun to fit out privateers,
though American commerce offered but little enticement for these
mercenary gentry. Between the ships of the two private armed navies,
encounters were common; and the battles were often fought with courage
and seamanship worthy of the regular navy.

Little glory was won by the navy of the United States during the
opening months of the year. Many ships were laid up in port; while
some, like the "Constellation," were blockaded by the enemy. The
"President" and the "Congress" managed to get to sea from Boston in
April, and entered upon a protracted cruise, in which the bad luck of
the former ship seemed to pursue her with malevolent persistence. The
two ships parted after cruising in company for a month, and scoured
the ocean until the following December, when they returned home,
experiencing little but continual disappointments. The "Congress"
could report only the capture of four British merchantmen, as the
result of her eight months' cruise; while the long service had so
seriously injured her hull, that she was condemned as unseaworthy, and
ended her career, a dismantled hulk reduced to the ignoble service of
store-ship at a navy-yard.

The "President" was little more fortunate in her search for prizes.
After parting with her consort, she beat about in the vicinity of the
Gulf Stream, in the hopes of getting a ship or two returning from the
West Indies. But day after day passed, and no ship appeared. Changing
his plan, Commodore Rodgers made for the North Sea, feeling sure that
there he would find in plenty the marine game for which he was
seeking. But, to his astonishment, not an English ship was to be
found. It was then the middle of summer, and the frigate had been at
sea for nearly three months. The jackies on the forecastle were weary
of the long voyage, and fairly at the end of their occupations for
"teasing time." The officers, well knowing the effect of long idleness
upon the sailors, were tireless in devising means of employment. The
rigging was set up weekly, so that the shrouds and stays were like
lines drawn with a ruler. Enough rope-yarn was pulled, and spun-yarn
spun, to supply a navy-yard for months. Laggards were set to scrubbing
the rust off the chain cables, and sharpening with files the flukes of
the anchors. When such work failed, the men were drilled in the use of
cutlasses and single sticks; forming long lines down the gun-deck, and
slashing away with right good will at the word of the instructor. But
the monotony of a long cruise without a prize cannot long be beguiled
by such makeshifts; and it was with the heartiest pleasure that the
sailors heard that the commodore had determined to put into port for a
time, and take on board stores.

It was North Bergen, Norway, that Rodgers chose for this purpose; and
an unfortunate choice it proved to be, for a famine prevailed in the
country, and only water could be obtained for the ship. Leaving the
inhospitable port, the "President" was soon again upon the ocean. She
quickly took two British merchantmen, from which she replenished her
stores. Shortly after, two hostile frigates hove in sight, and the
"President" fled for her life before them for more than eighty hours.
At that season, in those high latitudes, no friendly darkness settled
over the ocean to give the fugitive a chance to escape. Bright
daylight persisted throughout the chase, and the sun never dipped
below the horizon. Sheer good sailing saved the American frigate, and
enabled her to leave her pursuers far in her wake.

For some days thereafter, better luck seemed to attend the frigate
that so pluckily kept up her operations in seas thousands of miles
from a friendly port. With true Yankee audacity, she extended her
cruise even into the Irish Channel, and there preyed upon British
commerce until the enemy was moved to send a squadron to rout out the
audacious intruder. Then Rodgers set sail for home.

On the voyage to the United States, the "President" captured a British
armed schooner by a stratagem which taught at least one British
officer to respect "Yankee cuteness."

It was near the last of September that the frigate was flying along
before a fresh breeze. Her yards were spread with a cloud of snowy
canvas, and the wind sung through the straining cordage a melody sweet
to the ears of the sailor homeward bound. Towards evening, a small
sail was made out in the distance; and, as time wore on, it was seen
that she was rapidly approaching the "President." Rodgers surmised
that the stranger might be a British vessel, and determined to lure
her within range by strategy. In some way he had obtained knowledge of
some of the private signals of the British navy; and in a few minutes
from the masthead of the American frigate, there fluttered a row of
flags which announced her as the British frigate "Sea-Horse." The
stranger promptly responded, and was made out to be the schooner
"Highflyer," a little craft noted for her sailing qualities.
Unsuspectingly the "Highflyer" came under the stern of the American
frigate, and waited for a boat to be sent aboard. Soon the boat came;
and one of Rodgers's lieutenants, clad in British uniform, clambered
up the side, and was received with due honor. He was the bearer of a
message from Commodore Rodgers, requesting that the signal-books of
the "Highflyer" be sent on board the fictitious "Sea-Horse" for
comparison and revision. This the British captain hastened to do, and
soon followed his books to the deck of the frigate, where a
lieutenant met him, clothed in full British uniform. A file of
marines, dressed in the scarlet coats of the British service, stood on
the deck; and the duped Englishman greatly admired the appearance of
the frigate, remarking to the officer who escorted him to Rodgers's
cabin, that so trim a craft could only be found in His Majesty's
service.

On entering the cabin, the English officer greeted Commodore Rodgers
with deference, and proceeded at once to tell of naval matters.

"I have here," said he, placing a bundle of papers in the commodore's
hands, "a numbers of despatches for Admiral Warren, who is on this
station. You may not know that one of the principal objects of our
squadron cruising here is the capture of the Yankee frigate
'President,' which has been greatly annoying British commerce."

Rodgers was naturally much interested in this statement, and asked the
visitor if he knew much about the commander of the "President."

"I hear he is an odd fish," was the response; "and certainly he is
devilish hard to catch."

Rodgers started. He had hardly expected so frank an expression of
opinion.

"Sir," said he emphatically, "do you know what vessel you are on board
of?"

"Why, certainly,--on board of His Majesty's ship 'Sea-Horse.'"

"No, sir, you are mistaken," was the startling response. "You are on
board of the United States frigate 'President,' and I am Commodore
Rodgers."

The astounded Englishman sprang to his feet, and rushed to the deck.
The sight he saw there was still more startling. The quarter-deck was
crowded with officers in United States uniform. The scarlet coats of
the marines had vanished, and were replaced by Yankee blue. Even as he
looked, the British flag came fluttering down, the American ensign
went up, and the band struck up "Yankee Doodle."

Nothing was left to the Englishman but to submit; and, with the best
grace possible, he surrendered his vessel and himself to the "odd
fish," who had so cleverly trapped him.

[Illustration: "I Am Commodore Rodgers."]

Three days later, the "President," with her prize, and crowded with
prisoners, dropped anchor in the harbor of Newport, after a cruise of
one hundred and forty-eight days. In actual results, the cruise was
far from satisfactory, for but eleven vessels had been taken. But the
service rendered the country by annoying the enemy's merchantmen, and
drawing the British war-vessels away in chase, was vast. At one time
more than twenty British men-of-war were searching for the roving
American frigate; and the seafaring people of the United States were
thus greatly benefited by the "President's" prolonged cruise.




CHAPTER IX.

     DECATUR BLOCKADED AT NEW YORK. -- ATTEMPTS TO ESCAPE THROUGH
     LONG ISLAND SOUND. -- THE FLAG-SHIP STRUCK BY LIGHTNING. --
     TORPEDOES. -- FULTON'S STEAM FRIGATE. -- ACTION BETWEEN THE
     "CHESAPEAKE" AND "SHANNON."


While the "President" was thus roaming the seas, almost within sight
of the shores of the British Isles, events were occurring along the
American coast which were little likely to raise the spirits of the
people of the United States. From the "President," the "Congress," the
"Essex," and the smaller vessels that were upholding the honor of the
flag upon the ocean, they could hear nothing. But worse than this was
it for the good people of New York or Boston to go down to the
water-side and see stanch United States frigates kept in port by the
overwhelming forces of the enemy, that lay watchfully outside the
harbor's mouth.

For there was no doubt about it: the blockade was daily becoming
closer; and in the months of April and May a ship would have found it
a hard task to run out of New York Harbor without falling into the
hands of the British fleet stationed there. But, at that very time,
three stout men-of-war floated on the waves of that noble bay, under
the command of an officer little used to staying quietly in port in
time of war. The officer was Stephen Decatur: and the ships were the
flag-ship "United States;" the captured "Macedonian," repaired, and
flying the stars and stripes, under the command of the gallant Capt.
Jacob Jones; and the sloop-of-war "Hornet," Capt. Biddle.

With this force under his command, Decatur burned with the desire to
get to sea. The watchfulness of the British at the Narrows made it
useless to think of escaping that way: therefore, he determined to
pass up the sound, and reach the ocean by way of the opening between
Montauk Point and Block Island. At the very outset of this voyage,
however, was a serious obstacle. Through the narrow channel of the
East River, between Ward's Island and the Long Island shore, the tides
rushed with a mad speed and turbulence, that had won for the strait
the significant name of Hell Gate. The United States Government had
not then bent its energies to undermining and blowing into bits the
jagged rocks that at low tide reared their crests above the swirling
eddies. With its tides like mill races, and rocks hidden beneath the
treacherous water, Hell Gate was a fearful place for any ship to make
its way through with the uncertain aid of sails alone. Still greater
were its dangers for the ponderous and deep-laden men-of-war, that
required deep water and plenty of sea-room for their movements. Such
considerations, however, had no weight with Decatur, who had seen his
ships lying idly at their anchorage off Staten Island long enough. In
the night of May 24, he accordingly got up anchors and started for the
sound.

Hell Gate was passed safely, thanks to a skilful pilot, whom neither
the darkness of the night, nor the perils of the narrow channel, could
daunt. Once past this danger, the three vessels made their way up the
sound, with the flag-ship leading. They had gone but a little way when
black clouds to the westward told of a coming storm. The cloud-bank
came rolling up rapidly; and soon, with a burst of rain, the three
vessels were enveloped in the thunder-shower. The lightning flashed
through the black clouds, the thunder crashed and roared, and the wind
shrieked fiercely through the cordage. The "United States" held her
place at the head of the squadron; while behind, at the distance of
half a cable's-length, came the "Macedonian." Suddenly the men on the
deck of the latter vessel were horrified to see a jagged flash of
lightning cut its zigzag course through the clouds, then dart,
straight as an arrow, at the main-mast of the "United States." Hoarse
cries were heard from the deck of the stricken frigate; and the
captain of the "Macedonian," fearing lest the "States" should blow up,
threw all aback on his ship, to escape the explosion. But happily the
thunderbolt had done little serious injury. In its course it had cut
away the pendant; shot into the doctor's cabin, extinguishing that
worthy's candle, to his vast astonishment; then, gliding away, broke
through the ship's hull near the water-line, and plunged into the sea,
after ripping off a few sheets of copper from the ship's bottom. No
delay was caused by the accident; though the superstitious sailors
pronounced it an evil omen, and dismally predicted all sorts of
disasters.

On the 29th of May the squadron reached the strait through which
Decatur hoped to gain the ocean; but, to the intense disappointment of
all on board, a formidable British fleet barred all egress. Three days
later the Americans made an attempt to slip out unseen; but, failing
in this, they returned to New London harbor, where the two frigates
were kept rotting in the mud until the war was ended. The "Hornet"
luckily managed to run the blockade, and of her exploits we shall hear
later.

Upon the arrival of the three American ships at New London, the enemy
guarded the coast with renewed vigilance. The inhabitants made every
attempt to drive away the blockaders; and in the course of this
prolonged struggle there appeared, for almost the first time in the
history of warfare, that most terrible of offensive weapons, the
submarine torpedo.

During the Revolution, two attempts had been made to blow up British
men-of-war by means of torpedoes, invented by a Saybrook mechanic
named Bushnell. Though the attempts failed, yet the torpedoes
demonstrated their tremendous power. Before the declaration of the
second war with England, Robert Fulton, the inventor of the steamboat,
had made many improvements upon Bushnell's designs, and had so
thoroughly spread the knowledge of torpedo warfare that it suggested
itself to many New Englanders as a means of driving the enemy from
their coast.

The first attempt was well planned, but failed through an entirely
accidental combination of circumstances. Certain private citizens (for
in that day it was thought ignoble for a government to embark in
torpedo warfare) fitted out in New York a schooner, the "Eagle," in
the hold of which ten kegs of powder, together with sulphur and piles
of heavy stones, were placed. In the head of one of the casks were two
gun-locks, primed, and held in place by two barrels of flour. Should
either of the barrels be moved, the lock would spring, and the
terrible mine would explode with tremendous force. With this dreadful
engine of destruction, carefully covered by a cargo of flour and naval
stores, the "Eagle" left New York, and made her way up the bay, until,
near New London, she was overhauled and captured by the British
frigate "Ramillies." Boats were sent out by the English to take
possession of the prize; but the crew of the "Eagle," seeing the enemy
coming, took to their small boats, and succeeded in safely reaching
the shore. The captors, on boarding the vessel, were vastly pleased to
find that its cargo consisted largely of flour, of which the
"Ramillies" stood in great need. They at once attempted to get the
frigate alongside the prize, that the captured cargo might be readily
transferred. But a calm had fallen, and two hours' constant work with
sweeps and towing was unavailing. Accordingly, this plan of action was
abandoned, and the boats were ordered to lighter the cargo from the
"Eagle" to the frigate. Hardly had the first barrel been moved, when,
with a roar, and rush of flame and smoke as from a volcano, the
schooner blew up. Huge timbers, stones, and barrels were sent flying
high into the air. The lieutenant and ten men from the frigate, who
were on the "Eagle" at the time, were blown to atoms; and the timbers
and missiles, falling on all sides, seriously injured many men in the
boats near by. Had the frigate been alongside, where her commander had
endeavored to place her, she would have gone to the bottom, with all
her crew.

An attempt so nearly successful as this could not be long in leading
others to make similar ventures. Sir Thomas Hardy, the commander of
the "Ramillies," was kept in a constant fever of apprehension, lest
some night his ship should be suddenly sent to the bottom by one of
the insidious torpedoes. Several times the ship was attacked; and her
escapes were so purely matters of accident, that she seemed almost to
be under the protection of some sailors' deity. A Norwich mechanic,
who had invented a submarine boat with a speed of three miles an hour,
succeeded in getting under the bottom of the blockader three times,
but was each time foiled in his attempt to attach a torpedo to the
ship's hull. Another American, a fisherman, succeeded in getting
alongside in a whale-boat, unobserved, but was driven away before he
could get his torpedo in position. Such constant attacks so alarmed
Hardy, that at last he gave up bringing his ship to anchor, keeping
her continually under way, and, as a further precaution, causing her
bottom to be swept every two hours throughout the day and night.

The use of torpedoes was not confined to the people of New England.
New York Harbor was closed with a row of them. The British
seventy-four "Plantagenet," lying off Cape Henry, Virginia, was nearly
sunk by one in the charge of Mr. Mix, an American naval officer. The
attack was made near ten o'clock, on an unusually dark night. Mix and
his associates pulled in a heavy boat to a point near the bow of the
menaced vessel. The torpedo was then slipped into the water, with the
clockwork which was to discharge it set in motion. The rushing tide
carried the destructive engine down toward the frigate; and the
Americans pulled away into the darkness, to await the explosion. But
the clockwork had been badly adjusted, and the torpedo exploded just
before it reached the ship. A huge column of water, gleaming with a
ghostly sulphurous light, was thrown high in the air, falling with
terrific force on the deck of the frigate, which was almost capsized
by the shock.

A veritable storm of abuse and condemnation followed the introduction
of torpedo warfare. All countries and all peoples pronounced it
treacherous and cowardly, and the English press was particularly loud
in its denunciations. Yet the torpedo had won its place in the
armaments of nations; and to-day we see all the nations of Europe
vieing with each other in the invention and construction of powerful
and accurate torpedoes and swift torpedo-boats.

The germ of another feature of modern naval organization is to be
found in the annals of the War of 1812. The first war-vessel propelled
by steam was launched by the Americans for service in this war. She
was designed by Robert Fulton, and bore the name of "Fulton the
First." In model she was a queer craft, with two hulls like a
catamaran, with the single propelling-wheel mounted between them
amidships. Her armament was to consist of thirty thirty-two-pounder
guns, and two one-hundred-pounder columbiads. A secondary engine was
designed to throw floods of water upon the decks and through the
port-holes of an enemy. While the vessel was building, reports
concerning her reached England; and soon the most ludicrously
exaggerated accounts of her power were current in that country. "She
mounts forty-four guns," said an English paper, "four of which are
one-hundred-pounders, mounted in bomb proofs, and defended by
thousands of boarding-pikes and cutlasses wielded by steam; while
showers of boiling water are poured over those boarders who might
escape death from the rapidly whirling steel." Unfortunately for the
American cause, this much dreaded vessel did not get into the water in
time to take any active part in the war.

In June, 1813, while the British blockaders in the Sound were
exercising all their ingenuity to keep off the torpedoes, there was
fought off the Massachusetts coast, near Boston, an engagement which
must go down to history as one of the most brilliant naval duels of
the age of sails. The United States frigate "Chesapeake" was refitting
at Boston, after a cruise of four months, during which she had more
than justified her reputation as an unlucky ship. Though she sailed
the waters most frequented by British merchantmen, she returned to
port having captured only four vessels. Three men-of-war were sighted,
but could not be spoken. Strangely enough, the frigate sailed over the
spot where lay the sunken "Peacock" the very day after the "Hornet"
had fought her famous fight. Ill-luck pursued the hapless ship even to
her home port; for, as she was entering the port of Boston, a sudden
squall carried away the topmast, with several men who were aloft at
the time.

When the "Hornet" reached port, after her victory over the "Peacock,"
her gallant captain, James Lawrence, was appointed to the command of
the "Chesapeake." On reaching his ship, he found affairs in a
desperate condition. The sailors who had sailed on the long and
unproductive cruise were firmly convinced that the frigate's bad luck
was beyond remedy. The term of enlistment of many had expired, and
they were daily leaving the ship. Those who remained were sullen, and
smarting under fancied ill-treatment in the matter of the prize-money.
To get fresh seamen was no easy task. Great fleets of privateers were
being fitted out; and sailors generally preferred to sail in these
vessels, in which the discipline was light, and the gains usually
great. Some sailors from the "Constitution" were induced to join the
"Chesapeake;" and these, with the remnant of the frigate's old crew,
formed the nucleus of a crew which was filled up with merchant-sailors
and foreigners of all nations. Before the lists were fairly filled,
the ship put to sea, to give battle to an adversary that proved to be
her superior.

The events leading to the action were simple, and succeeded each other
hurriedly. The port of Boston was blockaded by two British frigates,
the "Tenedos" thirty-eight, and the "Shannon" thirty-eight. The latter
vessel was under the command of Capt. Philip Bowes Vere Broke, a naval
officer of courage, skill, and judgment. His crew was thoroughly
disciplined, and his ship a model of efficiency. No officer in the
service understood better than he the difference between the
discipline of a martinet and the discipline of a prudent and sagacious
commander. His ship might not, like the "Peacock," merit the title of
"the yacht;" but for active service she was always prepared. James, an
English naval historian, turns from his usual occupation of explaining
the American naval victories by belittling the British ships, and
enormously magnifying the power of the victors, to speak as follows of
the "Shannon:"--

"From the day on which he [Capt. Broke] joined her, the 14th of
September, 1806, the 'Shannon' began to feel the effect of her
captain's proficiency as a gunner, and zeal for the service. The
laying of the ship's ordnance so that it may be correctly fired in a
horizontal direction is justly deemed a most important operation, as
upon it depends, in a great measure, the true aim and destructive
effect of the shot; this was attended to by Capt. Broke in person. By
drafts from other ships, and the usual means to which a British
man-of-war is obliged to resort, the 'Shannon' got together a crew;
and in the course of a year or two, by the paternal care and excellent
regulations of Capt. Broke, the ship's company became as pleasant to
command as it was dangerous to meet." Moreover, the historian goes on
to relate that the ship's guns were carefully sighted, and her
ammunition frequently overhauled. Often a cask would be thrown
overboard, and a gun's crew suddenly called to sink it as it bobbed
about on the waves astern. Practice with the great guns was of daily
occurrence. "Every day for about an hour and a half in the forenoon,
when not prevented by chase or the state of the weather, the men were
exercised at training the guns; and for the same time in the
afternoon in the use of the broad-sword, musket, pike, etc. Twice a
week the crew fired at targets, both with great guns and musketry; and
Capt. Broke, as an additional stimulus beyond the emulation excited,
gave a pound of tobacco to every man that put a shot through the
bull's-eye."

Such was the vessel that in June appeared alone off the entrance to
Boston Harbor, and by her actions seemed to challenge the "Chesapeake"
to give her battle. Indeed, Broke's wish to test the strength of the
two vessels was so great, that he sent in, by the hands of an American
prisoner, a written challenge, the terms and spirit of which showed
the writer to be a courageous and chivalric officer and gentleman. "As
the 'Chesapeake' now appears ready for sea," he wrote, "I request you
will do me the honor to meet the 'Shannon' with her, ship to ship, to
try the fortunes of our respective flags. To an officer of your
character, it requires some apology for proceeding to further
particulars. Be assured, sir, it is not from any doubt I can entertain
of your wishing to close with my proposal, but merely to provide an
answer to any objection which might be made, and very reasonably, upon
the chance of our receiving any unfair support." Capt. Broke then
proceeds to assure Lawrence that the other British ships in the
neighborhood would be sent away before the day of combat. To the
challenge was appended a careful statement of the strength of the
"Shannon," that Lawrence might understand that the ships were fairly
matched.

But before this challenge reached Boston, Lawrence had set out to seek
the enemy. He had seen the "Shannon" lying off the entrance to the
port; and, finding out that she was alone, he knew that her presence
was in itself a challenge that he could not honorably ignore. Nor did
he desire to avoid the battle thus offered. He had confidence in his
crew, his frigate, and himself, and looked for nothing but victory. To
the Secretary of the Navy, he wrote, "An English frigate is now in
sight from my deck. I have sent a pilot-boat out to reconnoitre; and,
should she be alone, I am in hopes to give a good account of her
before night. My crew appear to be in fine spirits, and I hope will do
their duty."

In truth, however, the condition of this same crew was such that the
captain would have been justified in refusing the challenge. An
unusual number of foreign sailors were enrolled, among whom was a
Portuguese, who, in the ensuing battle, did incalculable injury to the
cause of the "Chesapeake." The crew had never drilled together; many
of the sailors came on board only a few hours before the ship sailed
out to battle. All the old sailors were sullen over the delay in the
payment of the prize-money of their last cruise. Lawrence attempted to
allay their discontent by giving them checks for the prize-money; but
the sense of injury still lingered in the minds of the men, and they
were ill-fitted to do battle for the honor of the flag. Added to this
evil was the fact that the first and second lieutenants and two acting
lieutenants were away on sick-leave, and the ship was thus left short
of officers on the eve of battle.

Regardless of the disadvantages under which he labored, Lawrence
weighed anchor on the 1st of June, and started down the harbor. As he
approached the ocean, Lawrence mustered his crew aft, and eloquently
urged them to fight bravely, and do their duty to the country, which
had entered upon this war in defence of seamen and their rights. Three
ensigns were run up; and at the fore was unfurled a broad white flag,
bearing the motto, "FREE TRADE AND SAILORS' RIGHTS." When Lawrence
closed his speech, and pointed out the flag floating at the fore, the
men cheered and went forward, leaving the captain convinced that he
could depend upon their loyalty.

The morning was bright and cool, with a fresh breeze blowing, before
which the "Chesapeake" rapidly bore down upon the foe that awaited
her. Following cautiously in her track came a number of small
craft,--pilot-boats, sloops, fishing-smacks, and pleasure-boats,--that
had come down the bay to see the outcome of the battle. Hundreds of
people of Boston rode along the coast, in hopes of gaining an outlook
from which the progress of the fight might be viewed.

At noon the ship rounded Boston Light, and made out into the open sea.
The "Shannon" went ahead, under easy sail, making up the coast toward
Salem. Towards five o'clock the "Chesapeake" luffed up for a moment;
while the pilot clambered down the side, and put off in a small boat.
A gun was then fired, as a signal that the Americans were ready for
action.

The "Shannon" evidently understood the purport of the signal; for she
quickly hove to, and troops of agile jackies clambered up her rigging,
and began to take in sail. The "Chesapeake" followed suit, and was
soon under only topsails and jib. She then laid her course straight
for the enemy.

[Illustration: Beating To Quarters.]

A ship preparing for action in that day was a scene of hurry and
confusion that cannot be equalled in this era of machinery and few
guns. At the short, broken, rolling beat of the drums, calling the men
to quarters, the hurried rush of hundreds of feet began, as the men
came pouring from all parts of the ship to their posts. Some clambered
aloft to their stations in the tops; others invaded the sanctity of
the quarter-deck and captain's cabin, where several guns are always
mounted. But the most stirring scene is on the long gun-deck where the
men gradually fall into their places at the two long rows of great
guns that peer through the open ports on either side. All are stripped
to the waist; and at many a gun the fair skin of the American sailor
gleams white by the side of some swarthy Spaniard, or still darker
negro.

[Illustration: The Only Shot Of The "Chesapeake".]

All quiet down on reaching their stations; and, five minutes after the
drum-beats, no sound is heard, save perhaps the steps of the black
boys, taking rations of grog around, that the men may "splice the
main brace" before going into the fight.

Thus silently did the "Chesapeake" bear down upon her adversary. There
was no long-range firing; for the two commanders were veterans, whose
chief desire was to settle the dispute yard-arm to yard-arm. Gradually
the American ship ranged alongside the "Shannon," at a distance of
half pistol-shot; and, as her foremast came in a line with the
"Shannon's" mizzen-mast, the latter opened fire with her cabin-guns.
For a moment the "Chesapeake" was silent, waiting for her guns to
bear; then, with sulphuric flashes and a thunderous roar, she let fly
her whole broadside. Then followed a duel with great guns. The two
ships, lying side by side, dealt and received staggering blows. The
spectators in small boats, who kept a safe distance, and the crowds of
eager watchers on the far-off heights of Salem, saw through their
spy-glasses the flash of the first broadsides, and the flying
splinters that followed the course of the deadly shot. Then a heavy
cloud of yellow smoke settled over the warring leviathans, and all
further incidents of the battle were shut out from view. Only the
top-masts of the ships, with the half-furled sails and the opposing
ensigns flying, could be seen above the smoke.

Under this vaporous pall, the fighting was sharp and desperate. The
first broadside of the "Shannon" so swept the decks of the American
frigate, that, of one hundred and fifty men quartered on the upper
deck, not fifty were upon their legs when the terrible rush of the
shot was over. The sailors in the tops of the British frigate, looking
down upon the decks of their enemy, could see nothing but a cloud of
hammocks, splinters, and wreckage of all kinds, driven fiercely across
the deck. Both men at the wheel fell dead, but their places were soon
filled; while fresh gunners rushed down to work the guns that had been
silenced by the enemy's fearful broadside. In a moment the
"Chesapeake" responded with spirit, and for some time broadsides were
exchanged with inconceivable rapidity. The men encouraged each other
with cheers and friendly cries. They had named the guns of the
frigate, and with each telling shot they cheered the iron-throated
monster which had hurled the bolt. "Wilful Murder," "Spitfire,"
"Revenge," "Bull Dog," "Mad Anthony," "Defiance," "Raging Eagle," and
"Viper" were some of the titles born by the great guns; and well the
weapons bore out the names thus bestowed upon them. The gunnery of the
Americans was good, their shot doing much damage to the enemy's
rigging. But the effect of the "Shannon's" broadsides was such that no
men, however brave, could stand before them. They swept the decks,
mowing down brave fellows by the score. Officers fell on every side.
At a critical moment the two ships fouled, exposing the "Chesapeake"
to a raking broadside, which beat in her stern-ports, and drove the
gunners from the after-port. At this moment, Lawrence was wounded in
the leg, but remained at his post and ordered that the boarders be
called up. Unhappily a negro bugler had been detailed for the duty
usually performed by drummers; and, at this important moment, he could
not be found. Midshipmen and lieutenants ran about the ship, striving
to call up the boarders by word of mouth. In the confusion, the bugler
was found skulking under the stem of the launch, and so paralyzed by
fear that he could only give a feeble blast upon his instrument. In
the din and confusion of battle, the oral orders of the officers only
perplexed the men; and the moment for boarding was lost. At that very
moment, the turning-point of the conflict, Capt. Lawrence was struck
by a musket-ball, and fell mortally wounded to the deck. His officers
rushed to his side, and, raising him gently, were carrying him below,
when in a firm voice he cried,--

"Tell the men to fire faster, and not give up the ship. Fight her till
she sinks."

With these words on his lips, he was carried to the wardroom.

At this moment, the upper deck was left without an officer above the
rank of midshipman. The men, seeing their captain carried below, fell
into a panic, which was increased by the explosion of an arm-chest,
into which a hand-grenade, hurled by a sailor lying out on the
yard-arm of the "Shannon," had fallen. Seeing that the fire of the
Americans had slackened, Capt. Broke left his quarter-deck, and,
running hastily forward, gained a position on the bow of his ship from
which he could look down upon the decks of the "Chesapeake." His
practised eye quickly perceived the confusion on the deck of the
American frigate; and he instantly ordered that the ships be lashed
together, and the boarders called up. An old quartermaster, a veteran
in the British navy, set about lashing the ships together, and
accomplished his task, although his right arm was actually hacked off
by the cutlass of an American sailor. The boarders were slow in coming
up, and but twenty men followed Broke as he climbed to the deck of
the "Chesapeake." Broke led his men straight for the quarter-deck of
the frigate. The Americans offered but little resistance. Not an
officer was in sight to guide the men, and the newly enlisted sailors
and foreigners fled like sheep before the advance of the boarders.

[Illustration: On Board The "Chesapeake."]

The British reached the quarter-deck with hardly the loss of a man.
Here stood Mr. Livermore, the chaplain of the "Chesapeake," who had
cruised long with Lawrence, and bitterly mourned the captain's fate.
Determined to avenge the fallen captain, he fired a pistol at Broke's
head, but missed him. Broke sprang forward, and dealt a mighty stroke
of his keen cutlass at the chaplain's head, who saved himself by
taking the blow on his arm. While the boarders were thus traversing
the upper deck, the sailors in the tops of the "Chesapeake" were
keeping up a well-directed fire, before which many of the Englishmen
fell. But this resistance was not of long duration; for one of the
"Shannon's" long nines, loaded with grape, swept clean the
"Chesapeake's" tops. With this, the British were in full control of
the upper deck.

Up to this time, the Americans on the gun-deck had known nothing of
the events occurring on the deck above them. When the news of the
British assault spread, Lieut. Budd called upon the men to follow him,
and drive the boarders back to their own ship. A number of the marines
(who behaved splendidly throughout the fight) and some twenty veteran
sailors were all that responded to the call. Broke had in the mean
time summoned the marines of the "Shannon" to his aid; and the
British, led by their dashing commander, were pouring in a dense
column down the companion-ways to the gun-deck. Budd and his handful
of followers attacked them fiercely; and, by the very desperation of
the onset, the British were forced back a few paces. Broke threw
himself upon the Americans. With his cutlass he cut down the first man
who attacked him, and bore down upon the others, dealing deadly blows
right and left. His followers came close behind him. The Americans
fell on every side, and began to retreat before the overwhelming force
of their foes. Up from the wardroom came Lieut. Ludlow, already
suffering from two dangerous wounds. He placed himself beside the
younger officer, and the two strove in every way to encourage their
men. But Ludlow soon fell, with a gaping wound across his forehead.
Budd was cut down, and fell through the hatchway to the deck beneath.
The sailors, seeing both officers fall, gave way in confusion; and the
ship was in the hands of the British. A few marines kept up a fire
through the hatchway, but soon were silenced.

An English officer, Lieut. Watts, ran to the halliards to haul down
the American flag. But it would seem that the good genius which had
watched over that starry banner throughout the war was loath to see it
disgraced; for the officer had hardly finished his work, when a
grape-shot from his own ship struck him, and he fell dead.

The noise of the battle had by this time died away, and the fresh
breezes soon carried off the smoke that enveloped the combatants. It
was an awful scene thus exposed to view. On the "Chesapeake" were
sixty-one killed, and eighty-five wounded men. On the "Shannon" were
thirty-three dead, and fifty wounded. On a cot in the wardroom lay
Capt. Lawrence, his mortal wound having mercifully rendered him
unconscious, so that he knew nothing of the loss of his ship. Broke
had been made delirious by the fevered throbbing of the wound he had
so long neglected. Everywhere were evidences of carnage and
desolation.

Little time was lost in getting the ships in order after the
surrender. The noise of the hammer and saw was heard in every quarter.
The wounded were taken to the sick-bay, and the bodies of the dead
were committed to the ocean. Floods of water and the heavy holystones
took from the decks the stains of blood. The galley cooks marched up
and down the decks, sprinkling hot vinegar with a lavish hand. The
British prize-crew took possession of the captured ship, and in a few
hours the captor and captive were well on their way toward Halifax.

They reached port on the 7th of June; and the sight of the "Shannon,"
followed by the "Chesapeake" with the British ensign flying proudly
over the stars and stripes, stirred the little city to the utmost
enthusiasm. As the two ships pursued their stately course up the
harbor, the British men-of-war on all sides manned their yards, and
fired salutes in honor of the victory. The thunders of the cannon
brought the town's-people to the water-side, and their cheers rang out
lustily to welcome their conquering countrymen to port.

Capt. Lawrence had died the day before; and his body, wrapped in an
American flag, lay on the quarter-deck of his frigate. Three days
later, his body, with that of his gallant lieutenant Ludlow, was laid
to rest with imposing naval honors, in the churchyard of Halifax. But
his country, honoring him even in the day of his defeat, was not
content that his body should lie in the soil of an enemy's country.
Two months after the battle, an American vessel, the "Henry" of Salem,
entered the harbor of Halifax, under cover of a flag of truce, and
took on board the bodies of Lawrence and Ludlow. They were conveyed
first to Salem and later to New York, where they now lie under a
massive monument of sandstone, in a corner of Trinity churchyard. A
few feet away, the ceaseless tide of human life rolls on its course up
and down Broadway; few of the busy men and women pausing to remember
that in the ancient churchyard lies the body of the man whose dying
words, "Don't give up the ship," were for years the watchword and
motto of the United States navy.




CHAPTER X.

     CRUISE OF THE "ESSEX." -- A RICH PRIZE. -- THE MYSTERIOUS
     LETTER. -- CAPE HORN ROUNDED. -- CAPTURE OF A PERUVIAN
     PRIVATEER. -- AMONG THE BRITISH WHALERS. -- PORTER IN
     COMMAND OF A SQUADRON. -- A BOY COMMANDER. -- THE SQUADRON
     LAYS UP AT NOOKAHEEVAH.


While the events related in the two preceding chapters were occurring
along the American coast, a few gallant vessels were upholding the
honor of the stars and stripes in far distant lands. To cruise in
waters frequented by an enemy's merchantmen, and capture, burn, sink,
and destroy, is always a legitimate occupation for the navy of a
belligerent nation. Yet the nation suffering at the hands of the
cruisers invariably raises the cry of "wanton vandalism and cruelty,"
and brands the officers to whom falls so unpleasant a duty with the
name of pirates. Such was the outcry raised against Paul Jones in the
Revolutionary war; so it was the British described the brilliant
service of the little brig "Argus" in 1813; and so the people of the
North regarded the career of the "Alabama" and other Confederate
cruisers in the great war for the Union. But perhaps no ship had
ever a more adventurous career, or wrought more damage to the enemy's
commerce, than the United States frigate "Essex," under the command of
the able officer David Porter.

Of the circumstances which led to the famous cruise of the "Essex,"
some account has already been given. With a full crew, and stores
enough to enable her to keep the sea for some months, the ship set
sail from the Delaware in the autumn of 1812, and headed to the
southward with the intention of joining the "Constitution" and
"Hornet" at some point in the tropics. Her first point of call was at
Porto Praya, a harbor in the Cape Verd Islands. To the captain's
disappointment, he could learn nothing of Bainbridge at this place;
and he soon departed, after scrupulously exchanging salutes with a
rickety little fort, over which floated the flag of Portugal.
Continuing her southward way, the "Essex" crossed the equator, on
which occasion the jolly tars enjoyed the usual ceremonies attendant
upon crossing the line. Father Neptune and his faithful spouse, with
their attendant suite, came aboard and superintended the operation of
shaving and dowsing the green hands, whose voyages had never called
them before into the Southern seas. Capt. Porter looked upon the
frolic indulgently. He was well known as a captain who never
unnecessarily repressed the light-heartedness of his crew. Two hours
daily were set aside during which the crew were free to amuse
themselves in any reasonable way. At four o'clock every afternoon, the
shrill piping of the boatswain's whistle rang through the ship,
followed by the cry, "D'ye hear there, fore and aft? All hands
skylark!" No order ever brought a quicker response, and in a minute
the decks became a perfect pandemonium. The sailors rushed here and
there, clad in all sorts of clothes; boxed, fenced, wrestled; ran
short foot-races; played at leap-frog, and generally comported
themselves like children at play. Fights were of common occurrence;
and the two combatants soon became the centre of an interested ring of
spectators, who cheered on their favorites with loud cries of "Go it,
Bill. Now, Jack, lively with yer left." But a sailor has no better
friend to-day than the man he fought yesterday; and the fights, like
the play, only kept the crew in good spirits and contentment.

The day after crossing the equator, the "Essex" sighted a sail and
gave chase. Towards evening the frigate had gained greatly upon the
stranger, and Porter displayed all the British signals which he had in
his possession. The chase made no response, but set a British ensign.
By nine o'clock, the "Essex" was within musket-shot, and could easily
have blown the fugitive out of water; but this Porter was loath to do,
as he desired to take the brig without doing her any injury. However,
as she showed no signs of surrendering, he ordered the marines to give
her a volley of musketry. One man on the chase was killed, and a
number wounded, upon which her flag was immediately hauled down. She
proved to be the British packet "Nocton" of ten guns. In her hold was
found fifty-five thousand dollars in specie, which was at once taken
on board the "Essex;" and the "Nocton" was sent to the United States
under the charge of a prize-crew. Before she could make a port, she
fell in with a British man-of-war, and was captured after a few hours'
chase.

Two days after parting with the "Nocton," the "Essex" hove in sight of
the Island of Fernando Noronha, off the coast of Brazil. For a time
the frigate abandoned her warlike character, battened down her ports,
housed her guns, hid her large crew between decks, and sailed into the
little harbor looking like a large but peaceable British merchantman.
An officer clad in plain clothes went ashore, and, meeting the
governor, stated that the ship was the "Fanny" of London, bound for
Rio Janeiro. During the conversation, the governor remarked that His
British Majesty's ships, the "Acosta" forty-four, and the "Morgiana"
twenty, had but recently sailed from the port, and had left a letter
for Sir James Yeo, requesting that it be forwarded to England as soon
as possible. With this news, the lieutenant returned to the ship. On
hearing his report, Porter at once surmised that the letter might have
been left for him by Commodore Bainbridge; and he at once sent the
officer back, bearing the message that the "Fanny" was soon going to
London, and her captain would see the letter delivered to Sir James
Yeo, in person. The unsuspecting governor accordingly delivered up the
epistle, and it was soon in Porter's hands. The note read as
follows:--

     My Dear Mediterranean Friend,--Probably you may stop here.
     Don't attempt to water: it is attended with too many
     difficulties. I learned, before I left _England_, that you
     were bound to Brazil coast. If so, perhaps we may meet at
     St. Salvador or at Rio Janeiro. I should be happy to meet
     and converse on our old affairs of captivity. Recollect our
     secret in those times.

          Your friend of His Majesty's ship "Acosta,"
                                                                  KERR.
          Sir JAMES YEO of His British Majesty's ship "Southampton."

Porter read and pondered over this perplexing letter. He felt sure
that the letter was from Bainbridge; and in the allusion to St.
Salvador and Rio Janeiro, he perceived the commodore's wish for a
rendezvous at one of those places. But what could be the secret of the
times of captivity? Suddenly a thought struck him. Might there not be
something written in sympathetic ink? Hurriedly calling for a candle,
he held the letter above its flame, and saw, under the influence of
the heat, words and sentences appearing where before all was blank
paper.

"I am bound off St. Salvador," it read; "thence off Cape Frio, where I
intend to cruise until the 1st of January. Go off Cape Frio to the
northward of Rio, and keep a lookout for me."

That afternoon the governor of the island, looking out toward the
harbor, was surprised to see the "Fanny" standing out under a full
spread of canvas. Porter had gained all the information that he
wished, and was off in search of his consorts. This search he
continued until the 20th of January, cruising up and down off the
Brazilian coast, and taking one or two small prizes. In this
unprofitable service the ship's stores were being rapidly consumed.
Among other things, the supply of rum began to run short; and in
connection with this occurred a curious incident, that well
illustrates the character of sailors. The daily rations of bread were
reduced one-half, and the rations of salt meat one-third, without a
word of remonstrance from the patient crew. Next the discovery was
made that the rum was giving out, and a proportional reduction in the
rations of grog was duly ordered. The jackies put in a vigorous and
immediate protest. They were prepared, they said, to go without grog,
should the supply of rum be unhappily exhausted; but so long as any of
the precious fluid remained, their rations of grog should not be
curtailed. But to this Porter would not accede, fearing that, should
the men be altogether deprived of their grog, the health of the crew
might suffer. Accordingly, when the crew were piped to "splice the
main brace" the next day, they were told that half rations only would
be issued; and, if the grog was not taken up in fifteen minutes, the
tub would be overturned, and the rum spilled into the sea. So dire a
threat was too much for the rebellious seamen: they sprang into line,
with their tin cups, and drew their curtailed rations without more
ado.

Some days after this occurrence, the "Essex" overhauled a Portuguese
vessel, from the captain of which Porter learned that an American
frigate had shortly before fought and sunk an English frigate off the
coast of Brazil; also, that it was rumored that an American corvette
of twenty-two guns had been brought into Rio, a prize to a British
seventy-four. This intelligence placed Capt. Porter in some
perplexity. He felt convinced that the successful American frigate was
the "Constitution;" a conjecture in which he was correct, for the news
referred to the celebrated action of that ship with the "Java." The
captured American corvette, he concluded, must be the "Hornet;" but
herein the captain was wrong, for the "Hornet" was at that moment
blockading the "Bonne Citoyenne."

Porter now found it necessary to decide upon a course of action. The
news which he had received made it appear most improbable that he
would fall in with either of the United States vessels for which he
was seeking. He was far from home, cruising in seas much frequented by
British men-of-war. There were no naval stations or outposts belonging
to the United States, into which he could put for protection or
repairs; for then, as now, the nation ignored the necessity of such
supply-stations. To return home was peculiarly distasteful to the
captain, who had set sail with the intention of undertaking a long
cruise. In this dilemma, he wasted but little time in thought. By
rounding Cape Horn, he would carry the "Essex" into the Pacific Ocean,
where British merchantmen abounded and men-of-war were few. It was an
adventurous and a perilous expedition to undertake; but Porter, having
decided upon it, wasted no time in getting under way. That very night
he took his ship out of the snug harbor of St. Catherine's, and
started upon his long voyage around the Horn.

A winter voyage around Cape Horn, even in the stoutest of ships, is an
undertaking to be dreaded by the most courageous seamen. The "Essex"
seemed to meet with more than her share of stormy weather. From the
night when she set sail from St. Catherine's, until she dropped anchor
in a harbor of the Island of Mocha, almost every day witnessed a
struggle for supremacy between the raging ocean on the one side, and
skilful seamanship and nautical science on the other. Capt. Porter,
however, proved himself ready for every emergency. No peril of the
deep was unforeseen, no ounce of prevention unprovided. The safety of
his ship, and the health of his men, were ever in his thoughts; and
accordingly, when the "Essex" rounded into the Pacific Ocean, both
men and ship were in condition to give their best service to the
enterprise in which they were embarked.

After rounding Cape Horn, the "Essex" made her way northward along the
desolate coast of Chili, until she reached the Island of Mocha. Here
she anchored for a day, giving the crew a much needed run on shore,
which they enjoyed with all the zest of schoolboys out for a day's
holiday. The island afforded little in the way of fresh stores; but
some pigs and horses were shot, and devoured with gusto by men who for
over two months had not tasted fresh meat. From this point the frigate
made for Valparaiso, and, after reconnoitring the port, put in for
water and stores. The officers were received with much hospitality by
the townspeople, and, after a few days' stay, were tendered a
complimentary ball,--an entertainment into which the young officers
entered with great glee. But, unhappily for their evening's pleasure,
the dancing had hardly begun, when a midshipman appeared at the door
of the hall, and announced that a large frigate was standing into the
harbor. Deserting their fair partners, the people of the "Essex"
hastened to their ship, and were soon in readiness for the action;
while the townspeople thronged the hills overlooking the sea, in the
hopes of seeing a naval duel. But the frigate proved to be a Spaniard;
and, of course, no action occurred.

[Illustration: The Peruvian Privateer.]

The "Essex" remained several days at Valparaiso, and during her stay
two or three American whalers put into the harbor. From the captains
of these craft, Porter learned that the Peruvians were sending out
privateers to prey upon American commerce, and that much damage had
already been done by these marauders, who were no more than pirates,
since no war existed between Peru and the United States. Porter
determined to put an immediate stop to the operations of the Peruvian
cruisers, and had not long to wait for an opportunity. A day or two
after leaving Valparaiso, a sail was sighted in the offing, which was
soon near enough to be made out a vessel-of-war, disguised as a
whaler. Porter hung out the English ensign, and caused an American
whaler, with which he had that morning fallen in, to hoist a British
flag over the stars and stripes. At this sight, the stranger hoisted
the Spanish flag, and threw a shot across the bow of the "Essex."
Porter responded by a few shot that whizzed through the rigging just
above the Spaniard's deck. The latter thereupon sent a boat to the
"Essex;" and the officer who came aboard, thinking that he was on a
British man-of-war, boasted of his ship's exploits among the American
whalers. His vessel was the Peruvian privateer "Nereyda" of fifteen
guns, and she had captured two American whalers, whose crews were even
then in the hold of the privateer. He admitted that Peru had no
quarrel with the United States, and no reason for preying upon her
commerce. The confession, so unsuspectingly made, gave Porter ample
grounds for the capture of the offending vessel. Curtly informing his
astounded visitor that he was on a United States man-of-war, Porter
ordered the gunners to fire two shots close to the privateer. This was
done, and the Peruvian quickly hauled down his colors. The American
officers, on boarding the prize, found twenty-three American sailors,
who had been robbed of all that they possessed, stripped of half their
clothing, and thrown into the hold. These unfortunate men were released
and sent to the "Essex;" after which all the guns and ammunition of
the privateer were thrown overboard, and the vessel ordered to return
to Callao.

After this act of summary justice, the "Essex" continued in her
northward course. She touched at Callao; but, much to the
disappointment of all on board, there were no British vessels among
the shipping at that port. Nor could the lookouts, for some days,
discern from the masthead any craft other than the double-hulled rafts
of logs, called catamarans, in which the natives along the Peruvian
coast make long voyages. Weary of such continued ill-luck, Porter
determined to make for the Galapagos Islands, where it was the custom
of the British whaling-ships to rendezvous. But it seemed that
ill-fortune was following close upon the "Essex;" for she sailed the
waters about the Galapagos, and sent out boats to search small bays
and lagoons, without finding a sign of a ship. Two weeks passed in
this unproductive occupation, and Porter had determined to abandon the
islands, when he was roused from his berth on the morning of April 29,
1813, by the welcome cry of "Sail, ho!"

All hands were soon on deck, and saw a large ship in the offing. All
sail was clapped on the frigate; and she set out in hot pursuit,
flying the British ensign as a ruse to disarm suspicion. As the chase
wore on, two more sail were sighted; and Porter knew that he had
fallen in with the long-sought whalers. He had no doubt of his ability
to capture all three; for in those southern seas a dead calm falls
over the ocean every noon, and in a calm the boats of the "Essex"
could easily take possession of the whalers. By eight o'clock in the
morning, the vessel first sighted was overhauled, and hove to in
obedience to a signal from the frigate. She proved to be the
"Montezuma," Capt. Baxter, with a cargo of fourteen hundred barrels of
sperm-oil. Baxter visited Capt. Porter in his cabin, and sat there
unsuspectingly, giving the supposed British captain information for
his aid in capturing American ships. The worthy whaler little knew, as
he chatted away, that his crew was being transferred to the frigate,
and a prize-crew sent to take charge of the "Montezuma."

By noon the expected calm fell over the water; and the boats were
ordered away to take possession of the two whalers, that lay
motionless some eight miles from the "Essex." The distance was soon
passed, and the two ships were ordered to surrender, which they
quickly did, much astonished to find a United States man-of-war in
that region. A breeze shortly after springing up, all the prizes bore
down upon the frigate; and the gallant lads of the "Essex" had the
pleasure of seeing themselves surrounded with captured property to the
value of nearly half a million dollars. One of the vessels, the
"Georgiana," was a good sailer, strongly built, and well fitted for a
cruiser. Accordingly she was armed with sixteen guns and a number of
swivels, and placed under the command of Lieut. Downes. With this
addition to his force, and with the other two prizes following in his
wake, Porter returned to the Galapagos Islands. The first sight of the
far-off peaks of the desert islands rising above the water was hailed
with cheers by the sailors, who saw in the Galapagos not a group of
desolate and rocky islands, but a place where turtle was plenty, and
shore liberty almost unlimited. Porter remained some days at the
islands, urging the crew of the "Essex," as well as the prisoners, to
spend much time ashore. Signs of the scurvy were evident among the
men, and the captain well knew that in no way could the dread disease
be kept away better than by constant exercise on the sands of the
seashore. The sailors entered heartily into their captain's plans, and
spent hours racing on the beach, swimming in the surf, and wandering
over the uninhabited islands.

After a few days of this sort of life, the squadron put to sea again.
The "Georgianna" now separated from the fleet, and started on an
independent cruise, with orders for a rendezvous at certain specific
times. The "Essex" continued to hover about the Galapagos, in the
hopes of getting a few more whalers. She had not long to wait; for the
whale ship "Atlantic" soon fell in her way, and was promptly snapped
up. The captain of this ship was a Nantucket man, who had deserted the
flag of his country, to cruise under what he thought to be the more
powerful flag of Great Britain. Great was his disgust to find that by
his treachery he had lost all that he desired to protect. While in
chase of the "Atlantic," a second sail had been sighted; and to this
the "Essex" now gave chase. On being overhauled, the stranger at first
made some show of fighting; but a shot or two from the guns of the
frigate convinced him of the folly of this course, and he surrendered
at discretion. The vessel proved to be the whale ship letter-of-marque
"Greenwich;" a stout ship, of excellent sailing qualities. She carried
ten guns, and was in every way a valuable prize.

Porter had now been in the Pacific Ocean about three months. On the
24th of February, the "Essex," solitary defender of the flag of the
United States in the Pacific, had turned her prow northward from Cape
Horn, and embarked on her adventurous career in the most mighty of
oceans. Now in May, Porter, as he trod the deck of his good ship,
found himself master of a goodly squadron instead of one stanch
frigate. The "Essex," of course, led the list, followed by the
"Georgianna," sixteen guns, forty-two men; "Atlantic," six guns,
twelve men; "Greenwich," ten guns, fourteen men; "Montezuma," two
guns, ten men; "Policy," ten men. Of these the "Georgianna" had
already received her armament and authority as a war-vessel; and the
"Atlantic" showed such seaworthy qualities that Porter determined to
utilize her in the same way. Accordingly he set sail for Tumbez, where
he hoped to get rid of some of his prisoners, perhaps sell one or two
of his prizes, and make the necessary changes in the "Atlantic." While
on the way to Tumbez, a Spanish brig was overhauled. Her captain
vastly edified Capt. Porter by informing him that the "Nereyda," a
Peruvian privateer, had recently attacked a huge American frigate, and
inflicted great damage upon the Yankee. But the frigate proving too
powerful, the privateer had been forced to fly, and hastened her
flight by throwing overboard all her guns and ammunition.

On the 19th of June, the "Essex" with her satellites cast anchor in
the harbor of Tumbez. The first view of the town satisfied Porter that
his hopes of selling his prizes there were without avail. A more
squalid, dilapidated little seaside village, it would be hard to find.
Hardly had the ships cast anchor, when the governor came off in a boat
to pay a formal visit. Though clothed in rags, he had all the dignity
of a Spanish hidalgo, and strutted about the quarter-deck with most
laughable self-importance. Notwithstanding his high official station,
this worthy permitted himself to be propitiated with a present of one
hundred dollars; and he left the ship, promising all sorts of aid to
the Americans. Nothing came of it all, however; and Porter failed to
dispose of any of his prizes. While the "Essex" with her train of
captives lay in the harbor at Tumbez, the "Georgianna" came into port,
and was greeted with three cheers by the men of the frigate. Lieut.
Downes reported that he had captured three British ships, carrying in
all twenty-seven guns and seventy-five men. One of the prizes had been
released on parole, and the other two were then with the "Georgianna."
This addition to the number of vessels in the train of the "Essex" was
somewhat of an annoyance to Capt. Porter, who saw clearly that so
great a number of prizes would seriously interfere with his future
movements against the enemy. He accordingly remained at Tumbez only
long enough to convert the "Atlantic" into an armed cruiser under the
name of the "Essex Junior," and then set sail, in the hopes of finding
some port wherein he could sell his embarrassing prizes. His
prisoners, save about seventy-five who enrolled themselves under the
American flag, were paroled, and left at Tumbez; and again the little
squadron put to sea. The "Essex Junior" was ordered to take the
"Hector," "Catherine," "Policy," and "Montezuma" to Valparaiso, and
there dispose of them, after which she was to meet the "Essex" at the
Marquesas Islands. On her way to the rendezvous, the "Essex" stopped
again at the Galapagos Islands, where she was lucky enough to find the
British whaler "Seringapatam," known as the finest ship of the British
whaling fleet. By her capture, the American whalers were rid of a
dangerous enemy; for, though totally without authority from the
British Crown, the captain of the "Seringapatam" had been waging a
predatory warfare against such luckless Americans as fell in his path.
Porter now armed this new prize with twenty-two guns, and considered
her a valuable addition to his offensive force. She took the place of
the "Georgianna," which vessel Porter sent back to the United States
loaded with oil.

Among the embarrassments which the care of so many prizes brought upon
the leader of the expedition was the difficulty of finding commanding
officers for all the vessels. This difficulty was enhanced while the
flotilla lay off the Galapagos Islands; for two officers, falling into
a dispute, settled their quarrel, after the manner of the day, by a
duel. In the contest one, a lieutenant, aged only twenty-one years,
was killed, and now lies buried in the sands of the desolate and
lonely island. After this occurrence, the need for commanding officers
became so imperative that even the purser and chaplain of the "Essex"
were pressed into the service. Midshipmen twelve or fourteen years old
found themselves in command of ships. David Farragut was one of the
boys thus suddenly promoted, and in his journal has left a description
of his experience as a boy commander.

[Illustration: The Duel At The Galapagos Islands.]

"I was sent as prize-master to the 'Barclay,'" he writes. "This was an
important event in my life; and, when it was decided that I was to
take the ship to Valparaiso, I felt no little pride at finding myself
in command at twelve years of age. This vessel had been recaptured
from a Spanish _guarda costa_. The captain and his mate were on board;
and I was to control the men sent from our frigate, while the captain
was to navigate the vessel. Capt. Porter, having failed to dispose of
the prizes as it was understood he intended, gave orders for the
'Essex Junior' and all the prizes to start for Valparaiso. This
arrangement caused great dissatisfaction on the part of the captain of
the 'Barclay,' a violent-tempered old fellow; and, when the day
arrived for our separation from the squadron, he was furious, and very
plainly intimated to me that I would 'find myself off New Zealand in
the morning,' to which I most decidedly demurred. We were lying still,
while the other ships were fast disappearing from view; the
'Commodore' going north, and the 'Essex Junior' with her convoy
steering to the south for Valparaiso.

"I considered that my day of trial had arrived (for I was a little
afraid of the old fellow, as every one else was). But the time had
come for me at least to play the man: so I mustered up courage, and
informed the captain that I desired the topsail filled away. He
replied that he would shoot any man who dared to touch a rope without
his orders; he 'would go his own course, and had no idea of trusting
himself with a d--d nutshell;' and then he went below for his pistols.
I called my right-hand man of the crew, and told him my situation; I
also informed him that I wanted the main topsail filled. He answered
with a clear 'Ay, ay, sir!' in a manner which was not to be
misunderstood, and my confidence was perfectly restored. From that
moment I became master of the vessel, and immediately gave all
necessary orders for making sail, notifying the captain not to come on
deck with his pistols unless he wished to go overboard; for I would
really have had very little trouble in having such an order obeyed."

On the 30th of September, the squadron fell in with the "Essex
Junior," which had come from Valparaiso. Lieut. Downes reported that
he had disposed of the prizes satisfactorily, and also brought news
that the British frigate "Phoebe," and the sloops-of-war "Raccoon" and
"Cherub," had been ordered to cruise the Pacific in search of the
audacious "Essex." More than this, he secured statistics regarding the
fleet of British whalers in the Pacific, that proved that Porter had
completely destroyed the industry, having left but one whaler
uncaptured. There was then no immediate work for Porter to do; and he
determined to proceed with his squadron to the Marquesas Islands, and
there lay up, to make needed repairs and alterations.

The Marquesas are a desolate group of rocky islands lying in the
Pacific Ocean, on the western outskirts of Oceanica. In formation they
are volcanic, and rise in rugged mountain-peaks from the bosom of the
great ocean. Sea-fowl of all sorts abound; but none of the lower
mammals are to be found on the island, save swine which were
introduced by Europeans. The people at the time of Porter's visit were
simple savages, who had seldom seen the face of a white man; for at
that early day voyagers were few in the far-off Pacific.

The island first visited by the "Essex" was known to the natives as
Rooahooga. Here the frigate stopped for a few hours. During her stay,
the water alongside was fairly alive with canoes and swimming natives.
They were not allowed to come on board, but were immensely pleased by
some fish-hooks and bits of iron let down to them from the decks of
the frigate. Not to be outdone in generosity, the islanders threw up
to the sailors cocoanuts, fruits, and fish. A boat-crew of jackies
that went ashore was surrounded by a smiling, chattering throng of
men, women, and children, who cried out incessantly, "_Taya, taya_"
(friend, friend), and strove to bargain with them for fruits. They
were a handsome, intelligent-looking people; tall, slender, and well
formed, with handsome faces, and complexion little darker than that of
a brunette. The men carried white fans, and wore bracelets of human
hair, with necklaces of whales' teeth and shells about their
necks,--their sole articles of clothing. Both men and women were
tattooed; though the women seemed to content themselves with bands
about the neck and arms, while the men were elaborately decorated from
head to foot. Though some carried clubs and lances, they showed no
signs of hostility, but bore themselves with that simple air of
hospitality and unconscious innocence common to all savage peoples of
tropical regions, uncorrupted by association with civilized white men.

Porter remained but a short time at this island, as its shallow bays
afforded no safe anchorage for the vessels. But, charmed as he was
with the friendly simplicity of the natives, he determined to remain
some time in the vicinity, provided safe anchorage could be found.
This essential was soon discovered at Nookaheevah, where the ships
cast anchor in a fine harbor, which Porter straightway dubbed
Massachusetts Bay. Hardly had the ship anchored, when a canoe
containing three white men came alongside, and was ordered away by the
captain, who thought them deserters from some vessel. The canoe then
returned to the shore, and the three whites were joined by a vast
assemblage of armed natives. Porter now began to fear lest he had
offended the natives, and proceeded at once to the beach, with four
boats well armed and manned. But, by the time the boats' prows grated
upon the white sand, every native had disappeared; and the sole figure
visible was that of a young man, who advanced, and, giving a formal
naval salute, announced himself as Midshipman John M. Maury, U.S.N.
Porter was greatly surprised to find a midshipman in so strange a
place; but the latter explained it by stating that he was on furlough,
and had been left there by a merchant-vessel, which was to call for
him. She had never returned, however, and he now hailed the "Essex" as
an opportunity for escape. A second white man, who then put in an
appearance, naked and tattooed like an Indian, proved to be an
Englishman who had been on the island for years, and who, by his
knowledge of the language and character of the natives, proved of
great assistance to the Americans, during the long stay upon which
Capt. Porter had determined.




CHAPTER XI.

     WAR WITH THE SAVAGES. -- THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST THE TYPEES. --
     DEPARTURE FROM NOOKAHEEVAH. -- THE "ESSEX" ANCHORS AT
     VALPARAISO -- ARRIVAL OF THE "PHOEBE" AND "CHERUB." --
     THEY CAPTURE THE "ESSEX." -- PORTER'S ENCOUNTER WITH THE
     "SATURN." -- THE MUTINY AT NOOKAHEEVAH.


It was now the last of October, 1813. Capt. Porter saw that the work
he desired done upon the ships under his charge would occupy about six
weeks, and he at once set about forming such relations of peace and
amity with the natives as should enable him to procure the necessary
supplies and prosecute his work unmolested. Much to his dismay, he had
hardly begun his diplomatic palaver with the chiefs, when he learned
that to keep one tribe friendly he must fight its battles against all
other tribes on the island. The natives of Nookaheevah were then
divided into a large number of tribal organizations. With three of
these the Americans were brought into contact,--the Happahs, the
Taeehs, and the Typees. The Taeehs lived in the fertile valley about
the bay in which the American squadron was anchored. With these people
Porter treated first, and made his appearance in their village in
great state, being accompanied by the band, the marines, and several
boats' crews of jackies. He was hospitably received by the natives,
who crowded about to listen to the band, and wonder at the military
precision of the marines, whom they regarded as supernatural beings.
Gattanewa, the chief, expressed his abounding love for the captain,
and exchanged names with him, after the custom of the people; but
ended by saying that the lawless Happahs were at war with the Taeehs,
and the Americans, to gain the friendship of the latter tribe, must
make common cause with them against their enemies. To this Porter
demurred, but the wily chief thereupon brought forward a most
conclusive argument. He said that the Happahs had cursed his mother's
bones; and that, as he and Porter had exchanged names, that estimable
woman was the captain's mother also, and the insult to her memory
should be avenged. It is probable that even this argument might have
proved unavailing, had not the Happahs the next night descended upon
the valley, and, having burned two hundred bread-fruit trees,
departed, leaving word that the Americans were cowards, and dared not
follow them into their mountain fastnesses. Porter saw that his food
supplies were in danger from these vandals, and his knowledge of
savage character convinced him that he could have no peace with any of
the natives until the insolence of this tribe was punished.
Accordingly he notified the Taeehs, that, if they would carry a gun to
the top of one of the mountain peaks, he would send a party against
the Happahs. The Taeehs eagerly agreed; and, after seeing the gun
fired once or twice (a sight that set them fondling and kissing it, to
show their reverence for so powerful a weapon), they set off up the
steep mountain sides, tugging the gun after them. Lieut. Downes led
the American forces. They had hardly reached the mountain tops, when
the fighting began. The Happahs were armed with spears, and with
slings, from which they threw heavy stones with terrific velocity.
They seemed to know no fear, and stood gallantly before the advancing
Americans, fairly darkening the air with clouds of stones and spears.
The Americans, though few in number,--forty, opposed to nearly four
thousand savages,--pressed forward, suffering but little from the
weapons of their foes. From the deck of his frigate in the bay, Porter
could see the steady advances of his forces, as they drove the Happahs
from peak to peak. Before the Americans a huge native strode along,
waving wildly the American flag. The howitzer came in the rear, and
was every now and then discharged, to drive the foe from some
formidable stronghold. So ignorant of fire-arms were the enemy, that
they had no idea of their power, often fighting until the muzzle of a
musket was laid to their temples before the discharge. But before
nightfall this warlike spirit was broken, and the victors returned to
their ships, their native allies carrying five dead bodies slung on
poles. Two only of the Americans were wounded. The next day Happah
ambassadors came to sue for peace; and soon every tribe on the island
joined the alliance, save the Typees, and a distant tribe that proudly
bore the unpronounceable name of Hatecaaheottwohos. For two or three
weeks peace reigned undisturbed. Work was pushed on the vessels. The
rats with which the "Essex" was infested were smoked out, an operation
that necessitated the division of the crew between the shore and the
other vessels. Porter himself, with his officers, took up his quarters
in a tent pitched on the shore. Under some circumstances, such a
change would have been rather pleasant than otherwise; but the rainy
season had now come on, and the tent was little protection against the
storms. Noticing this, the natives volunteered to put up such
buildings as the captain desired, and proceeded to do so in a most
expeditious manner. At early dawn four thousand men set about the
work, and by night had completed a walled village, containing a
dwelling-house for the captain, another for his officers, a cooper's
shop, hospital, bake-house, guard-house, and a shed for the sentinel
to walk under. For their services the men received old nails, bits of
iron hoop, and other metal scraps, with which they were highly
delighted. The Americans were then living on the terms of the most
perfect friendship with the natives. Many of the jackies had been
taken into the families of the islanders, and all had formed most
tender attachment for the beautiful island women; who, in their turn,
were devoted to the "Malleekees," who were such mighty men of war, and
brought them such pretty presents of beads and whales' teeth. The
Americans entered into the celebrations and festivities of the
islanders, watched their dances, joined their fishing expeditions, and
soon were on the friendliest footing with their dusky hosts.

[Illustration: Firing The Howitzer.]

But so pleasant and peaceful an existence was not destined to continue
long. The Typees, who inhabited the interior of the island, were
beginning to stir up strife against the Americans; and Porter saw that
their insolence must be crushed, or the whole native population would
unite in war against him. But to begin a war with the Typees was far
from Porter's wish. The way to their country lay over rugged
precipices and through almost impenetrable jungles. The light-footed
natives could easily enough scale the peaks, or thread the forests;
but to Porter's sailors it would be an exhausting undertaking. No
artillery could be taken into the field, and the immense number of
natives that might be arrayed against the sailors made the success of
the expedition very uncertain. Porter, therefore, determined to try to
adjust the difficulty amicably, and with this purpose sent an
ambassador to the Typees, proposing a peaceful alliance. The reply of
the natives is an amusing example of the ignorant vainglory of savage
tribes, unacquainted with the power of civilized peoples. The Typees
saw no reason to desire the friendship of the Americans. They had
always got along very well without it. They had no intention of
sending hogs or fruit to sell to the Americans. If the Americans
wanted supplies, let them come and take them. The Americans were
cowards, white lizards, and mere dirt. The sailors were weaklings, who
could not climb the Nookaheevan hills without aid from the natives.
This, and much more of the same sort, was the answer of the Typees to
Porter's friendly overtures.

This left no course open to the Americans save to chastise the
insolent barbarians. The departure of the expedition was, however,
delayed until a fort could be built for the protection of the American
village. This work, a sand-bag battery, calculated to mount sixteen
guns, was completed on the 14th of November, and preparations for the
expedition were then begun. And, indeed, it was time that the
Americans showed that they were not to be insulted with impunity.
Already the Taeehs and Happahs were beginning to wonder at the delay,
and rumors spread about the village that the whites were really the
cowards for which the Typees took them. One man, a chief among the
Happahs, was rash enough to call Porter a coward to his face; whereat
the choleric captain seized a gun, and, rushing for the offender, soon
brought him to his knees, the muzzle of the weapon against his head,
begging for mercy. That man was ever after Porter's most able ally
among the natives.

The preparations for war with the Typees were completed, and the
expedition was about to set out, when a new difficulty arose, this
time among the white men. First, a plot was discovered among the
British prisoners for the recapture of the "Essex Junior." Their plan
was to get the crew drunk, by means of drugged rum, and then rise,
seize the vessel, and make off while the American forces were absent
on the Typee expedition. This plot, being discovered, was easily
defeated; and the leaders were put in irons. Then Porter discovered
that disaffection had spread among his crew, which, for a time,
threatened serious consequences. But this danger was averted by the
captain's manly actions and words, which brought the jackies to his
side as one man.

On the 28th of November the long-deferred expedition against the
Typees left the snug quarters on the shore of Massachusetts Bay. The
expedition went by sea, skirting the shore of the island, until a
suitable landing-place near the territory of the hostile tribe was
reached. The "Essex Junior" led the way, followed by five boats full
of men, and ten war-canoes filled with natives, who kept up an
unearthly din with discordant conches. When the forces landed, the
friendly natives were seen to number at least five thousand men; while
of the Americans, thirty-five, under the command of Capt. Porter, were
considered enough for the work in hand. From the time the fighting
began, the friendly natives kept carefully in the rear, and seemed to
be only waiting to aid the victors, whether they should be Americans
or Typees.

Capt. Porter and his followers, upon landing, sat down upon the beach
for breakfast; but their repast was rudely disturbed by a shower of
stones from an ambuscade of Typees in the edge of the wood. Stopping
but a moment to finish their food, the jackies picked up their
cutlasses and muskets, and started for the enemy. They were soon in
the shady recesses of the tropical forest, but not a Typee was to be
seen. That the enemy was there, however, was amply attested by the
hail of stones that fell among the invaders, and the snapping of
slings that could be heard on all sides. This was a kind of fighting
to which the sailors were not accustomed; and for a moment they
wavered, but were cheered on by their brave leader, and, pushing
through the woods, came to a clearing on the banks of a narrow river.
But here a sad disaster befell them in the loss of Lieut. Downes,
whose ankle was broken by a stone. He was sent back to the ship, with
an escort of five men; and the party, thus reduced to twenty-nine,
forded the river, and scaled its high bank, cheering lustily, under a
heavy fire from the Typees, who made a dogged stand on the farther
shore. By this time, the last of their savage allies had disappeared.

The advance of the Americans was now checked by a jungle of such rank
underbrush that the cutlasses of the men made no impression upon it;
and they were forced to crawl forward on their hands and knees, under
a constant fire from the enemy. From this maze, they burst out upon a
clearing, and, looking about them, saw no sign of their savage foes,
who had suddenly vanished. The solution of this mystery was soon
discovered. After marching a few rods totally unmolested, a sudden
turn in the path brought the Americans in sight of a formidable stone
fortress, perched on a hill commanding the road, and flanked on either
side by dense jungles. The wall of the fortress was of stone, seven
feet high; and from it, and from the thickets on either side, came
such demoniac yells, and such showers of stones, as convinced the
Americans that they were in front of the Typee stronghold. For a time
the invaders seemed in danger of annihilation. They were totally
unprotected, and flanked by concealed foes, whose missiles were
plunging down upon them with deadly effect. Some few secured places
behind trees, and began a musketry fire; but the alarming cry soon
arose that the ammunition was exhausted. Five men were immediately
despatched to the beach for more cartridges, while the few remaining
determined to hold their position at any cost. But to this
determination they were unable to adhere. Had the Typees charged, the
whole American force would have been swept away like driftwood before
a springtime flood. But the savages neglected their opportunity; and
the Americans first gained the protection of the bushes, then fell
back across the river, and so to the beach.

Here a council of war was held. They had been beaten back by savages;
enormously outnumbered, to be sure, but still opposed by undisciplined
warriors armed with rude weapons. The stain of that defeat must be
washed out by a victory. Upon one point, all were agreed. The Happahs
had played them false by leading them over the most dangerous roads,
and into ambuscades of the enemy. To such treacherous guides, they
would not again trust themselves. Before he again led his men to
battle, Porter wished to try diplomacy. Although he knew that he had
been beaten in the engagement, it would never do to confess defeat
before so many savages (for the Taeehs and Happahs were now swarming
about him, discussing the fight). Accordingly a messenger was sent to
tell the Typees that a handful of white men had driven them into their
fort, killing and wounding many. Now a large re-enforcement of white
men was on the beach, ready to drive them from their valley, but that
if they would sue for peace they might yet save their lives and their
villages. At this the Typees laughed. "Tell Opotee," said they, "that
we have plenty of men to spare; while his men are few. We have killed
his chief warrior, and wounded many of his people. We are not afraid
of his _bouhies_ [muskets]: they often miss fire, and, when they
wound, don't hurt much. If the Malleekees can drive us from our
valley, why don't they come and do it?--not stay on the beach and
talk."

When Porter received this letter, he knew that he must again take the
field against the Typees, or his half-hearted allies would abandon him
and join his foes, giving him endless trouble, and putting a stop to
the refitting of the ships in Massachusetts Bay. He now understood the
power of his foes, and accordingly chose two hundred men to go with
him on the second expedition. He also determined to leave behind the
friendly savages, whose friendship was a very doubtful quality. The
forces left the beach that very night, and began their weary march up
the mountain-side. It was bright moonlight; so that the narrow
mountain paths, the fearful precipices, the tangled jungles, and the
swamps and rivers were visible to the marching column. By midnight the
Americans found themselves perched on the summit of a rocky peak
overlooking the Typee valley, from which arose sounds of drum-beating,
singing, and loud shouts of revelry. The guides who had led the
American column said that the savages were rejoicing over their
triumph, and were calling upon their gods to send rain and spoil the
"Malleekees' _bouhies_." Porter knew the time was ripe for a surprise,
and the men were eager to be led against the enemy; but the guides
protested that no mortal men could descend the path leading to the
Typee village, at night, so precipitous was the descent. The Americans
were therefore forced to wait patiently until morning. Throwing
themselves on the ground, the weary sailors were soon asleep, but were
waked up in an hour by a heavy burst of rain. They saw the rain
falling in sheets, and the sky banked with black clouds that gave
little hope of a stoppage. From the valley below rose the triumphant
yells of the Typees, who were convinced that their gods had sent the
shower to spoil the white men's weapons. And, indeed, the floods
poured down as though sent for that very service; so that at daybreak
the Americans found that more than half their powder was spoiled. To
make matters worse, the precipitous path leading down into the valley
was so slippery that it would have been madness to attempt the
descent. Accordingly Porter determined to retreat to the Happah
village, and there wait for better weather. Before falling back,
however, he ordered a volley fired, to show the savages that the
fire-arms were not yet useless. The noise of the volley was the first
intimation to the Typees that the Americans were so near them, and
their village was at once thrown into the direst confusion. Cries of
surprise mingled with the beating of drums, the blowing of horns, the
shrieks of women and children, and the squealing of pigs being driven
to places of safety. In the midst of the tumult the Americans retired
to the Happah village, where they spent the remainder of that day and
the following night.

The next morning dawned bright and cool after the rain; and the
Americans sallied forth, determined to end this annoying affray in
short order. They soon reached their former station on the cliffs,
and, looking down upon the Typee territory, saw a beautiful valley,
cut up by stone walls into highly cultivated farms, and dotted with
picturesque villages. But though their hearts may have been softened
by the sight of so lovely a spot, so soon to be laid desolate, they
were soon nerved to their work by a party of Typees, who were posted
on the farther bank of a river that skirted the base of the cliff, and
were calling out to the Americans, calling them cowards, and daring
them to come down and fight. Porter gave the command; and the jackies
were soon clambering down the cliffs, in the face of a rapid fire from
their enemies. The bank of the river once gained, the Americans halted
to rest for a few minutes, and then, fording the stream, pushed
forward straight for the nearest village. The Typees hung upon the
flank of the advancing column; now and then making fierce charges but
always beaten back with severe losses. The sailors suffered but
little, and were soon in possession of the village, behind the walls
of which the main body halted, while scouting parties were sent out to
reconnoitre. After a short halt at this point, the invaders pushed
forward to the next village, and so on up the valley, burning each
village as soon as it was captured. Undismayed by their continued
reverses, the Typees fought doggedly, scornfully refusing to listen to
the peaceful overtures made by the American commander. After marching
three or four miles, and fighting for every foot of the way, the
Americans found themselves before an extensive village, which, from
its size, and the strength of its fortifications, was evidently the
Typee capital. Here the savages made a last determined stand, but to
no avail. The Americans poured over the wall, and were soon in
possession of the town. The beauty of the village, the regularity of
its streets, and the air of comfort and civilization everywhere
apparent, made it hard for Porter to give the fateful order that
should commit all to the flames. But his duty was clear, and the order
was given. Leaving the blazing capital behind them, the sailors
retraced their steps to the ships, having completed the devastation of
the valley that a day before was so peaceful, fertile, and lovely. The
spirit of the Typees was thoroughly broken by this crushing blow; and
for the next few days the ships were besieged by ambassadors from all
the island tribes, begging for peace.

Feeling assured that he should have no further trouble with the
natives, Porter now exerted all his energies to complete the repairs
on the ships, that he might again take the sea. So rapidly did the
work progress, that by the 9th of December the "Essex" and "Essex
Junior" were refitted, and stocked with fresh provisions of hogs,
cocoanuts, and bananas; the "New Zealander," loaded with oil from the
other prizes, was ordered to proceed to New York; while the
"Greenwich," "Seringapatam," and "Hammond" were to remain at the
islands until the "Essex" should return for them. These arrangements
being made, the war-ships made ready to depart.

But now arose a difficulty, ludicrous in its cause, but which
threatened to be serious in its effects. The ships had been lying in
harbor for about two months; and during that time the sailors, with
unlimited shore liberty, had made such ties as bound them closely to
the native people. The young girls of the islands, with their comely
faces and fair complexions, had played sad havoc with the hearts of
the gallant tars of the "Essex;" and deep was the grumbling among the
sailors when they heard that the time had come for them to bid
farewell to their sweethearts. No openly mutinous demonstration was
made; but so old a commander could not overlook the fact that some
disaffection existed among his crew, and a little investigation
disclosed the trouble. There could be no half-way measures adopted in
the case, and Porter at once gave orders that all further intercourse
with the shore should cease. That very night three sailors slipped
into the sea, and swam ashore to meet their sweethearts; but the wily
captain had stationed a patrol upon the beach, and the three luckless
Leanders were sent back to the ship in irons. All the next day the
native girls lined the shore of the bay, and with pleading gestures
besought the captain to let the sailors come ashore, but to no avail.
Some fair maidens even swam off to the ship, but were gruffly ordered
away by the officers. All this was very tantalizing to the men, who
hung over the bulwarks, looking at the fair objects of their
adoration. But one man only showed signs of rebellion against the
captain's authority; and Porter, calling him out before the crew,
rebuked him, and sent him ashore in a native canoe: while the rest of
the jackies sprang into the rigging, set the canvas, and the ship soon
left the island, with its sorrowing nymphs, far in her wake.

The two vessels turned their heads toward Valparaiso, and made the
port after an uneventful voyage of fifty-six days. The frigate entered
the harbor at once, and cast anchor; while the "Essex Junior" was
ordered to cruise about outside, keeping a close watch for the enemy's
ships. The friendship of the people of the town seemed as great as
during the first visit of the frigate to the port; and a series of
entertainments was begun, that culminated in a grand ball upon the
"Essex" on the night of the 7th of February, 1814. For that one night
the officers of the "Essex Junior" were absolved from their weary duty
of patrolling the sea at the mouth of the harbor. The vessel was
anchored at a point that commanded a view of the ocean; and her
officers, arrayed in the splendor of full dress, betook themselves on
board of the frigate. At midnight, after an evening of dancing and
gayety, Lieut. Downes left the "Essex," and returned to his vessel,
which immediately weighed anchor and put to sea. The festivities on
the frigate continued a little time longer; and then, the last ladies
having been handed down the gangway, and pulled ashore, the work of
clearing away the decorations began. While the ship's decks were still
strewn with flags and flowers, while the awnings still stretched from
stem to stern, and the hundreds of gay lanterns still hung in the
rigging, the "Essex Junior" was seen coming into the harbor with a
signal flying. The signal quartermaster rushed for his book, and soon
announced that the flags read, "Two enemy's ships in sight." At this
moment more than half the crew of the "Essex" were on shore; but a
signal set at the ship's side recalled the men, and in an hour and a
half the ship was ready for action; while the "Essex Junior" cast
anchor in a supporting position.

The two strange vessels were the "Cherub" and the "Phoebe," British
men-of-war. They rounded into the harbor about eight A.M., and bore
down towards the American ships. The "Phoebe," the larger of the two
Englishmen, drew close to the "Essex;" and her commander, Capt.
Hillyar, sprang upon the taffrail, and asked after Capt. Porter's
health. Porter responded courteously; and, noticing that the "Phoebe"
was coming closer than the customs of war-vessels in a neutral port
permitted, warned the Englishman to keep his distance, or trouble
would result. Hillyar protested that he meant no harm, but
nevertheless continued his advance until the two ships were almost
fouled. Porter called the boarders to the bow; and they crowded
forward, armed to the teeth, and stripped for the fight. The "Phoebe"
was in such a position that she lay entirely at the mercy of the
"Essex," and could not bring a gun to bear in her own defence.
Hillyar, from his position on the taffrail, could see the American
boarders ready to spring at the word of command, and the muzzles of
the cannon ready to blow the ship out of water. There is little doubt
that he was astonished to find the "Essex" so well prepared for the
fray, for he had been told that more than half her crew had gone
ashore. Relying upon this information, he had probably planned to
capture the "Essex" at her moorings, regardless of the neutrality of
the port. But he had now brought himself into a dangerous position,
and Porter would have been justified in opening fire at once. But the
apologies and protestations of the British captain disarmed him, and
he unwisely let the "Phoebe" proceed unmolested.

In his journal, Farragut thus describes this incident: "We were all at
quarters, and cleared for action, waiting with breathless anxiety for
the command from Capt. Porter to board, when the English captain
appeared, standing on the after-gun, in a pea-jacket, and in plain
hearing said,--

"'Capt. Hillyar's compliments to Capt. Porter, and hopes he is well.'

"Porter replied, 'Very well, I thank you. But I hope you will not come
too near, for fear some accident might take place which would be
disagreeable to you.' And, with a wave of his trumpet, the
kedge-anchors went up to our yard-arms, ready to grapple the enemy.

"Capt. Hillyar braced back his yards, and remarked to Porter, that, if
he did fall aboard him, he begged to assure the captain that it would
be entirely accidental.

"'Well,' said Porter, 'you have no business where you are. If you
touch a rope-yarn of this ship, I shall board instantly.'"

Notwithstanding Porter's forbearance, the incident came near leading
to a battle, through the action of one of the crew, who had come off
from shore with his brain rather hazy from heavy drinking. This man
was standing by a gun, with a lighted brand in his hand, ready to fire
the piece, when he thought he saw an Englishman grinning at him
through one of the open ports of the "Phoebe." Highly enraged, he
shouted out, "My fine fellow, I'll soon stop your making faces!" and
reached out to fire the gun; when a heavy blow from an officer, who
saw the action, stretched him on the deck. Had that gun been fired,
nothing could have saved the "Phoebe."

The two hostile ships cast anchor within long gunshot of the
Americans, and seemed prepared for a long season in port. For the next
few weeks the British and American officers and seamen met frequently
on shore; and a kind of friendship sprang up between them, although
they were merely waiting for a favorable moment to begin a deadly
strife. Some incidents, however, took place which rather disturbed the
amicable relations of the two parties. At the masthead of the "Essex"
floated a flag bearing the motto, "Free Trade and Sailors' Rights."
This flag gave great offence to the British, who soon displayed a flag
with the inscription, "God and Country, British Sailors' Best Rights.
Traitors offend both." To this Americans responded with, "God, our
Country and Liberty. Tyrants offend them." Here the debate closed, and
seemed to arouse no unfriendly feeling; for Porter and Hillyar talked
it over amicably on shore. In the course of this conversation, Porter
challenged the "Phoebe" to meet the "Essex" alone; but Hillyar
declined the proposition. Shortly after this, the crews of the hostile
ships began the practice of singing songs _at_ each other; the
Americans beginning with "Yankee Doodle," while the British retorted
with "God save the King." Then the poets of the forecastle set to
work, and ground out verses that would prove particularly obnoxious to
the enemy. One of the American songs recited at full length the
capture of the "Guerriere." The character of the poetry may be judged
by the first verse.

        "Ye tars of our country, who seek on the main
        The cause for the wrongs your country sustain,
        Rejoice and be merry, for bragging John Bull
        Has got a sound drubbing from brave Capt. Hull."

The British responded with triumphant verses upon the capture of the
"Chesapeake," news of which had just reached Valparaiso. Their poetry
was quite as bad.

        "Brave Broke he waved his sword,
        And he cried, 'Now, lads, aboard;
        And we'll stop their singing,
            Yankee Doodle Dandy, O!'"

Porter now wished to get rid of some of the prizes with which he was
encumbered. He could not burn them in the harbor, and the British
ships kept too close a watch upon him to permit his ships to leave the
harbor for an hour: so he was forced to wait many days for an
opportunity. On the 14th of February the opportunity came; and the
"Hector" was towed out to sea, and set a-fire. Two weeks later, the
"Phoebe" came alone to the mouth of the harbor, and, after showing her
motto-flag, hove to, and fired a gun to windward. This Porter
understood to be a challenge, and he at once put out in the "Essex."
But the "Phoebe" had no intention of entering a fair and equal fight;
for she quickly joined her consort, and the two then chased the
"Essex" back to port. Much talk and a vast deal of correspondence grew
out of this affair, which certainly did not redound to the credit of
the British.

On the 28th of March the wind blew with such force that the larboard
cable of the "Essex" parted; and the ship, drifting before the wind,
dragged her starboard cable out to sea. Knowing that the British ships
were in waiting outside, Porter lost no time in getting on sail and
trying to beat back into the harbor. But, just as the ship was
rounding the point, there came up a heavy squall, which carried away
the main topmast, throwing several topmen into the sea. In her
disabled state the frigate could not regain the harbor; but she ran
into a little cove, and anchored within half pistol-shot of the shore.
Here she was in neutral waters; and, had Capt. Hillyar been a man of
his word, the "Essex" would have been safe: for that officer, on being
asked by Porter whether he would respect the neutrality of the port,
had replied with much feeling, "You have paid so much respect to the
neutrality of the port, that I feel bound in honor to respect it." But
he very quickly forgot this respect, when he saw his enemy lying
crippled and in his power, although in neutral waters.

Hardly had the "Essex" cast anchor, when the two British ships drew
near, their actions plainly showing that they intended to attack the
crippled frigate. The "Essex" was prepared for action, the guns beat
to quarters; and the men went to their places coolly and bravely,
though each felt at his heart that he was going into a hopeless fight.
The midshipmen had hardly finished calling over the quarter-lists, to
see that every man was at his station, when the roar of the cannon
from the British ships announced the opening of the action. The
"Phoebe" had taken up a position under the stern of the American
frigate, and pounded away with her long eighteens; while the "Essex"
could hardly get a gun to bear in return. The "Cherub" tried her
fortune on the bow, but was soon driven from that position, and joined
her consort. The two kept up a destructive fire, until Porter got
three long guns out of the cabin-windows, and drove the enemy away.
After repairing damages, the British took up a position just out of
range of the "Essex's" carronades, and began a rapid and effective
fire from their long eighteens.

Such an action as this was very trying to the crew of the "Essex." The
carronades against which Porter had protested when his ship was armed
were utterly useless against an enemy who used such cautious tactics.
On the deck of the frigate men were falling on every side. One shot
entered a port, and killed four men who stood at a gun, taking off the
heads of the last two. The crash and roar of the flying shots were
incessant. As the guns became crippled for lack of men, the junior
officers took a hand in all positions. Farragut writes, "I performed
the duty of captain's aid, quarter-gunner, powder-boy, and, in fact,
did every thing that was required of me.... When my services were not
required for other purposes, I generally assisted in working a gun;
would run and bring powder from the boys, and send them back for more,
until the captain wanted me to carry a message; and this continued to
occupy me during the action." Once during the action a midshipman came
running up to Porter, and reported that a gunner had deserted his
post. Porter's reply was to turn to Farragut (the lad was only twelve
years old), and say, "Do your duty, sir." The boy seized a pistol, and
ran away to find the coward, and shoot him in his tracks. But the
gunner had slipped overboard, and made his way to the shore, and so
escaped.

After the "Essex" had for some time suffered from the long-range fire
of the enemy, Capt. Porter determined to make sail, and try to close
with his foes. The rigging had been so badly shot away that the flying
jib was the only sail that could be properly set. With this, and with
the other sails hanging loose from the yards, the "Essex" ran down
upon the British, and made such lively play with her carronades, that
the "Cherub" was forced to haul off for repairs, and the tide of war
seemed to be setting in favor of the Americans. But, though the
gallant blue-jackets fought with desperation, their chances for
success were small. The decks were strewn with dead, the cock-pit was
full, and the enemy's shot were constantly adding to the number of
dead and dying. Young Farragut, who had been sent below after some
gun-primers, was coming up the ladder, when a man standing at the
opening of the hatchway was struck full in the face by a cannon-ball,
and fell back, carrying the lad with him. The mutilated body fell full
upon the boy, who lay for a time unconscious; then, jumping to his
feet, ran, covered with blood, to the quarter-deck. Capt. Porter saw
him, and asked if he was wounded. "I believe not, sir," answered the
midshipman. "Then," said the captain, "where are the primers?"
Farragut remembered his errand, and dashed below to execute it. When
he emerged the second time, he saw the captain (his adopted father)
fall, and running up asked if he was wounded. "I believe not, my son,"
was the response; "but I felt a blow on the top of my head." He had
probably been knocked down by the wind of a passing shot.

But the end of the action was now near. Dreadful havoc had been made
in the ranks of both officers and men. The cock-pit would hold no more
wounded; and the shots were beginning to penetrate its walls, killing
the sufferers waiting for the surgeon's knife. Lieut. McKnight was the
only commissioned officer on duty. The ship had been several times on
fire, and the magazine was endangered. Finally, the carpenter reported
that her bottom was so cut up that she could float but a little while
longer. On learning this, Porter gave the order for the colors to be
hauled down, which was done. The enemy, however, kept up their deadly
fire for ten minutes after the "Essex" had struck.

David Farragut narrates some interesting incidents of the surrender.
He was sent by the captain to find and destroy the signal book before
the British should come aboard; and, this having been done, he went to
the cock-pit to look after his friends. Here he found Lieut. Cornell
terribly wounded. When Farragut spoke to him, he said, "O Davy, I fear
it's all up with me!" and died soon after. The doctor said, that, had
this officer been operated upon an hour before, his life might have
been saved; but when the surgeons proposed to drop another man, and
attend to him, he replied, "No, no, doctor, none of that. Fair play's
a jewel. One man's life is as dear as another's; I would not cheat any
poor fellow out of his turn." Surely history nowhere records more
noble generosity. Soon after this, when Farragut was standing on the
deck, a little negro boy came running up to inquire about his master,
Lieut. Wilmer, who had been knocked over by a shot. On learning his
master's fate, he leaped over the taffrail into the sea, and was
drowned.

After the "Essex" had been formally surrendered, boats were sent to
convey the prisoners to the British ships. In one of these Farragut
was carried to the "Phoebe," and there fell into a second battle, in
which the victory remained with him. "I was so mortified at our
capture that I could not refrain from tears," he writes. "While in
this uncomfortable state, I was aroused by hearing a young reefer call
out,--

"'A prize! a prize! Ho, boys, a fine grunter, by Jove.'

"I saw at once that he had under his arm a pet pig belonging to our
ship, called 'Murphy.' I claimed the animal as my own.

"'Ah,' said he, 'but you are a prisoner, and your pig also!'

"'We always respect private property,' I replied; and, as I had seized
hold of 'Murphy,' I determined not to let go unless 'compelled by
superior force.'

"This was fun for the oldsters, who immediately sung out,--

"'Go it, my little Yankee. If you can thrash Shorty, you can have your
pig.'

"'Agreed,' cried I.

"A ring was formed in an open space, and at it we went. I soon found
that my antagonist's pugilistic education did not come up to mine. In
fact, he was no match for me, and was compelled to give up the pig. So
I took Master Murphy under my arm, feeling that I had in some degree
wiped out the disgrace of the defeat."

When the British ships with their prize returned to the quiet waters
of the harbor, and began to take account of damages, it was found that
the "Essex" had indeed fought a losing fight. On the "Phoebe," but
four men were killed, and seven wounded; on the "Cherub," one killed
and three wounded, made up the list of casualties. But on the "Essex"
were fifty-eight killed, and sixty-six wounded; while an immense
number of men were missing, who may have escaped to the shore or may
have sunk beneath the waves. Certain it is some swimmers reached
shore, though sorely wounded. One man had rushed on deck with his
clothing all aflame, and swam ashore, though scarcely a square inch
could be found on his body which was not burned. Another seaman had
sixteen or eighteen scales of iron chipped from the muzzle of his gun
driven into his legs, yet he reached the shore in safety.

After some delay, the "Essex Junior" was disarmed; and the prisoners,
having given their paroles, were placed on board her, with a letter
of safe-conduct from Capt. Hillyar to prevent their capture by any
British man-of-war in whose path they might fall. But this letter
availed them little; for, after an uneventful voyage to the northward,
the "Essex Junior" found herself brought to by a shot from the British
frigate "Saturn," off Sandy Hook. The boarding-officer took Capt.
Hillyar's letter to the commander of the "Saturn," who remarked that
Hillyar had no authority to make any such agreement, and ordered the
"Essex Junior" to remain all night under the lee of the British ship.
Capt. Porter was highly indignant, and handed his sword to the British
officer, saying that he considered himself a prisoner. But the
Englishman declined the sword, and was about to return to his ship,
when Porter said, "Tell the captain that I am his prisoner, and do not
consider myself any longer bound by my contract with Capt. Hillyar,
which he has violated; and I shall act accordingly." By this Porter
meant that he now considered himself absolved from his parole, and
free to escape honorably if an opportunity should offer.

Accordingly at seven o'clock the following morning, a boat was
stealthily lowered from the "Essex Junior;" and Porter, descending
into it, started for the shore, leaving a message, that, since British
officers showed so little regard for each other's honor, he had no
desire to trust himself in their hands. The boat had gone some
distance before she was sighted by the lookout on the "Saturn," for
the hull of the "Essex Junior" hid her from sight. As soon as the
flight was noticed, the frigate made sail in chase, and seemed likely
to overhaul the audacious fugitives, when a thick fog set in, under
cover of which Porter reached Babylon, L.I., nearly sixty miles
distant. In the mean time, the "Essex Junior," finding herself hidden
from the frigate by the fog-bank, set sail, and made for the mouth of
the harbor. She was running some nine knots an hour when the fog
showed signs of lifting; and she came up into the wind, that the
suspicion of the British might not be aroused. As it happened, the
"Saturn" was close alongside when the fog lifted, and her boat soon
came to the American ship. An officer, evidently very irate, bounded
upon the deck, and said brusquely,--

"You must have been drifting very fast. We have been making nine knots
an hour, and yet here you are alongside."

"So it appears," responded the American lieutenant coolly.

"We saw a boat leave you, some time ago," continued the Englishman. "I
suppose Capt. Porter went in it?"

"Yes. You are quite right."

"And probably more of you will run away, unless I cut away your boats
from the davits."

"Perhaps that would be a good plan for you to adopt."

"And I would do it very quickly, if the question rested with me."

"You infernal puppy," shouted the American officer, now thoroughly
aroused, "if you have any duty to do, do it; but, if you insult me
further, I'll throw you overboard!"

With a few inarticulate sounds, the Englishman stepped into his boat,
and was pulled back to the "Saturn," whence soon returned a second
boat, bearing an apology for the boarding-officer's rudeness. The
boarders then searched all parts of the ship, mustered her crew on the
plea that it contained British deserters, and finally released her,
after having inflicted every possible humiliation upon her officers.
The "Essex Junior" then proceeded to New York, where she was soon
joined by Capt. Porter. The whole country united in doing honor to the
officers, overlooking the defeat which closed their cruise, and
regarding only the persistent bravery with which they had upheld the
cause of the United States in the far-off waters of the Pacific.

Before closing the account of Porter's famous cruise, the story of the
ill-fortune which befell Lieut. Gamble should be related. This
officer, it will be remembered, was left at Nookaheevah with the
prizes "Greenwich," "Seringapatam," and "Hammond." Hardly had the
frigate disappeared below the horizon, when the natives began to grow
unruly; and Gamble was forced to lead several armed expeditions
against them. Then the sailors under his charge began to show signs of
mutiny. He found himself almost without means of enforcing his
authority, and the disaffection spread daily. The natives, incited by
the half-savage Englishman who had been found upon the island, began
to make depredations upon the live-stock; while the women would swim
out to the ships by night, and purloin bread, aided by their lovers
among the crews. To the lieutenant's remonstrances, the natives
replied that "Opotee" was not coming back, and they would do as they
chose; while the sailors heard his orders with ill-concealed contempt,
and made but a pretext of obeying them. In the middle of April three
sailors stole a boat from the "Greenwich," and, stocking it well with
ammunition and provisions, deserted, and were never again seen. One
month later, mutiny broke out in its worst form. Lieut. Gamble and his
two midshipmen, being upon the "Seringapatam," were knocked down by
the sailors, gagged, bound, and thrust into the hold. The mutineers
then went ashore, spiked the guns in the fort, and then, hoisting the
British colors over the captured ship, set sail. Lieut. Gamble was
badly wounded in the foot by a pistol-shot fired by one of his guards.
Notwithstanding his wound, he, with the two lieutenants and two loyal
seamen, was turned adrift in an open boat. After long and painful
exertions, they reached the shore, and returned to the bay, where the
"Greenwich" still lay at anchor. The mutineers, thirteen of whom were
Englishmen who had enlisted in the American service, steered boldly
out to sea, and were nevermore heard of. The half-savage Englishman,
Wilson, was supposed to be at the bottom of this uprising, and some
days later a boat's crew from the "Greenwich" went ashore to capture
him. Soon after, Gamble, anxiously watching the shore, saw a struggle
upon the beach, the natives rushing down on all sides, the boat
overturned in the surf, and two white men swimming towards the ship,
making signals of distress. Mr. Clapp, with two men, sprang into a
boat, and put off to the aid of the swimmers, leaving Gamble alone on
the ship. Two large canoes loaded with savages then left the beach,
and swiftly bore down towards the "Essex;" but Gamble, lamed though he
was, seized a lighted brand, and hobbled along the deck of the ship,
firing her guns with such effect that the savages were driven back,
the beach cleared, and Mr. Clapp enabled to save the two struggling
men. When the boat returned to the ship, it was learned that
Midshipman Feltus and five men had been basely murdered by the
savages. There were now left but seven Americans; and of these but two
were well, and fit for duty. Setting the "Greenwich" on fire, this
little band boarded the "Hammond," and made their way to sea. But
between the Sandwich Islands and Honolulu they fell in with the
"Cherub," by whom they were captured, and kept prisoners for nine
months, when, peace being declared, they were released.

So ended the last incident of the gallant cruise of the "Essex."
History has few more adventurous tales to relate.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Naval History of the United States, by
Willis J. Abbot

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NAVAL HISTORY ***

***** This file should be named 22305.txt or 22305.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/3/0/22305/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Christine P. Travers and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
