The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the United States, Volume 4, by 
E. Benjamin Andrews

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: History of the United States, Volume 4

Author: E. Benjamin Andrews

Release Date: September 19, 2007 [EBook #22676]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY UNITED STATES ***




Produced by Don Kostuch





[Transcriber's notes]

[1862] indicate the following text covers this period, until the
next such appearance.

Here are the definitions of some unfamiliar (to me) terms.

abatis
  Barricade of trees with sharpened branches directed toward an enemy.

acclivities
  Upward slope.

carpet-baggers
  Politicians who move to a place for an opportunity to promote their
  career.

comity
  Courtesy; civility. Comity of nations: respect of one country for the
  laws and institutions of another. Law: courts of one jurisdiction give
  effect to the decisions of another.

Lethe of death
  River in Hades; drinking it caused forgetfulness.

mare clausum
  Navigable body of water under the jurisdiction of one nation and
  closed to all others. Latin: mare, sea + clausum, closed.

modus vivendi
  Manner of living; way of life. Temporary agreement between contending
  parties pending a final settlement.

Ney
  Michel Ney--Duke of Elchingen, 1769-1815, French revolutionary and
  Napoleonic military leader; marshal of France 1805-15.

parole
  A written promise by a prisoner of war, that if released he will not
  take up arms against his captors.

redintegration
  Restoration of a lost or injured part. Evocation of a state of mind
  by the recurrence of the elements making up the original experience.

scalawag
  A native white Southerner who collaborated with the occupying forces
  during Civil War Reconstruction for personal gain.

spiles
  Post used as a foundation; a pile. Wooden plug; bung. Spigot used in
  taking sap from a tree.

windrows
  Row of leaves or snow heaped up by the wind; row of cut hay or grain
  left to dry in a field before being bundled.

[End transcriber's notes]



[Illustration: Sculpture of a boat carrying several classical figures.]
Drawn by Will H. Low.
The World's Fair at Chicago.
Central Portion of MacMonnies Fountain--Effect of Electric Light.



HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES



FROM THE EARLIEST DISCOVERY OF AMERICA TO THE PRESENT TIME

BY
E. BENJAMIN ANDREWS
CHANCELLOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF NEBRASKA
FORMERLY PRESIDENT OF BROWN UNIVERSITY

With 650 Illustrations and Maps


VOLUME IV.

NEW YORK
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS
1912

COPYRIGHT, 1894 AND 1903, BY
CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

[Illustration: Scribner's logo.]



CONTENTS

PERIOD IV

CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION

(Continued)

1860--1868



CHAPTER V. THE STRUGGLE FOR THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

Three Great Lines of Campaign.
Confederate Posts in Kentucky.
Surrender of Fort Henry.
Siege of Fort Donelson.
Capture.
Kentucky Cleared of Armed Confederates.
Pope Captures Island No. 10.
Gunboat Fight.
Memphis Ours.
Battle of Pittsburg
Landing.
Defeat and Victory.
Farragut and Butler to New Orleans.
Battle.
Victory.
The Crescent City Won.
On to Vicksburg.
Iuka.
Corinth.
Grant's Masterly Strategy.
Sherman's Movements.
McClernand's.
Gunboats pass Vicksburg.
Capture of Jackson, Miss.
Battle of Champion's Hill.
Siege of Vicksburg.
Famine within.
The Surrender.


CHAPTER VI. THE WAR IN THE CENTRE

Bragg Invades Kentucky.
Buell Saves Louisville.
Battle of Perryville.
Of Stone River.
Losses.
Chickamauga.
Thomas the "Rock of Chickamauga."
Grant to the Front.
Bragg's Movements.
Chattanooga.
The "Battle above the Clouds."
Capture of Missionary Ridge.
Bragg's Army Broken Up.
Grant Lieutenant-General.
Plan of Campaign for 1864-65.
Sherman's Army.
Skirmishes.
Kenesaw Mountain.
Johnston at Bay.
Hood in Command.
Assumes the Offensive.
Sherman in Atlanta.
Losses.
Hood to Alabama and Tennessee.
The March to the Sea.
Living on the Country.
Sherman at Savannah.
Hardee Evacuates.
A Christmas Gift.
The Blow to the Confederacy.
Thomas Crushes Hood.
Sherman Marches North.
Charleston Falls.
Columbia.
Johnston Routed at Bentonville.
Sherman Master of the Carolinas.
Johnston Surrenders.


CHAPTER VII. THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGNS OF 1862--63

McClellan to Fortress Monroe.
Yorktown.
Williamsburg.
Fair Oaks.
Lee in Command.
McDowell Retained at Fredericksburg.
Lee Assumes the Offensive.
Gaines's Mill.
The Seven Days' Retreat.
Malvern Hill.
Union Army at Harrison's Landing.
Discouragement.
McClellan Leaves the Peninsula.
Pope's Advance on Richmond.
Retreat.
Jackson in his Rear.
Second Battle of Bull Run.
Pope Defeated.
Chantilly.
McClellan again Commander.
Lee in Maryland.
South Mountain.
Antietam.
Lee Escapes.
McClellan Removed and Burnside in Command.
Fredericksburg.
The Battle.
Hooker General-in-Chief.
Chancellorsville.
Flank Movement by Jackson.
Battle of May 3d.
Lee in Pennsylvania.
Convergence to Gettysburg.
First Day's Battle.
Second Day.
Third.
Pickett's Charge.
Failure.
Lee Escapes.
Significance of this Battle.


CHAPTER VIII. COLLAPSE OF THE CONFEDERACY

Grant Comes East.
Battle of the Wilderness.
Flanking.
Spottsylvania.
The "Bloody Angle."
Butler "Bottled Up" at Bermuda.
Grant at the North Anna.
At Cold Harbor.
Change of Base to the James.
Siege of Petersburg.
The Mine.
Washington in Peril.
Operations in Shenandoah Valley.
"Sheridan's Ride."
Further Work at Petersburg.
Distress at the South.
Lee's Problem.
Battle at Five Forks.
Blue-coats in Petersburg.
Davis and his Government Leave Richmond.
Union Army Enters.
Grant Pursues Lee.
The Surrender.
Assassination of President Lincoln.
Johnston Grounds Arms.
Capture of Jefferson Davis.


CHAPTER IX. THE WAR ON THE SEA

Classification of Naval Deeds.
Our Navy when the War Began.
Enlargement.
Blockading.
Difficulty and Success.
Alternate Tediousness and Excitement.
Blockade-running Tactics.
Expeditions to Aid the Blockade.
To Port Royal.
To Roanoke Island.
Confederate Navy.
The Merrimac.
Sinks the Cumberland, Burns the Congress.
Monitor and Merrimac.
An Era in Naval Architecture and Warfare.
Operations before Charleston.
The Atlanta.
The Albemarle.
Blown Up by Cushing.
Farragut in Mobile Harbor.
Fort Fisher Taken.
Southern Cruisers upon the High Seas.
Destructive.
The Sumter.
The Alabama.
Her Career.
Fights the Kearsarge.
Sinks.


CHAPTER X. FOREIGN RELATIONS. FINANCE. EMANCIPATION.

Views of the War Abroad.
England's Hostility.
Causes.
The Trent Affair.
Seward's Reasoning.
Great Britain's Breach of Neutrality.
Louis Napoleon's Hypocrisy.
Invasion of Mexico.
Maximilian.
War Expenditure.
How Met.
Duties.
Internal Revenue.
Loans.
Bonds.
Treasury Notes.
Treasurer's Report, July 1, 1865.
Errors of War Financiering.
Confederate Finances.
High Prices at South.
Problem of the Slave in Union Lines.
"Contraband of War."
Rendition by United States Officers.
Arguments for Emancipation.
Congressional Legislation.
Abolition in District of Columbia.
Negro Soldiers.
Preliminary Proclamation.
Final Effects.
Mr. Lincoln's Difficulties.
Republican Opposition.
Abolitionist.
Democratic.
Copperhead.
Yet he is Re-elected.


CHAPTER XI. RECONSTRUCTION

Delicacy of the Task.
Reasons.
The Main Constitutional Question.
Different Views.
The Other Questions.
Answer.
Periods of Reconstruction.
During War.
President Lincoln.
Johnson.
His Policy.
Carried Out.
Congress Rips up his Work.
Why.
South's Attitude just after War.
Toward Negroes.
XIVth Amendment.
Rejected by Southern States.
Iron Law of 1867.
Carried through.
Antagonism between President Johnson and Congress.
Attempt to Impeach Johnson.
Fails.



PERIOD V


THE CEMENTED UNION

1868-1888


CHAPTER I. POLITICAL HISTORY OF THE LAST TWO DECADES

Grant's First Election.
His Work During Reconstruction.
Its Difficulty.
Bayonet Rule in the South.
The Force Act.
Danger to State Independence.
"Liberal Republican" Movement.
The Greeley Campaign, 1872.
Grant again Elected.
Fresh Turmoil at the South.
Culminates in Louisiana.
Blood Shed.
The Kellogg Government Sustained in that State.
A Solid South.
The Election of 1876.
In Doubt.
The Returns.
The Electoral Commission of 1877.
Hayes Seated.
The Electoral Count Act, 1886.
Hayes's Administration.
End of the Bayonet Regime.
Garfield's Nomination.
And Election.
And Assassination.
The Guiteau Trial.
Civil Service Reform.
Under Grant.
Under Hayes.
Need of it.
Credit Mobilier Scandal.
The Pendleton Act Passed.
Its Nature and Operation.
Recovery of Power by the Democracy.
Election of Cleveland.
The Civil Service.
Presidential Succession Act of 1886.
Its Necessity.
And Provisions.


CHAPTER II. THE TREATY OF WASHINGTON.   237

A Shining Instance of Peaceful International Methods.
Earlier Negotiations.
"ALABAMA CLAIMS" Insisted on.
A Joint Commission.
Its Personnel.
A Treaty Drafted and Ratified.
Its Provisions.
Northwest Boundary Question.
Minor Claims.
The Alabama Claims.
Geneva Tribunal.
Personnel.
No Pay for Indirect Losses.
Importance of the Case.
The Three Rules of the Washington Treaty.
Position of Great Britain Relative to These.
Their Meaning.
An Advance in International Law.
The Other Cruisers.
The Award.
Charles Francis Adams.
The Money Paid.
Its History.


CHAPTER III. THE FISHERIES DISPUTE.

Fishery Clause of the Treaty of 1783.
Value of the Rights it Conveyed.
Effect of War of 1812.
Convention of 1818.
Its Fateful Provisions.
Troubles in Consequence.
The Reciprocity of 1854.
Repeal in 1865.
New Troubles.
Reciprocity by Treaty of Washington, from 1871.
Repealed in 1885.
Why
Friction in 1886.
Strict Enforcement by Canada of Convention of 1818.
Severities.
Their Animus.
Pleas of the United States Government.
Threat of Retaliation.
Commission to Draft New Treaty.
Indecisive Result.
Northwestern Fisheries Question Settled.


CHAPTER IV. THE SOUTH.

The Results of Congressional Reconstruction.
Restoration of White Rule.
Ku-Klux-Klan.
Improvement.
Loyalty at the South.
Prosperity.
Cotton.
Manufacturing.
Iron.
Marble.
Southern Cities.
Country Parts.
State of Florida.


CHAPTER V. THE WEST.

New States and Territories.
Alaska.
Its Resources.
Both Sides of the Rockies Filling Up.
Pacific Railways.
Colorado.
California.
Great American Desert.
Tabular View of the West's Growth.
Western Cities.
Minnesota.
St. Paul, Minneapolis, Duluth.
Duluth and Chicago.
Statistics of Immigration.


CHAPTER VI. THE EXPOSITION OF 1876.

Origin of the Plan.
Organization.
Financial Basis.
Conclusion to Make it a World Affair.
To be at Philadelphia.
Building.
Opening Exercises.
The Main Building.
Arrangement and Contents.
The American Exhibit.
Machinery Hall.
The Corliss Engine.
Agricultural Hall.
Memorial Hall.
The Art Exhibit.
Horticultural Hall.
Minor Arrangements and Structures.
The Fourth of July Celebration.
Original Copy of the Declaration of Independence Read.
Interest in the Philadelphia Exposition.


CHAPTER VII. ECONOMIC POLITICS

Reduction of National Debt.
Refunding.
Surplus.
Tariff.
Its History since the War.
Policy of the Political Parties.
Tariffs of 1890 and 1894.
Trusts.
The Dollar of the Fathers.
Resumption of Specie Payments.
The Promissory Greenback.
Fiat Greenback Theory.
And Party.
Great Strike of 1877.
Labor Movement and Labor Question.
Corporations.
Their Evil Influence.
Counter-organizations.
Growth of our Urban Population.


CHAPTER VIII. THE MARCH OF INDUSTRY.

Progress in Cotton Manufacturing.
In Woollen, Iron, and Other.
In Travel.
New Submarine Cables.
First Pacific Railway.
Others.
Consolidation of Railways.
Electric Lighting.
Brooklyn Bridge.
Elevated Railways and New Modes of Surface Traction.
Telephone.
Black Friday.
Chicago Fire.
Boston Fire.
Hard Times of 1873.
Material Betterment for Last Two Decades.


CHAPTER IX. END OF THE PERIOD.

Contrast of New Things with Old.
Postal Arrangements.
Art.
Extension of Suffrage.
Woman's Rights.
Higher Education for Women.
Socialism and State Socialism.
Widened Scope of Governmental Action.
Restriction of Immigration.
Catholics.
Their Attitude to Public Schools.
Peril to Family.
Mormonism.
Divorce.
Danger from a Secular Spirit.
New Sense of Nationality.
Benign Results.
Greely Expedition to Polar Regions.
Lesson of our National Success to Other Nations.
Our Nation's Duty in World Affairs.



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


THE WORLD'S FAIR AT CHICAGO. CENTRAL PORTION OF MACMONNIES
FOUNTAIN--EFFECT OF ELECTRIC LIGHT.

GENERAL JOHN POPE.

GENERAL WILLIAM T. SHERMAN.

THE BATTLE OF THE RAMS AT MEMPHIS, JUNE 6, 1862.

FARRAGUT IN THE MAIN-RIGGING. (From the original by William Page).

GENERAL HENRY W. HALLECK.

GENERAL WILLIAM S. ROSECRANS.

GENERAL GEORGE H. THOMAS.

GENERAL JOSEPH HOOKER.

THE BATTLE OF LOOKOUT MOUNTAIN. (The "Battle above the Clouds ").

GENERAL JAMES B. McPHERSON.

GENERAL DAVID D. PORTER.

GENERAL ROBERT E. LEE.

GENERAL NATHANIEL P. BANKS.

GENERAL J. E. B. STUART'S RAID UPON POPE'S HEADQUARTERS.

AUGUST 22, 1862, WHEN POPE'S DESPATCH-BOOK FELL INTO THE HANDS OF THE
CONFEDERATES.

GENERAL THOMAS J. ("STONEWALL") JACKSON.

GENERAL EDWIN V. SUMNER.

GENERAL WINFIELD S. HANCOCK.

GENERAL AMBROSE E. BURNSIDE.

THE STONE WALL AT FREDERICKSBURG.

GENERAL OLIVER O. HOWARD.

GENERAL JOHN SEDGWICK.

GENERAL JAMES LONGSTREET.

GENERAL GEORGE G. MEADE.

DEATH OF GENERAL SEDGWICK AT SPOTTSYLVANIA, MAY 9, 1864.

GENERAL DAVID HUNTER.

GENERAL LEE SIGNING THE TERMS OF SURRENDER AT APPOMATTOX COURT-HOUSE.

GIDEON WELLES.

THE SINKING OF THE FRIGATE CUMBERLAND BY THE MERRIMAC IN HAMPTON ROADS,
MARCH 8, 1862.

JOHN ERICSSON.

SECTIONAL VIEW OF MONITOR THROUGH TURRET AND PILOT-HOUSE.

THE ORIGINAL MONITOR.

THE SINKING OF THE ALABAMA.

THE LANDING OF THE ALLIED TROOPS AT VERA CRUZ.

MAXIMILIAN WATCHING THE DEPARTURE OF THE LAST FRENCH TROOPS FROM THE
CITY OF MEXICO.

SALMON PORTLAND CHASE, SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY DURING THE CIVIL WAR.

FACSIMILE OF A PORTION OF PRESIDENT LINCOLN'S DRAFT OF THE PRELIMINARY
PROCLAMATION OF EMANCIPATION, SEPTEMBER, 1862. (From the original in the
Library of the State of New York, Albany).

EDWIN M. STANTON.

ULYSSES S. GRANT.

SAMUEL J. TILDEN. (After a pastel by Sarony in the house at Gramercy Park).

JAMES A. GARFIELD.

JAMES G. BLAINE.

PRESIDENT GROVER CLEVELAND.

A FACSIMILE PUT IN EVIDENCE BEFORE THE CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEE.

THE MOUTH OF THE MIAMI RIVER, FLORIDA.

THE SITE OF CHICAGO.

AN OHIO RIVER FLAT-BOAT.

AN IRRIGATED ORANGE GROVE AT RIVERSIDE, CALIFORNIA.

THE IRRIGATING RESERVOIR AT WALNUT GROVE, ARIZONA, SHOWING THE
ARTIFICIAL LAKE PARTLY FILLED.

AT THE CENTENNIAL EXPOSITION, PHILADELPHIA, 1876.

THE AMERICAN LINE STEAMSHIP ST. LOUIS, LAUNCHED FROM THE CRAMPS DOCKS,
NOVEMBER 12, 1894. (554  feet long, 11,000 tons, and 20,000 horse-power).

CORNELIUS VANDERBILT.

THE BIG LOOP ON THE GEORGETOWN BRANCH OF THE UNION PACIFIC, COLORADO.

CHARLES F. BRUSH.

MOSES G. FARMER.

THOMAS A. EDISON.

THE HOOSAC TUNNEL LIT BY GLOW LAMPS, AFTER THE PLAN OF THE MARR
CONSTRUCTION COMPANY.

EDISON'S PLATINUM LAMP ON CARBON SUPPORT, 1879.

EDISON'S PAPER CARBON LAMP.

EDISON'S FIRST INCANDESCENT PLATINUM LAMP.

THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE, LOOKING UP THE EAST RIVER.

THE MANHATTAN ELEVATED RAILWAY, NEW YORK.

UNDER SIDE OF A MODERN SWITCHBOARD, SHOWING 2,000 TELEGRAPH WIRES.

PROFESSOR BELL SENDING THE FIRST MESSAGE, BY LONG-DISTANCE TELEPHONE,
FROM NEW YORK TO CHICAGO.

THE NEW YORK GOLD ROOM ON "BLACK FRIDAY," SEPTEMBER 24,1869.

A SCENE DURING THE CHICAGO FIRE.

CATCHING THE MAIL POUCH FROM THE CRANE.

IGLOOS, OR ESQUIMAU HUTS.

A. W. GREELY.



LIST OF MAPS

THE CONFEDERATE LINE FROM COLUMBUS TO BOWLING GREEN.

FORT HENRY.

FORT DONELSON.

NEW MADRID AND ISLAND NUMBER TEN.

MEMPHIS TO IUKA, 1862.

OPERATIONS IN LOUISIANA. FEBRUARY TO JULY, 1863.

ATLANTA TO SAVANNAH.

THE BATTLE-FIELD OF NASHVILLE.

MAP OF NORTH CAROLINA.

JACKSON'S ATTACK ON HOWARD, MAY 1, 1863.

DIAGRAM OF THE ATTACK ON SICKLES AND SYKES.

THE SHENANDOAH VALLEY.

GENERAL EARLY'S MARYLAND CAMPAIGN.

GRANT'S PURSUIT OF LEE, APRIL, 1865.

MAP OF HAMPTON ROADS.



PERIOD IV.

CIVIL WAR AND RECONSTRUCTION
(Continued)

1860-1868

CHAPTER V.

THE STRUGGLE FOR THE MISSISSIPPI VALLEY

The North conducted the war upon three great lines of campaign: 1. The
Western campaigns, to clear the Mississippi River and thus divide the
Confederacy. 2. The campaigns in the centre, to reach the sea at Mobile,
Savannah, or Charleston, cutting the Confederacy a second time. 3. The
Eastern campaigns, to take Richmond, and capture or destroy the main
Confederate army, ending the Confederacy. This chapter deals with the
Western campaigns alone.

[1862]

The opening of 1862 found the Confederates in possession of a strong
line across the southern portion of Western Kentucky, stretching from
Bowling Green, near the centre of the State, to Columbus on the
Mississippi. The two gates of this line were Forts Henry and Donelson,
on the Tennessee and Cumberland Rivers, respectively, just over the
Tennessee border. If these forts could be taken the Confederates must
give up Kentucky.


[Illustration: Map of western Kentucky.]
The Confederate Line from Columbus to Bowling Green.


[Illustration: Map.]
Fort Henry.


On February 6th, after a two hours' bombardment, Fort Henry surrendered
to General Grant, who had come up the river from Cairo with 17,000
troops, and with seven gunboats commanded by Commodore Foote. Most of
the garrison, about 3,000, had been sent off before the fleet opened
fire, General Tilghman foreseeing that he could not hold the fort. The
land forces arrived too late to cut off their retreat, and they escaped
safely to Fort Donelson, some dozen miles to the east.

Grant marched at once to invest Donelson, and sat down before it on the
12th with 15,000 men. The stronghold stood upon a bluff 100 feet high.
On the east it was protected by the Cumberland River; on the north and
south by two flooded creeks. Along a crest back of the fort a mile or
two ran a semicircular line of rifle-pits, with abatis in front. Nine
batteries were posted at various points along the line. Donelson was
garrisoned by 20,000 men under Generals Floyd, Pillow, and Buckner, who
quietly looked on while Grant's smaller army hemmed them in. On the 14th
the gunboats opened fire upon the water batteries between fort and
river. Commodore Foote steamed up boldly within 400 yards and pounded
the opposing works with his heavy guns.  He did little damage, however,
while the Confederate fire proved very effective against him. His
flag-ship, the Hartford, was struck fifty-nine times. A shot crashed
into the pilothouse, destroying the wheel and wounding Foote himself.
The boat became unmanageable and drifted down-stream. A shot cut the
tiller-ropes of the Louisville. The other boats were also considerably
damaged, and after an action of an hour and a half, the entire fleet
withdrew.


[Illustration: Map.]
Fort Donelson.


But Grant's army had been re-enforced to 27,000. Three divisions, under
Smith, Wallace, and McClernand, stretched in a semicircle about Donelson
from north to south. On the night of the 14th the Confederate generals
held a consultation, and decided to try cutting their way out. Most of
the troops were withdrawn from the rifle-pits during the night, and
massed on the Union right. The weather had suddenly turned frosty, and
the Union men, without tents or camp-fires, many even without blankets,
shivered all night in the intense cold. Before dawn the attacking column
from inside, 10,000 strong, rushed through the woods and fell upon
McClernand's division, which formed the Union right. For hours the woods
rang with musketry and the southern yell. Slowly the Confederates drove
the Unionists before them and gained the road running south to
Charlotte, opening to themselves the way of escape.

This, however, they had not yet utilized, when, about one o'clock,
General Grant, who had been aboard the fleet consulting with Commodore
Foote, came upon the field. Learning that the foe had begun to fight
with full haversacks, he instantly divined that they were trying to make
their escape, and inferred that their forces had been mostly withdrawn
from opposite the Union left to make this attack against the right.
General Smith was therefore instantly ordered to fall upon the
Confederate right. As Grant had surmised, the intrenchments there were
easily carried. Meanwhile the demoralized soldiers of the Union right
and centre rallied, and drove the Confederates back to their
intrenchments. At daybreak Buckner sent to Grant for terms of
capitulation. "No terms except unconditional and immediate surrender can
be accepted: I propose to move immediately upon your works," was the
answer. The resolute words rang through the North, carrying big hope in
their remotest echo. Donelson surrendered. Floyd and Pillow had sneaked
away during the night, the former monopolizing the few boats to
transport his own brigade. Fifteen thousand troops remained and were
taken prisoners.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General John Pope.


The capture of Henry and Donelson necessitated the evacuation of Bowling
Green and Columbus. Kentucky was now clear of Confederates, and the
Mississippi open down to Island Number Ten. This island lay in a bend of
the river at the extreme northwestern corner of Tennessee. The great
stream here runs northwest for a dozen miles, then sharply turns to the
south again. New Madrid stands at this northern bend. It was protected
by Confederate fortifications and gunboats. Early in March, General
Halleck, now at the head of the Western Department, sent General Pope
against New Madrid with 20,000 men. The enemy fled to Island Number Ten,
leaving thirty-three guns, besides ammunition and many tents.

Island Number Ten was strongly fortified. Commodore Foote came down the
river with seventeen gunboats, and on March 16th began a bombardment
which was kept up for three weeks with little effect; but early in April
Pope got upon the Tennessee shore, in the undefended rear of the island,
and by intercepting its communication to the south, forced it to
surrender, April 8th. Seven thousand prisoners, one hundred heavy siege
guns, several thousand small arms, besides large stores of ammunition
and supplies, were thus secured, without the loss of a single Union
soldier. This exploit brought to Pope great fame.

Pope now descended the river to Fort Pillow, 100 miles below, which he
prepared to take. He was just then transferred by Halleck to another
field, and the reduction of Pillow left to the gunboats. Pillow was
abandoned June 4th. The Union flotilla, increased by four rams, now ran
down the river to Memphis, where, on June 6th, in the presence of
thousands of spectators upon the bluffs, it fought a battle with a
southern fleet. Seven of the Confederate boats were destroyed, and the
next day Memphis surrendered.

After the fall of Donelson the Confederates began concentrating their
forces at Corinth, in the northeast corner of Mississippi. Meanwhile the
Army of the Tennessee, under orders from Halleck, had moved up the
Tennessee River, and encamped, some 40,000 strong, at Pittsburg Landing
on the Tennessee River, 25 miles north of Corinth.  Here Grant, who had
been temporarily removed, took command again on March 17th. Buell, with
40,000 men, was on the march thither from Central Tennessee. The
Confederate generals at Corinth, Albert Sidney Johnston and Beauregard,
wisely determined to strike Grant before Buell arrived. There ensued the
greatest battle which had up to that time shaken the solid ground of
this continent.
[footnote: Indifferently called the battle of Shiloh or the battle of
Pittsburg Landing.]


[Illustration: Map.]
New Madrid and Island Number Ten.


About six o'clock on the morning of April 6th the Confederates burst
through the thick woods upon the Union pickets and drove them in. It was
at least partially a surprise. Grant in person was nine miles down the
river. The Union officers hastily got their men into line, as the
attacking columns came sweeping in after the pickets. Three of the five
Union divisions were raw recruits, many of whom fled at the first fire.
Some colonels led their entire regiments off the field. Later in the day
Grant saw 4,000 or 5,000 of these runaways cowering under the shelter of
the bluffs.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General William T. Sherman.


But the bulk of the army made a stubborn resistance. General W. T.
Sherman, then comparatively unknown, inspired his division of raw troops
with his own intelligent courage. Their gallant and protracted fight
around the Shiloh log church made them the heroes of the day. But the
Confederates' onset was impetuous. Step by step they forced their
opponents back through the heavy woods, and by noon stood in possession
of the Union camps; Grant's army, badly shattered, being cooped up in a
narrow space along the edge of the river.

The tide now turned. About two o'clock, General Johnston was killed, and
the Confederate advance flagged. Between the two armies lay a deep
ravine. Grant planted some fifty guns upon the edge, and two of the
gunboats took positions where they could rake the ravine. By these
dispositions Beauregard's advance was stayed. Night fell, and
hostilities ceased.

Fortunately, 22,000 of Buell's men arrived during the night, and next
morning Grant ordered an advance. Beauregard made as desperate a
resistance as he could, seeing that his heavy losses the day before had
left him but 30,000 troops fit for duty. Buell's men showed the effects
of long training under that matchless disciplinarian, and fought
splendidly. The enemy were steadily pushed back, until more than all the
ground lost on the preceding day had been triumphantly regained, and the
battle of Pittsburg Landing, from being for the Union side a defeat
accomplished and a surrender threatened, was turned into a bright and
inspiring victory. Beauregard ordered a retreat, and, not being pursued,
regained his old position at Corinth. He had lost about 10,000 men. Our
loss was 12,000, including four regiments taken prisoners. The battle
was a severe check to both sides.


[Illustration: Several ships, one in the foreground listing; smoke
covers the sky.]
A.R. Ward        H.R. Hall, JR.
The Battle of the Rams at Memphis, June 6, 1862.


On February 2d the largest fleet that had ever sailed under the American
flag left Fortress Monroe for the mouth of the Mississippi, commanded by
Commodore Farragut. It consisted of 16 gunboats, 21 mortar-schooners,
six sloops of war, and five other vessels. Fifteen thousand land troops,
under General Butler, soon followed. Thirty miles below New Orleans
Forts Jackson and St. Philip, mounting 100 guns, frowned at each other
across the Mississippi. Farragut's fleet sailed up the river and the
mortar-schooners were moored to the banks within range of the forts.
Boughs were tied to the top-masts so that the enemy could not
distinguish them from the trees along the shore. April 18th the mortars
began shelling the forts. An incessant fire was kept up night and day,
for six days, till nearly 6,000 shells had been thrown.

[Illustration: Map.]
Memphis to Iuka. 1862.


As the forts sustained little damage, Farragut decided to run the
batteries. A gunboat stole up by night and cut the boom of hulks chained
together, which crossed the river just below the forts. Some of the
boats were rubbed over with mud to make them invisible, and chain cables
hung over the sides to protect the engines. About half past two in the
night of April 23d the fleet moved up the river through the gap in the
boom. The enemy, on the alert, launched fire-rafts and lit bonfires to
lift the cover of night. Old Jackson and St. Philip poured a hot fire
into the fleet as vessel after vessel slowly steamed past, answering
with its most spiteful broadsides.

But the Union craft had more than the forts against them. Once past the
boom they were in the midst of a hostile fleet of fifteen vessels,
including a dangerous ironclad ram. A fierce water-fight followed. The
Union Varuna was sunk; the flag-ship Hartford set on fire by one of the
fire-rafts. The flames, however, were soon put out. Other vessels were
disabled. But every one of the Confederate ships was captured or
destroyed, and Jackson and St. Philip had to surrender. Farragut then
sailed up the river and took possession of New Orleans without
resistance. Butler at once occupied the city with his troops, and the
Stars and Stripes again waved over the Crescent City. Since that
eventful day New Orleans has never been in disunionist hands.

After the battle of Pittsburg Landing, Halleck himself came down from
St. Louis, and took the reins. Grant was nominally in command under him,
but had next to nothing to do. Re-enforced by 25,000 men under Pope,
Halleck slowly advanced toward Corinth, entering the place May 30th,
Beauregard having evacuated it May 29th. A few Quaker guns--logs mounted
on wagon-wheels--were the only trophies. Halleck now had 110,000
effectives, Beauregard less than 60,000. Halleck lay inactive at Corinth
for six weeks, when he was summoned to Washington as General-in-Chief.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Farragut in the Main-Rigging.
From the original by William Page.


Grant once more took command of the forces about Corinth, which
re-enforcements to Eastern Tennessee soon reduced to 42,000. With these
he was expected to guard 200 miles of railroad, from Memphis to Decatur
in Northern Alabama. The Confederates under Van Dorn and Price attempted
to regain Corinth, but in the battles of Iuka, September 19th, and
Corinth, October 3d and 4th, were repulsed with heavy losses. Grant then
took the offensive. Vicksburg, about half-way from north to south on
Mississippi's western boundary, was the only stronghold left to the
Confederates on the great river. Its capture would ideally complete the
western campaign. Grant's plan was for Sherman to descend the river from
Memphis, while he himself simultaneously attacked Vicksburg by land.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Henry W. Halleck.


[1863]

So long as the stout-hearted general continued his march south all his
supplies had to be brought over the Mississippi Central Railroad from
Holly Springs, near the Tennessee border. A troop of 3,500 Confederate
cavalry, making a long detour around his army, swooped down upon Holly
Springs, December 20th, captured the garrison of 1,300 men, and
destroyed all the stores, valued at $2,000,000. For two weeks the Union
army had to live from the enemy's country, and then after all to fall
back to Holly Springs. Meanwhile Sherman, ignorant of his superior's ill
fortune, descended the Mississippi, and with a force of 30,000 made
during the last days of the year an unsuccessful attack upon Vicksburg.

Very early in January, 1863, McClernand arrived near Vicksburg with
re-enforcements. The last of the month, Grant, who had given up the land
expedition, took command in person. Sherman's repulse had shown that
Vicksburg could not be taken from the water side. A position must be
gained in the rear. This seemed, and indeed proved, an almost impossible
task. The Mississippi was unusually high, and the surrounding country a
vast network of bayous and swamps. The winter passed away in fruitless
labors to make some sort of a water passage to the rear of Vicksburg,
either above, via the Yazoo, or around through Louisiana to some point
below the city, whence the army could cross again to the Vicksburg side
of the Mississippi and strike Pemberton's stronghold from the southeast.
In most of these attempts Grant himself had little faith, but the army
was better at work than idle. At last he resolved, without attempting a
regular canal, partly by land but utilizing bayous and creeks as he
could, to swing his army across west of the river to New Carthage, south
of Vicksburg, run the Vicksburg batteries with the fleet, and, uniting
his land and water forces in the capture of Grand Gulf, to gain the rear
of Vicksburg by way of the Big Black River. It was a bold plan, but it
succeeded.

In April, by building corduroy roads through miles of swamp and bridging
numberless bayous, the general succeeded in reaching New Carthage, some
twenty miles south of Vicksburg, with a good part of his land forces. On
the night of April 16th, the gunboats and provision transports ran the
gauntlet of Vicksburg's guns with little damage. The last of the month a
landing was effected just below Grand Gulf, on the east bank, fifteen or
twenty miles still farther south of Vicksburg. The enemy made some
resistance, but were driven back.

Grant's position was now full of peril. He was in the heart of the
enemy's country. Pemberton was occupying Jackson and Vicksburg with
50,000 men. General Joseph E. Johnston was hurrying to his aid with
re-enforcements. Grant's forces available for an advance about equalled
Pemberton's. A bold policy was the only safe one. Taking five days'
rations, he cut loose from his base at Grand Gulf and marched north to
attack Pemberton before Johnston could join him. Jackson, forty-four
miles to the east of Vicksburg, was easily captured, May 14th. Grant had
thus thrust himself in between Johnston and Pemberton. Turning to the
left he smote Pemberton a heavy blow at Champion's Hill on the 16th, and
drove him into Vicksburg. Johnston fell back baffled. In eighteen days
Grant had marched 200 miles, defeated the enemy in four engagements,
inflicting a loss of 8,000 and taking 88 guns, and shut up a large army
in Vicksburg--all this upon five days' rations. It is a brilliant
record, equalled, if at all, only by some of Napoleon's campaigns.


[Illustration: Map.]
Operations in Louisiana. February to July, 1863.


The bold commander now transferred his base of supplies to the Yazoo
River, which runs into the Mississippi a few miles above Vicksburg.
After an unsuccessful assault upon the city's strong intrenchments, he
sat down to a deliberate siege. Twelve miles of trenches were
constructed. Eighty-nine batteries, with more than 200 guns, day after
day rained shot and shell against the Vicksburg fortifications. The
lines of investment crept nearer and nearer the fated city. The pickets
chaffed with each other, and exchanged tobacco and newspapers. June
25th, a mine was exploded under one of the Vicksburg parapets, but it
made no effectual breach. A second explosion, July 1st, was equally
unavailing. Johnston kept menacing the rear, but feared to attack, as
Grant had been re-enforced to 60,000.

Famine began to threaten the city, Porter's fleet blockading the water
front. Flour sold for $1,000 a barrel in Confederate money. Mule flesh
became the chief meat. Rats were hung up for sale in the market. The
inhabitants sought protection from the shells in cellars and caves.
Cave-digging became a regular business. The Vicksburg daily news sheet
was now printed on wall paper. July 3d. white flags appeared upon the
city's works. An armistice followed, and the next day Pemberton
surrendered. The prisoners, some 30,000 in number, were mostly released
on parole. With the fall of Vicksburg the western campaigns virtually
closed. The capture of Port Hudson, below, was assured from that moment,
and followed on July 8th. The "Father of Waters" once more rolled
"unvexed to the sea," and the Confederacy was cut in twain.



CHAPTER VI.

THE WAR IN THE CENTRE

[1863]

We have seen that the fall of Donelson had driven the Confederates out
of Kentucky. In the following September, 1862, Bragg invaded the State
from Tennessee with 40,000 men. Buell hurried north from Nashville, and
after an exciting race headed him off from Louisville. Bragg slowly fell
back, first east, then south. Kentucky was rich in food and clothing,
and his army plundered freely, coming out, it was boasted, with a
wagon-train forty miles long. At Perryville Bragg turned upon Buell
fiercely. An indecisive battle was fought, October 8, 1862, which gave
the richly loaded wagon-train time to escape into Tennessee, whither
Bragg followed.


The Christmas holidays of 1862 found the Confederate host at
Murfreesboro, Tenn., thirty miles southeast of Nashville, where the
Union army lay. Rosecrans, who had succeeded Buell, moved suddenly to
the banks of Stone River, within four miles of the gay town, and
prepared to attack. Bragg, like Wellington from Brussels on the morning
of Waterloo, hurried forth to meet him. At dawn, December 31st, the
gray-colored columns emerged from the fog that overhung the river, and
spiritedly beat up the Union right. Two divisions were swept back.
Sheridan's men, inspired by their dashing leader, held their ground for
awhile, but fell rearward at last, and, forming a new line, stood at bay
with fixed bayonets. Rosecrans recalled the troops who had crossed the
river to make a similar attack upon the Confederate right, and massed
all his forces at the point of assault. Six times the southrons charged,
six times they were tumbled back by the Union batteries double-shotted
with canister. Night fell on a drawn battle.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General William S. Rosecrans.

The next day, January 1, 1863, was peaceful save for cavalry
skirmishing. January 2nd the awful combat was renewed. Rosecrans having
planted artillery upon commanding ground, Bragg must either carry this
or fall back. He attempted the first alternative, and was repulsed with
terrible slaughter, losing 1,000 men in forty minutes. He escaped south
under cover of a storm. In proportion to the numbers engaged, the battle
of Stone River was one of the bloodiest in the war. About 45,000 fought
on each side. The Union loss was 12,000, the Confederate nearly 15,000.

Rosecrans did not advance again till June, although Bragg lay quite
near. The latter fell back as the Unionists approached, first into
Chattanooga and then over the Georgia line. Rosecrans followed. Bragg
was now re-enforced, and determined to retake Chattanooga, which lay on
the Tennessee River and was an important strategical point. The two
armies met on Chickamauga Creek, twelve miles south of Chattanooga. All
through the first day's battle, September 19th, there was hot
fighting--charges and countercharges--but no decisive advantage fell to
either side. During the night Bragg was reenforced by Longstreet's corps
from Virginia, and he opened the next day's fight with an assault upon
the Union left. Brigades were moved from the centre to support the left.
Through the gap thus made Longstreet poured his men in heavy columns,
cutting the Union army in two. Its right wing became demoralized, and
fled toward Chattanooga in wild confusion, Rosecrans after it at a
gallop, believing that all was lost.

But all was not lost. General Thomas commanded the Union left. Like a
flinty rock he stood while Polk's and Longstreet's troops surged in
heavy masses against his front and flank. About three o'clock heavy
columns were seen pouring through a gorge almost in Thomas's rear. They
were Longstreet's men. It was a critical moment Granger's reserves came
rushing upon the field. Raw recruits though they were, they dashed
against Longstreet like veterans. In twenty minutes, at cost of
frightful slaughter, the gorge and ridge were theirs. Longstreet made
another assault, but was again repulsed. At nightfall Thomas fell back
to Chattanooga, henceforth named, and justly, the "Rock of Chickamauga."
For six hours he had held his own with 25,000 braves against twice that
number. Out of 70,000 troops Bragg lost probably 20,000. Rosecrans's
force was about 55,000, his loss 16,000.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General George H. Thomas.


Bragg proceeded to shut up the Union army in Chattanooga. Grant, now
commanding the Department of the Mississippi, was ordered to recover
Chattanooga, and his deeds along this front, though less often
mentioned, will glitter upon the page of history with little if any less
lustre than those about Vicksburg. Upon his arrival, late in October, he
found the city practically in a state of siege. Its railroad
communication with Nashville was cut off, and supplies had to be hauled
in wagons sixty miles over a rough mountain road. The men had been for
some time on half rations. Thousands of horses and mules had starved,
and the artillery could not be moved for lack of teams. There was not
ammunition enough for one day's fighting. In five days Grant wrested the
railroad from Bragg's men and bridged the Tennessee, so that an abundant
supply of food and ammunition came pouring in.

Elated at his Chickamauga triumph, and unaware that he now had a greater
than Rosecrans in his front, Bragg deemed it a safe and promising
stratagem to despatch Longstreet's corps to Knoxville to capture
Burnside. It was a fatal step, and Grant was not slow to take advantage
of it. He telegraphed Sherman to put his entire force instantly en route
from Vicksburg to Chattanooga.

Chattanooga lies on the south side of the Tennessee River, at the
northern end of a valley running north and south. Along the eastern edge
of the valley rises Missionary Ridge. On the western side and farther
south, stands Lookout Mountain. After passing Chattanooga, the river
turns and runs south till it laves the base of Lookout Mountain. The
Confederate fortifications, twelve miles in length, ran along Missionary
Ridge, across the southern end of the valley, and up over Lookout
Mountain.

On November 23d, Thomas, who had succeeded Rosecrans, stormed the
breastworks half a mile from the base of Missionary Ridge. The next day
Grant sent "Fighting Joe Hooker" to sweep Bragg's detachment from
Lookout Mountain. Mist lay along the lofty slopes as the gallant Hooker
and his men moved up them, soon veiling the entire column from sight;
and it was only by the rattle of the musketry that Grant knew how the
fight progressed. This was the famous "Battle Above the Clouds." Hooker
pounded the enemy so lustily that they were glad to evacuate the
mountain in the night, and the next morning the Stars and Stripes
saluted the breezes of its topmost peak.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Joseph Hooker.


While Hooker had been thus engaged, and for some days before, Sherman
had been at a movement that was even more momentous. He had slyly thrust
his army up the Tennessee River above the city, placing it between the
river and Missionary Ridge, and had worked its flank to the left as far
as the mouth of Chickamauga Creek.  He had thus gotten possession of the
entire northeastern spur of that ridge with hardly the loss of a
corporal's guard.

The morrow after this was accomplished, November 25, 1863, was a day of
blood. Bragg's forces were now massed on Missionary Ridge, mainly in
front of Thomas and Sherman. Hooker had come down into the valley and
was to turn the enemy's left. If Bragg massed troops on either of the
two wings, Thomas's braves were to be let slip against the weakened
centre. Sherman got into action early in the morning, and fought his
painfully difficult way slowly up the rugged acclivities in his front.
Hooker had to bridge Chattanooga Creek, and did not attack till
afternoon. By three o'clock Sherman was so hard pressed that Grant found
it necessary to relieve him by sending Thomas forward at the centre.


[Illustration: Several hundred soldiers in battle.]
The Battle of Lookout Mountain. (The "Battle Above the Clouds.")


The signal guns boom--one, two, three, four, five, six. Up spring
Thomas's heroes from their breastworks, and rush like a whirlwind for
the first line of Confederate rifle-pits. Bragg sees the advance and
hurries help to oppose. His batteries open with shot and shell, then
with canister. The infantry rake Thomas with a withering fire. Yet on,
double quick, dash the lines of blue over the open plain, over rocks,
stumps, and breastworks, bayonetting back or capturing their
antagonists, till the first line of rifle-pits is theirs.

The orders had been to halt at this point and re-form. But here, with
Bragg's artillery raining a veritable hell-fire upon them--here is no
place of resting, and as the men's blood is up, they sweep forward
unbidden, with a cheer. It is five hundred yards to the top--a steep
ascent, covered with bowlders and fallen timber. Over the rocks, under
and through the timber, each one scrambles on as he can. Half-way up is
a line of small works. It is carried with a rush, and on the men go,
right up to the crest of the ridge. Now they confront the heaviest
breastworks. The air is thick with whizzing musket-balls, and fifty
cannon belch flame and death. But nothing can stop that furious charge.
Sheridan's men reach the top first, the rest of the line close behind.
The "Johnnies" are routed after a short fight, and the guns turned
against them as they fly. By night Bragg's army is in full retreat,
Chattanooga is safe and free, Grant's lines of communication are
assured, and the keys of the State of Georgia in his hands.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General James B. McPherson.


The Union forces in this battle numbered about 60,000, the Confederate
half as many; but the latter fought with all the advantage which the
mountain and breastworks could give them. They lost nearly 10,000
including 6,500 prisoners. The Union loss was between 5,000 and
6,000--2,200 in the one hour's charge against the centre.

[1864]

There was no halting, no resting. Scarcely had the sounds of yesterday's
cannonade died away, when Sherman's already jaded forces were put in
motion to the north, to make sure that Burnside was set free at
Knoxville; but Longstreet had already raised the siege and started east.
By December 6th, Bragg's redoubtable army, which, so recently as
September, swore to reconquer Tennessee and to invade Kentucky, was rent
in twain, one part of it fleeing to Virginia, the other to the heart of
Georgia.

No important military movement occurred in the Centre during this winter
of 1863-64. In March Grant was made Lieutenant-General, with command of
all the Union armies, Sherman succeeding to the headship of the
Mississippi Department. The latter accompanied his superior toward
Washington as far as Cincinnati, and there, in a parlor of the Burnet
House, the two victorious generals, bending over their maps together,
planned in outline that gigantic campaign of 1864-65, which was to end
the war; then, grasping one another warmly by the hand, they parted, one
starting east, the other south, each to strike at the appointed time his
half of the ponderous death-blow.

Sherman pushed out from Chattanooga May 6, 1864, with 100,000 men and
254 cannon. His force comprised the Army of the Cumberland, 60,000,
under Thomas; the Army of the Tennessee, 25,000, under Schofield; and
the Army of the Ohio, 15,000, under McPherson. Johnston, who had
superseded Bragg, lay behind strong works at Dalton, a few miles
southeast, with 64,000 men, his base being Atlanta, 80 miles away.
Sherman's supplies all came over a single line of railroad from
Nashville, nearly 150 miles from Chattanooga as the road ran. Every
advantage but numbers was on Johnston's side.

Sherman calculated that the Army of the Cumberland could hold his
opponent at bay, while the two smaller armies crept around his flanks.
This plan was adhered to throughout, and with wonderful success. All
through May and the first of June a series of skilful flanking movements
compelled Johnston to fall back from one position to another, each
commander, like a tried boxer, constantly on the watch to catch his
opponent off guard. Heavy skirmishing day after day made the march
practically one long battle.

June 10th Johnston planted his army upon three elevations--Kenesaw,
Pine, and Lost Mountains--and stubbornly stood at bay. A pouring rain,
which turned the whole country into a quagmire and the streams into
formidable rivers, made the usual flank manoeuvre impracticable. Sherman
resolved to assault in front. June 27th a determined onset was made
along the whole line for two hours but failed, though the troops gained
positions close to the hostile works and intrenched. They lost 2,500;
the Confederates not more than a third of this number. The roads having
now improved, Sherman resorted to his old tactics, the Confederates
having to fall back across the Chattahoochee, and come to bay under the
very guns of Atlanta.

Just at the critical moment, when Sherman's army was slowly closing in
around Atlanta, General Johnston, so wary and cool, was superseded by
the young and fiery Hood, pledged to assume the offensive. On the 20th
Hood made a furious attack on Hooker's front, but was repulsed with
heavy losses. On the 22d he struck again, and harder. By a night march,
Hardee's corps at dawn fell upon the Union left flank and rear like a
thunderbolt out of a clear sky, rolling up the Army of the Tennessee in
great confusion. The brave and talented McPherson was killed early in
the action, Logan succeeding. "McPherson and revenge," he cried, as upon
his coal-black steed he careered from post to post of danger, inspiring
his men and restoring order. The veterans soon recovered from their
surprise. The Union lines were completely re-established, and by night
Hood's army was driven back into the city, having sacrificed probably
10,000 much-needed men, 2,500 of them killed.


[Illustration: Map.]
Atlanta to Savannah.


Sherman now began to swing round to the south and southeast of Atlanta,
till at last he cut its communications with the Confederacy. Hood
evacuated the city and his opponent entered it, September 5th. The
northern troops, after their four months' incessant marching and
fighting, now got a little well-earned rest. Their total losses from
Chattanooga were 32,000. The Confederates had sacrificed about
35,000--the larger part under Hood.

The last of September Hood struck out boldly for Tennessee, menacing,
and, in fact, temporarily rupturing Sherman's long supply-line from
Nashville. Leaving one corps to hold Atlanta, Sherman raced back for 100
miles in pursuit. The railroad being well guarded, Hood could do no
serious damage, and finally turned west into Alabama. Sherman now
resolved on a march to the sea. Thomas, with three corps, was sent to
Tennessee to look out for Hood. The 62,000 troops remaining at Atlanta
were put into light marching trim, and the wagons filled with 20 days'
rations and 200 rounds of ammunition per man. All storehouses and other
property useful to the enemy were then destroyed, communications with
the North cut, and November 15th a splendid army of hardy veterans swung
off for the Atlantic or the Gulf, over 200 miles away. Their orders were
to live on the country, the rations being kept for emergencies; but no
dwellings were to be entered, and no houses or mills destroyed if the
army was unmolested. The dwelling-house prescription was, alas, too
often broken over. There was little resistance, Georgia having been
drained of its able-bodied whites. Negroes flocked, singly and by
families, to join "Massa Linkum's boys." The railroads were destroyed,
and the Carolinas thus cut off from the Gulf States.

Each regiment detailed a certain number of foragers. These, starting off
in the morning empty-handed and on foot, would return at night riding or
driving beasts laden with spoils. "Here would be a silver-mounted family
carriage drawn by a jackass and a cow, loaded inside and out with
everything the country produced, vegetable and animal, dead and alive.
There would be an ox-cart, similarly loaded, and drawn by a nondescript
tandem team equally incongruous. Perched upon the top would be a ragged
forager, rigged out in a fur hat of a fashion worn by dandies of a
century ago, or a dress-coat which had done service at stylish balls of
a former generation. The jibes and jeers, the fun and the practical
jokes, ran down the whole line as the cortege came in, and no masquerade
in carnival could compare with it for original humor and rollicking
enjoyment. ... The camps in the open pine-woods, the bonfires along the
railways, the occasional sham battles at night with blazing pine-knots
for weapons whirling in the darkness, all combined to leave upon the
minds of officers and men the impression of a vast holiday frolic."
[footnote: The March to the Sea, by Major-General J. D. Cox. Campaigns
of the Civil War. Scribners.]

At the start Sherman was uncertain just where he should strike the
coast. The blockade vessels were asked to be on the lookout for him from
Mobile to Charleston. By the middle of December the army lay before
Savannah. Hardee held the city with 16,000 men, but evacuated it
December 20, 1864, Sherman entering next day. He wrote to Lincoln, "I
beg to present you as a Christmas gift the city of Savannah." The
capture of Fort McAllister a week before had opened the Ogeechee River,
and Sherman now established a new base of supplies on the sea-coast.

The North rang with praises of the Great March, which had pierced like a
knife the vitals of the Confederacy. Georgia, with her arsenals and
factories, had been the Confederacy's workshop. Twenty thousand bales of
cotton had been burned upon the march, besides a great amount of
military stores. The 320 miles of railroad destroyed had practically
isolated Virginia from the South and the West. And all this had been
done with the loss of less than 1,000 men.

[1865]

Meanwhile Thomas had dealt the Confederacy another staggering blow. The
adventurous Hood had advanced with his army of 44,000 to the very gates
of Nashville. The deliberate Thomas, spite of prickings from Grant,
waited till he felt prepared. Then he struck with a Titan's hand. The
first day's fight, December 15th, drove the Confederate line back two
miles. Hood formed again on hills running east and west, and hastily
fortified. All next day the battle raged. Late in the afternoon the
works on the Confederate left were carried by a gallant charge. Total
rout of Hood's brave army followed. It fled south, demoralized and
scattered, never to appear again as an organized force. In the two days'
battle, 4,500 prisoners and 53 guns were taken.


[Illustration: Map.]
The Battle-Field of Nashville.


February 1, 1865, his troops all rested and equipped afresh, Sherman set
his face to the north. The days of frolic were over. Continuous rains
had made the Carolinas almost impassable. The march now begun was an
incessant struggle with mud, swamps, and swollen rivers. A pontoon and
trestle bridge three miles long was thrown across the Savannah, and
miles of corduroy road were built through continuous swamps. Charleston,
incessantly besieged since the war opened, where the United States had
wasted more powder and iron than at all other points together, fell
without a blow. Columbia was reached the middle of the month. It caught
fire--just how has never been settled--and the greater part of the city
was destroyed. Sherman's men helped to put out the flames, and left
behind provisions and a herd of five hundred cattle for the suffering
inhabitants.


[Illustration: Map.]
Map of North Carolina.


The army pushed on toward North Carolina, destroying railroads as it
went. Johnston was athwart their path with 30,000 men. March 16th he
struck Sherman's army at Averysboro', N. C., and three days later at
Bentonville. In the latter battle he was completely routed, and re
treated during the night. Sherman swept on to Goldsboro', where
re-enforcements from the coast, under Schofield, increased his army to
90,000. He was undisputed master of the Carolinas. By this time the
Confederacy was hastening to its fall. April 11th the news of Lee's
surrender was hailed in Sherman's army with shouts of joy. A few days
later Johnston surrendered to the hero of Atlanta and of the March to
the Sea.



CHAPTER VII.

THE VIRGINIA CAMPAIGNS OF 1862-63

[1862]

The Army of the Potomac lay inactive all through the winter of 1861-62.
The country cried "Forward," but it was March before McClellan was ready
to stir. Then he sailed down Chesapeake Bay to attack Richmond from the
south, with Fortress Monroe as base. The splendidly disciplined and
equipped army, 120,000 strong, began embarking March 17th.

Fortress Monroe lies at the apex of a wedge-shaped peninsula formed by
the York and James Rivers, which converge as they flow toward the coast.
April 4th, McClellan started on his march up this peninsula. A line of
Confederate fortifications, twelve miles long, stretched across it, from
Yorktown to the James, defended by 10,000 men. Yorktown must be taken to
turn this line. A month was wasted in laborious siege preparations, for
early in May, just before an overwhelming cannonade was to begin, the
southern army evacuated the place and retreated toward Richmond.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General David D. Porter.


McClellan hurried after it. A desultory battle was fought all day on the
5th, near Williamsburg, the enemy withdrawing at night. McClellan now
moved slowly up the peninsula, the last of May finding his army within
ten miles of Richmond, encamped on both sides of the Chickahominy. By
this time nearly 70,000 troops had gathered for the defence of the
Confederate capital.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Robert E. Lee.


May 31st, the Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston fell upon the part
of McClellan's army south of the river, at Fair Oaks, and in a bloody
battle drove it back a mile. McClellan sent re-enforcements across the
river, and the retreat was stayed. The lost ground was regained next
day, and the enemy driven into Richmond. Johnston having been wounded,
General Robert E. Lee was now placed in command of the Army of Virginia,
destined to lay it down only at the collapse of the Confederate
government.

McClellan waited three weeks for better weather. He also expected
McDowell's corps of 45,000, which had been kept near Fredericksburg to
defend Washington, but was under orders at the proper time to cooperate
with McClellan by moving against Richmond from the north. But Stonewall
Jackson came raiding down the Shenandoah Valley, hustling General Banks
before him. Washington was alarmed, and McDowell had to be retained.

Lee boldly took the offensive, and the "Seven Days' Fight" began. June
26th he attacked McClellan's extreme right under Porter, on the north
side of the Chickahominy.  He was repulsed, but Porter fell back farther
down the river to Gaines's Mill, there fought all the next day against
great odds, and was saved from total rout toward night only by the
arrival of re-enforcements.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Nathaniel P. Banks.


Jackson's army from the north had joined Lee's left, and McClellan's
communication with York River was in danger. He decided to change his
base to the James, where he would have placed it at first but for his
expectation of McDowell and his desire to connect with him. Everything
not transportable, including millions of rations and hundreds of tons of
ammunition, had to be destroyed. Five thousand loaded wagons, 2,500 head
of cattle, and the reserve artillery were then set in motion toward the
James, protected by the army in flank and rear.

On discovering this movement Lee hastened to strike. A force was sent to
assail the retreating column in the rear; but the bridgeless
Chickahominy, guarded by artillery, held the pursuers at bay. Lee threw
other portions of his army against McClellan's right, at Savage's
Station on the 29th, at Frazier's Farm on the day following; but the
Union troops each time stood their ground till ready and then continued
their march.

July 1st found the retreating host concentrated on Malvern Hill, a
plateau a mile and a half long and half as broad, with ravines toward
the advancing enemy. Here McClellan planted seventy cannon, rising tier
upon tier up the slope, seven heavy siege guns crowning the crest. The
position was impregnable, but Lee determined to attack. Shortly before
sunset his men advanced boldly to the charge, but were mowed down by the
terrible concentrated fire of the batteries. The hill swarmed with
infantry as well, sheltered by fences and ravines, while shells from the
gunboats in James River could reach every part of the Confederate line.
Yet not till nine in the evening did Lee let the useless carnage cease.
Badly demoralized as the opposing army was, McClellan at midnight
withdrew to Harrison's Landing, farther down the James.


[Illustration: Battle.]
General J. E. B. Stuart's Raid upon Pope's Headquarters, August 22, 1862,
when Pope's despatch book fell into the hands of the Confederates.


During the Seven Days' Retreat he had lost 15,000 men; the Confederates
somewhat more. Military authorities unite in pronouncing McClellan's
change of base "brilliantly executed;" but the campaign as a whole was a
failure, discouraging the country as much as Bull Run had done.
McClellan prepared and fully expected to move on Richmond again from
this new base, but early in August received orders to withdraw from the
Peninsula. By the middle of the month the dejected Army of the Potomac
was on its way north.

The last of June the Union forces in West Virginia, the Shenandoah
Valley, and in front of Washington were consolidated into one army, and
the same General Pope who had recently won laurels by the conquest of
Island Number Ten, put in command. His headquarters, he announced, were
to be in the saddle, and those who had criticised McClellan gave out
that the Union army's days of retreating were past. McClellan was called
from the Peninsula to strengthen this new movement.

Lee started north to crush Pope before McClellan should reach him. Pope
had but 50,000 men against Lee's 80,000, and fell back across the
Rappahannock. Lee sent Jackson on a far detour, via Thoroughfare Gap, to
get into his rear and cut his communications. Jackson moved rapidly
around to Manassas--one of the most brilliant exploits in all the
war--and destroyed Pope's immense supply depot there. On August 29th he
was attacked by Pope near the old battlefield of Bull Run. The first
day's fight was indecisive, but Confederate re-enforcements under
Longstreet arrived in time to join in the battle of the next. McClellan
was in no hurry to re-enforce his rival, but proposed "to leave Pope to
get out of his scrape as he might." Toward sunset in the battle of the
30th, Longstreet's column, doubling way around Jackson's right and
Pope's left, made a grand charge, taking Pope straight in the flank.
Porter's corps--the Fifth--part of McClellan's army, stood in the
"bloody angle" of cross-fire. His loss was dreadful--2,000 out of 9,000.
Pope was compelled to retire to Centreville. An engagement at Chantilly,
September 1st, forced a further retreat to Washington. Pope resigned,
and his army was merged in the Army of the Potomac, McClellan commanding
all.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Thomas J. ("Stonewall") Jackson.


Lee now invaded Maryland with 60,000 men. Already the alarmed North
heard him knocking at its gates. Hastily re-organizing the army,
McClellan gave chase. Leaving a force to hold Turner's Gap in South
Mountain, Lee pushed on toward Pennsylvania. By the battle of South
Mountain, September 14th, Hooker got possession of the gap, and the
Union army poured through. Seeing that he must fight, Lee took up a
position on Antietam Creek, a few miles north of Harper's Ferry. Jackson
had just received the surrender of the latter place, with 11,000
prisoners, and now hurried to join Lee.

By the night of September 16th, the two armies were in battle array on
either side of the creek. To the rear of the Confederate left lay a
cultivated area encircled by woods, a cornfield in its centre. At dawn
on the 17th, Hooker opened the battle by a furious charge against the
Confederate left, and tumbled the enemy out of the woods, across the
cornfield, and into the thickets beyond, where he was fronted by
Confederate reserves. The carnage was terrific. Re-enforcements under
Mansfield were sent to Hooker, but driven back across the cornfield.
Mansfield was killed and Hooker borne from the field wounded, Sumner
coming up barely in time to prevent a rout. Once more the Confederates
were pushed through the cornfield into the woods. Here, crouching behind
natural breastworks--limestone ridges waist-high--the southern ranks
delivered so hot a fire as to repulse Sumner's men. Thus, all the
morning and into the afternoon the tide of battle surged back and forth
through the bloody cornfield, strewn with wounded and dead.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Edwin V. Sumner.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Winfield S. Hancock.


On the Confederate right no action took place till late in the day.
Burnside then attacked and gained some slight advantage. But
re-enforcements from Harper's Ferry came up and were put in against him,
forcing him back to the creek. During the next day McClellan feared to
risk a battle. Being re-enforced, he intended to attack on the following
morning; but Lee, who should have been crushed, having but 40,000 men to
McClellan's 87,000, slipped away in the night and got safely across the
Potomac. The Union loss was 12,400; that of the Confederates probably
about the same.

The general dissatisfaction with McClellan's slowness caused his removal
early in November, Burnside succeeding him. The new commander, who, as
the head of the army, was an amiable failure, proposed to move directly
against Richmond, but Lee flung himself in his path at Fredericksburg.

Fredericksburg lies on the south bank of the Rappahannock. Behind the
city is a gradually ascending plain, bounded by heights which bend
toward the river. Lee's army, 80,000 strong, lay in a semicircle along
these heights, its wings touching the river above and below the town.
Two rows of batteries, planted on the heights, swept the plain in front
and flank. A sunken road, sheltered by a stone wall, ran along the base
of the declivity. Burnside's army of 125,000 men occupied a range of
hills on the north side of the river.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Ambrose E. Burnside.


Lee's position was very strong; but the country was impatient for
action, and Burnside too readily and without any definite plan gave the
order to attack. December 11th and 12th were spent in crossing the river
on pontoon bridges. The ominous 13th came. The first charge was made by
5,000 of Franklin's men against the Confederate right. The attacking
column broke through the lines and reached the heights; but it was not
supported, and Confederate reserves drove it back.

About noon an attack was made by Hancock's and French's corps against
the Confederate left. They advanced over the plain in two lines, one
behind the other. Suddenly the batteries in front, to left, to right,
poured upon them a murderous fire. Great gaps were mowed in their ranks.
Union batteries, replying from across the river, added horror to the
din, but helped little. Still the lines swept on. They grew thinner and
thinner, halted, broke, and fled.

Again they advanced, this time almost up to the stone wall. Behind it,
hidden from sight, lay gray ranks four deep. Suddenly that silent wall
burst into flame, and the advancing lines crumbled away more rapidly
than before. Three times more the gallant fellows came on, bayonets
fixed, to useless slaughter. That deadly wall could not be passed.



[Illustration: Ditch full of dead soldiers, behind a four foot stone
wall.]
The Stone Wall at Fredericksburg.


[1863]

The two wings having failed, the Union centre, under Fighting Joe
Hooker, was ordered to try. He kept his batteries playing till sunset,
hoping to make a breach. Four thousand men were then ordered into the
jaws of death. Stripping off knapsacks and overcoats, and relying on the
bayonet alone, they charged on the double-quick and with a cheer. They
got within twenty yards of the stone wall. Again that sheet of flame! In
fifteen minutes it was all over, and they returned as rapidly as they
advanced, leaving nearly half their number dead and dying behind. During
the day Burnside had had 113,000 men either across the river or ready to
cross. Lee's force was 78,000.

Night put an end to the luckless carnage. Burnside's generals dissuaded
him from renewing the attack next day, and the army re-crossed the
river. They had lost 12,300 men; the Confederates 5,000. A writer to the
London Times from Lee's headquarters called this December 13th a day
"memorable to the historian of the Decline and Fall of the American
Republic."

Burnside resigned in January, and Hooker took the command, but he did
not assume the offensive till the last of April. Then, leaving three
corps under Sedgwick to deceive Lee by a demonstration in front, he
marched up-stream with the other four of his corps, crossed the
Rappahannock and the Rapidan, partially turned Lee's left, and took up a
position near Chancellorsville. It was a perfect plan, and thus far
triumphantly executed. But here Hooker waited, and the pause was fatal.
On the night of April 30th Lee perceived that Sedgwick's movement was
only a feint, and gathered all his forces, 62,000 strong, to fight at
Chancellorsville. He fortified himself so firmly that Hooker with
64,000, or, including Sedgwick's two corps and the cavalry, 113,000,
made not a single step of further advance.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General Oliver O. Howard.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General John Sedgwick.


[Illustration: Map.]
R.D. Servoss, N.Y.
Jackson's Attack on Howard, May 1st, 1863.


Nor was this the worst. Hooker's right wing, under Howard, was weakly
posted. On the 2d of May Stonewall Jackson, who cherished the theory
that one man in an enemy's rear is worth ten in his front, making a
detour of fifteen miles, got upon Howard's right unobserved, and rolled
it up. The surprise was as complete as it was inexcusable. Arms were
stacked and the men getting supper. Suddenly some startled deer came
bounding into camp, gray-coats swarming from the woods hard behind.
Almost at the first charge the whole corps broke and flee! But the
victory cost the Confederates dear; Jackson was fatally wounded,
probably by his own men.

All the next day the Union army fought on the defensive. Hooker was
stunned in the course of it by a cannon-ball stroke upon the
house-pillar against which he was leaning, and the army was left without
a commanding mind. Sedgwick, who was to come up from below
Fredericksburg and take Lee in the rear, found it impossible to do this
in time, having to fight his way forward with great loss. When he drew
near, Lee was enough at leisure to attend to him. Forty thousand troops,
aching for the fray, were left idle while Lee was hammering away against
the portion of the Union line commanded by Sickles. Ammunition gave out,
and charge after charge had to be repulsed with the bayonet.

Sickles's brave men at last yielded. The Confederate attack of May 4th
was nearly all directed against Sedgwick, whose noble corps narrowly
escaped capture. That night the whole army fell back to nearly its old
position north of the Rappahannock. Except that at Fredericksburg it was
the most disgraceful fiasco on either side during the war. It cost
17,000 men, and accomplished less than nothing. The South was elated. It
proposed again to invade the North and this time dictate terms of peace.

Early in June Lee's jubilant army, strengthened to 100,000, with 15,000
cavalry and 280 guns, started on its second grand Northern Campaign. It
marched down the Shenandoah Valley, crossed the Potomac on the 25th, and
headed for Chambersburg, Penn. The Army of the Potomac marched parallel
with it, on the east side of the Blue Ridge, and crossed the Potomac a
day later. Hooker suddenly resigned, and Meade was put in command.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General James Longstreet.


Lee reached Chambersburg; his advance even pushed well on toward
Harrisburg, the capital of Pennsylvania. At Chambersburg he waited
eagerly for those riots in northern cities by which the "copperheads"
had expected to aid his march. In vain. Meade was drawing near. "Pressed
by the finger of destiny, the Confederate army went down to Gettysburg,"
and here the advance of both hosts met on July 1st. After some sharp
fighting the Union van was driven back in confusion through Gettysburg,
with a loss of 10,000 men, half of them prisoners. The brave General
Reynolds, commanding the First Corps, lost his life in this action. The
residue fell back to Cemetery Hill, south of the town. Meade, fifteen
miles to the south, sent Hancock on to take command of the field, and
see what it was best to do. This able and trusty officer hurried to the
scene of action in an ambulance, studying maps as he went. He saw at a
glance the strength of Cemetery Ridge and resolved to retreat no
farther. The remaining corps were ordered up, and by noon of July 2d had
mostly taken their positions.

The Union army lay along an elevation some three miles in length,
resembling a fish-hook in shape. At the extreme southern end forming
the head of the shank rose "Round Top," four hundred feet in height.
Farther north was "Little Round Top," about three-fourths as high.
Cemetery Ridge formed the rest of the shank. The hook curved to the
east, with Culp's Hill for the barb. The Confederate army occupied
Seminary Ridge a mile to the west, its left wing, however, bending
around to the east through Gettysburg, the line being nearly parallel
with Meade's, but much longer. Each army numbered not far from 80,000.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General George G. Meade.


The battle of the second day began about three in the afternoon. Meade
had neglected to occupy Little Round Top, which was the key to the Union
line. Longstreet's men began climbing its rugged sides. Fortunately the
movement was seen in time, and Union troops, after a most desperate
conflict, seized and held the crest of the hill.

Along the Union left centre General Sickles's corps had taken a position
in advance of the rest of the line, upon a ridge branching off from
Cemetery Ridge at an acute angle. Here he was fiercely attacked and most
of his force finally driven back into the line of Cemetery Ridge. The
Union right had been greatly weakened to strengthen the centre. The
Confederates charged here also, and carried the outer intrenchments at
Culp's Hill. The Union losses during the afternoon were
10,000--three-fifths in Sickles's corps, which lost half its numbers.

The next morning was spent by Lee in preparing for a grand charge upon
the Union centre, that of yesterday upon the left having failed, and the
Confederates having this morning been driven from the ground gained the
night before on the right at Culp's Hill. The storm burst about one
o'clock. For two hours 120 guns on Seminary Ridge kept up a furious
cannonade, to which Meade replied with 80. About three the Union cannon
ceased firing. Lee mistakenly thought them silenced, and gave the word
to charge.

An attacking column 18,000 strong, made up of fresh troops, the flower
of Lee's men, and commanded by the impetuous Pickett, the Ney of the
southern army, emerges from the woods on Seminary Ridge, and, drawn up
in three lines, one behind the other, with a front of more than a mile,
moves silently down the slope and across the valley toward the selected
spot. Suddenly the Union batteries again open along the whole line.
Great furrows are ploughed in the advancing ranks. They press steadily
on, and climb the slope toward Meade's lines. Two regiments behind rude
intrenchments slightly in advance pour in such a murderous fire that the
column swerves a little toward its left, exposing its flank. General
Stannard and his lusty Vermonters make an irresistible charge upon this.
Windrows of Pickett's poor fellows are mowed down by the combined
artillery and musketry fire. A part of the column breaks and flees. A
part rushes on with desperate valor and reaches the low stone wall which
serves for a Union breastwork. A venomous hand-to-hand fight ensues.
Union re-enforcements swarm to the endangered point. The three
Confederate brigade commanders are all killed or fatally wounded, whole
regiments of their followers surrounded and taken prisoners. The rest
are tumbled back, and the broken remnants of that noble column flee in
wild confusion across the valley.


[Illustration: Map.]
Note: From A to K is just one mile.
R.D. Servos N.Y.
Diagram of the Attack on Sickles and Sykes.


The Confederate loss on this eventful day was 16,000, the Union loss not
one-fifth as great. General Hancock, whose command bore the brunt of the
charge, was severely wounded. Meade should have pressed his advantage,
but did not, and next day Lee retreated under cover of a storm and
escaped across the Potomac. His losses during the three days had been
frightful, amounting to 23,000. In one brigade, numbering 2,800 on July
1st, only 835 answered roll-call three days later. Meade's total losses
were also 23,000. Meade had had on the field in all 83,000 men and 300
guns, Lee 69,000 and 250 guns.

Gettysburg marks the turning of the tide. The South's dream of getting a
foothold in the North was forever past. She was soon to hear a gallant
Northerner's voice demanding the surrender of Richmond.



CHAPTER VIII.

COLLAPSE OF THE CONFEDERACY

[1864]

Gettysburg was the last general engagement in the East during 1863. The
next spring, as we have noticed, Grant was appointed Lieutenant-General,
with command of all the northern armies, now numbering over 600,000
effectives. This vast body of men he proposed to use against the
fast-weakening Confederacy in concerted movements. Sherman's part in the
great plan has already been traced. The hardest task, that of facing
Lee, the hero of Vicksburg and Chattanooga [he] reserved for himself.
Greek thus met Greek, and the death-grapple began.

May 4th the Army of the Potomac crossed the Rapidan and entered the
Wilderness, Meade in immediate command, with 120,000 men present for
duty. Lee, heading an army of 62,000 veterans, engaged his new
antagonist without delay. For two days the battle raged in the gloomy
woods. There was no opportunity for brilliant manoeuvres. The men of the
two armies lay doggedly behind the trees, each blazing away through the
underbrush at an unseen foe, often but a few yards off, while a stream
of mangled forms borne on stretchers came steadily pouring to the rear.
The tide of battle surged this way and that, with no decisive advantage
for either side.

But Grant, as Lee said of him, "was not a retreating man." If he had not
beaten, neither had he been beaten. Advance was the word. On the night
of the 7th he began that series of "movements by the left flank" which
was to force Lee forever from the Rappahannock front. The army stretched
nearly north and south, facing west. Warren's corps, at the extreme
right, quietly withdrew from the enemy's front, and marching south took
a position beyond Hancock's, hitherto the left. Sedgwick's corps
followed. By this sidling movement the army worked its way south, all
the while presenting an unbroken front to the enemy. Yet, on reaching
Spottsylvania, Grant found Lee's army there before him. Sharp fighting
began again on the 9th and continued three days, but was indecisive,
mainly from the wild nature of the country, heavily timbered, with only
occasional clearings.


[Illustration: Officer with arms outstretched, after being shot.]
Death of General Sedgwick at Spottsylvania. May 9, 1864.


An early morning attack on the 12th carried a salient angle in the
centre of the Confederate line, securing 4,000 prisoners and twenty
guns. All that day and far into the night Lee desperately strove to
dislodge the assailants from this "bloody angle." Five furious charges
were stubbornly repulsed, the belligerents between these grimly facing
each other from lines of rifle-pits often but a few feet apart. Bullets
flew thick as hail, a tree eighteen inches through being cut clean off
by them. Great heaps of dead and wounded lay between the lines, and "at
times a lifted arm or a quivering limb told of an agony not quenched by
the Lethe of death around." Lee did not give up this death-grapple till
three o'clock in the morning, when he fell back to a new position. His
losses here in killed and wounded were about 5,000; Grant's about 6,000.

Rains now compelled both armies to remain quiet for several days.
Meantime news reached Grant that Butler, who was to have moved up the
James with his army of 20,000 and co-operate with the main army against
Richmond, had suffered himself to be "bottled up" at Bermuda Hundred, a
narrow spit of land between the James and Appomattox Rivers, the
Confederates having "driven in the cork." Re-enforcements reached Grant,
however, which made good all his losses.

On the 19th, after an unsuccessful assault the day before, he resumed
the flanking movement, and reached and passed the North Anna. But Lee
pushed in like a wedge between the two parts of the Union army,
separated by crossing the river at different points, and after some
fighting, Grant re-crossed and resumed his march to the south. Lee,
again moving on shorter lines, reached Cold Harbor before Grant.

The outer line of Confederate intrenchments at Cold Harbor was carried
on June 1st, and at early dawn on the 3d a charge made along the whole
front. Under cover of a heavy artillery fire the men advanced to the
enemy's rifle-pits and carried them. They then swept on toward the main
line. The ground was open, and the advancing columns were exposed to a
terrible storm of iron and lead. Artillery cross-fire swept through
their ranks from right to left. The troops pressed close up to the
works, but could not carry them. They intrenched, however, and held the
position gained, at some points within thirty yards of the hostile
ramparts. The Union loss was very heavy, not less than 6,000; the
Confederates, fighting under shelter, lost comparatively few.

During the next ten days the men lay quietly in their trenches. Both
forces had now moved so far south that Grant's hope of getting between
Lee's army and Richmond had to be abandoned. He therefore decided to
cross the James and take a position south of Richmond, whence he could
threaten its lines of communication, while that river would furnish him
a secure base of supplies.

The two hosts now began a race for Petersburg, an important railway
centre, twenty-two miles south of Richmond. Grant's advance reached the
town first, but delayed earnest attack, and on the morning of the 15th
Lee's veterans, after an all-night's march, flung themselves into the
intrenchments. Grant spent the next four days in vain efforts to
dislodge them. On the 19th he gave up this method of assault, and began
a regular siege. His losses in killed and wounded hereabouts had been
almost 9,000.

Things now remained comparatively quiet till late in July. Both sides
were busy strengthening their intrenchments. Lee held both Richmond and
Petersburg in force, besides a continuous line between the two. Attempts
to break this line and to cut the railroads around Petersburg led to
several engagements which would have been considered great battles
earlier in the war.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
General David Hunter.

Grant's total losses from the crossing of the Rapidan to the end of June
were 61,000, but re-enforcements promptly filled his ranks. The
Confederate loss cannot be accurately determined, but was probably about
two-thirds as great.

Through July one of Burnside's regiments, composed of Pennsylvanians
used to such business, had been working at a mine under one of the main
redoubts in front of Petersburg. A shaft 500 feet long was dug, with a
cross gallery 80 feet in length at the end square under the redoubt.
This chamber was charged with 8,000 pounds of powder, which was fired
July 30th. The battery and brigade immediately overhead were blown into
the air, and the Confederate soldiers far to left and right stunned and
stupefied with terror. For half an hour the way in to Petersburg was
open. Why did none enter? The answer is sad.

Grant had splendidly fulfilled his part by a feint to Deep Bottom across
the James, which had drawn thither all but about one division of Lee's
Petersburg force. But Meade, at a late hour on the 29th, changed the
entire plan of assault, which Burnside had carefully arranged, and to
lead which a fresh division had been specially drilled. Then there was
lamentable inefficiency or cowardice on the part of several subordinate
officers. The troops charged into the great, cellar-like crater,
twenty-five feet deep, where, for lack of orders, they remained huddled
together instead of pushing on. The Confederates rallied, and after
shelling the crater till more of its occupants were dead than alive,
charged and either routed the living or took them prisoners.


[Illustration: Map.]
The Shenandoah Valley.


During the summer and fall of 1864 the scene of active operations was
shifted to the Shenandoah Valley. The latter part of June Lee sent
Early, 20,000 strong, to make a demonstration against Washington, hoping
to scare Grant away from Petersburg. Early moved rapidly down the
valley, hustling Hunter before him, who escaped only by making a detour
to the west, thus leaving Washington open. Thither Early pushed with all
speed.

General Lew Wallace hastily gathered up the few troops at his disposal
and hurried out from Baltimore to meet him. Wallace was defeated at the
Monocacy River July 9th, but precious time was gained for the
strengthening of Washington. When Early arrived before the city on the
11th, Grant's re-enforcements had not yet come, and the fate of the
capital trembled in the balance. Early happily delayed his attack till
the morrow, and that night two of Grant's veteran corps landed in
Washington, President Lincoln, in his anxiety, being on the wharf to
meet them. Once more Washington was safe, and Early fell back, pressed
by the newcomers.


[Illustration: Map.]
General Early's Maryland Campaign.


The pursuit was feeble, however, and the last of July Early swooped down
the valley again. A detachment pushed into Pennsylvania and burned
Chambersburg. All through the war the Confederate operations in the
Shenandoah Valley had been an annoyance and a menace. Grant now
determined to put a definite stop to this, and sent the dashing General
Sheridan for the work with 30,000 troops, including 8,000 cavalry.
Sheridan pushed Early up the Shenandoah, defeating him at Opequon Creek,
September 19th, and at Fisher's Hill two days later.

One-half of Early's army had been destroyed or captured, and the rest
driven southward. Sheridan then, in accordance with Grant's orders, that
the enemy might no longer make it a base of operations against the
capital, laid waste the valley so thoroughly that, as the saying went,
not a crow could fly up or down it without carrying rations. Spite of
this, Early, having been re-enforced, entered the valley once more. The
Union army lay at Cedar Creek. Sheridan had gone to Washington on
business, leaving General Wright in command. On the night of October
18th, the wily Confederate crept around to the rear of the Union left,
and attacked at daybreak. Wright was completely surprised, and his left
wing fled precipitately, losing 1,000 prisoners and 18 guns. He ordered
a retreat to Winchester. The right fell slowly back in good order,
interposing a steady front between Early and the demoralized left.

Meanwhile Sheridan, who had reached Winchester on his return, snuffed
battle, and hurried to the scene. Now came "Sheridan's Ride." Astride
the coal-black charger immortalized by Buchanan Read's verse, he shot
ahead and dashed upon the battle-field shortly before noon, his horse
dripping with foam. His presence restored confidence, and the army
steadily awaited the expected assault. It came, was repulsed, was
reciprocated. Early was halted, then pushed, then totally routed, and
his army nearly destroyed. It was one of the most signal and telling
victories of the war. In a month's campaign Sheridan had killed and
wounded 10,000 of the enemy and taken 13,000 prisoners.

[1865]

All this time the siege of Petersburg was sturdily pressed. In August,
Grant got possession of the Weldon Railroad, an important line running
south from Petersburg. During the next month fortifications on the
Richmond side of the James were carried and held. Through the winter
Grant contented himself with gradually extending his lines around
Petersburg, trying to cut Lee's communications, and preventing his
sending troops against Sherman. He had a death-grip upon the
Confederacy's throat, and waited with confidence for the contortions
which should announce its death.

The spring of 1865 found the South reduced to the last extremity. The
blockade had shut out imports, and it is doubtful if ever before so
large and populous a region was so far from being self-sustaining. Even
of food-products, save corn and bacon, the dearth became desperate.
Wheat bread and salt were luxuries almost from the first. Home-made
shoes, with wooden soles and uppers cut from buggy tops or old
pocketbooks, became the fashion. Pins were eagerly picked up in the
streets. Thorns, with wax heads, served as hairpins. Scraps of old metal
became precious as gold.

The plight of the army was equally distressing. Drastic drafting had
long since taken into the army all the able-bodied men between the ages
of eighteen and forty-five. Boys from fourteen to eighteen, and old men
from forty-five to sixty, were also pressed into service as junior and
senior reserves, the Confederacy thus, as General Butler wittily said,
"robbing both the cradle and the grave." Lee's army had been crumbling
away beneath the terrible blows dealt it by Grant. He received some
re-enforcements during 1864, but in no wise enough to make good his
losses. When he took the field in the spring of 1865, his total
effective force was 57,000. Grant's army, including Butler's and
Sheridan's troops, numbered 125,000.

 Lee now perceived that his only hope lay in escaping from the clutches
 of Grant and  making a junction with Johnston's army in North Carolina.
 Grant was on the watch for precisely this. On March 29th Sheridan
 worked around into the rear of the Confederate right. Lee descried the
 movement, and extended his lines that way to obviate it. A force was
 sent, which drove Sheridan back in some confusion. Re-enforced, he
 again advanced and beat the forces opposed to him rearward to Five
 Forks. Here, April 1st, he made a successful charge, before which the
 foe broke and ran, leaving 4,500 prisoners.

Fearing an attack on Sheridan in force which might let Lee out, Grant
sent re-enforcements, at the same time keeping up a roaring cannonade
along the whole line all night. At five on the morning of the 2d, a
grand assault was made against the Confederate left, which had been
weakened to extend the right. The outer, intrenchments, with two forts
farther in, were taken. Lee at once telegraphed to President Davis that
Petersburg and Richmond must be immediately abandoned.


[Illustration: Map.]
Grant's Pursuit of Lee; April, 1865.


It was Sunday, and the message reached Mr. Davis in church. He hastened
out with pallid lips and unsteady tread. A panic-stricken throng was
soon streaming from the doomed city. Vehicles let for one hundred
dollars an hour in gold. The state-prison guards fled and the criminals
escaped. A drunken mob surged through the streets, smashing windows and
plundering shops. General Ewell blew up the iron-clads in the river and
burned bridges and storehouses. The fire spread till one-third of
Richmond was in flames. The air was filled with a "hideous mingling of
the discordant sounds of human voices--the crying of children, the
lamentations of women, the yells of drunken men--with the roar of the
tempest of flame, the explosion of magazines, the bursting of shells."
Early on the morning of the 3d was heard the cry, "The Yankees are
coming!" Soon a column of blue-coated troops poured into the city,
headed by a regiment of colored cavalry, and the Stars and Stripes
presently floated over the Confederate capital.

The Confederacy was tottering to its fall. Lee had begun his retreat on
the night of the 2d, and was straining every nerve to reach a point on
the railroad fifty miles to the west, whence he could move south and
join Johnston. Grant was too quick for him. Sending Sheridan in advance
to head him off, he himself hurried after with the main army. Gray and
blue kept up the race for several days, moving on nearly parallel lines.
Sheridan struck the Confederate column at Sailor's Creek on the 6th, and
a heavy engagement ensued, in which the southern army lost many wagons
and several thousand prisoners.

Lee's band was in a pitiable plight. Its supplies had been cut off, and
many of the soldiers had nothing to eat except the young shoots of
trees. They fell out of the ranks by hundreds, and deserted to their
homes near by. With all hope of escape cut off, and his army dropping to
pieces around him, Lee was at last forced to surrender. To this end he
met Grant, on April 9th, at a residence near Appomattox Court House.

The personal appearance of the two generals at this interview presented
a striking, not to say ludicrous, contrast. Lee, who was a tall,
handsome man, was attired in a new uniform, showing all the insignia of
his rank, with a splendid dress-sword at his side. Grant, wholly
unprepared for the interview, wore a private's uniform, covered with mud
and dust from hard riding that day. His shoulder-straps were the only
mark of his high rank, and he had no sword. Having served together in
the Mexican War, they spent some time in a friendly conversation about
those old scenes. Grant then wrote out the terms of surrender, which Lee
accepted. The troops were to give their paroles not to take up arms
again until properly exchanged, and officers might retain their
side-arms, private horses, and baggage. Anxious to heal the wounds of
the South, Grant, with rare thoughtfulness, allowed privates also to
take home their own horses. "They will need them for the spring
ploughing," he said. The 19,000 prisoners captured during the last ten
days, together with deserters, left, in Lee's once magnificent army, but
28,356 soldiers to be paroled. The surrendering general was compelled to
ask 25,000 rations for these famished troops, a request which was
cheerfully granted.


[Illustration: Grant and eleven other officers watching Lee sign.]
General Lee Signing the Terms of Surrender at Appomattox Court-House.


While all loyal hearts were rejoicing over the news of Lee's surrender,
recognized as virtually ending the war, a pall suddenly fell upon the
land. On the evening of April 14th, while President Lincoln was sitting
in a box at Ford's Theatre in Washington, an actor, John Wilkes Booth,
crept up behind him, placed a pistol to his head, and fired. Brandishing
his weapon, and crying, "Sic semper tyrannis," the assassin leaped to
the stage, sustaining a severe injury. Regaining his feet, he shouted,
"The South is avenged!" and made his escape.

The bullet had pierced the President's brain and rendered him
insensible. He was removed to a house near by, where he died next
morning. His body was taken to Springfield, Ill., for burial, and a
nation mourned above his grave, as no American since Washington had ever
been mourned for before. The South repudiated and deplored the foul
deed. Well it might, for, had Lincoln lived, much of its sorrow during
the next years would have been avoided.

Booth was only one of a band of conspirators who had intended also to
take off General Grant and the whole Cabinet. By a strange good fortune
Secretary Seward, sick in bed, was the only victim besides the
President. He was stabbed three times with a bowie-knife, but not
fatally. After a cunning flight and brave defence Booth was captured
near Port Royal, and killed. Of the other conspirators some were hanged,
some imprisoned.

The Confederacy collapsed. Johnston's army surrendered to Sherman on
April 26th. President Davis fled south. On May 10th he was captured in
Georgia, muffled in a lady's cloak and shawl, and became a prisoner at
Fortress Monroe. The war had called into military (land) service in the
two armies together hardly fewer than 4,000,000 men; 2,750,000, in round
numbers, on the Union side, and 1,250,000 on the other. The largest
number of northern soldiers in actual service at anyone time was
1,000,516, on May 1, 1865, 650,000 of them being able for duty. The
largest number of Confederate land forces in service at any time was
690,000, on January 1, 1863. The Union armies lost by death
304,369--44,238 of these being killed in battle, 49,205 dying of wounds.
Over 26,000 are known to have died in Confederate prisons.



CHAPTER IX.

THE WAR ON THE SEA

[1861]

Naval operations during the war fall into three great classes: Those
upon inland waters, the Mississippi especially; those along the coast;
and those upon the high seas. The first class has already been touched
upon in connection with the Mississippi campaigns. The naval work along
the coast and upon the high seas is the subject of the present chapter.
Only the more important features can be sketched. At the outbreak of the
Rebellion our navy was totally unprepared for war. Forty-two vessels
were in commission, but most of them were in distant seas or in southern
ports. The service was weak with secession sentiment. Between March and
July, 1861, 259 naval officers resigned or were dismissed.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Gideon Welles.


Secretary Welles went energetically to work. Vessels in foreign waters
were called home, the keels of new craft laid in northern dockyards, and
stout merchant ships bought and fitted up for the rough usage of war. By
the end of 1861 the navy numbered 264 vessels. At the close of the war
it had 671 ships, carrying 4,610 guns and 50,000 sailors.

The first work--a gigantic one--was to blockade the southern ports. This
involved the constant patrolling of more than 3,000 miles of dangerous
coast, indented with innumerable inlets, sounds, and bays. But within a
year a fairly effective blockade was in force from Virginia to Texas,
drawn tighter and tighter as the navy increased in size. The
effectiveness of the blockade is sufficiently proved by the dearth at
the South. The South had cotton enough to sell--$300,000,000 worth in
gold at the end of the war--and Europe was greedy to buy; but she could
not get her wares to market. Fifteen hundred prizes, worth $30,000,000,
were taken during the war.

The details of the blockade must be left to the reader's imagination.
Important as the work was, it was comparatively monotonous and
dull--ceaseless watching day and night in all weather, week after week
and month after month. Now and then the routine would be broken by the
excitement of a chase. A suspicious-looking sail would be spied in the
offing and pursued, perhaps, far out to sea. Again, the low hull of a
blockade-runner would be seen creeping around a point and heading for
the open sea. Or on a still night the throb of engines and the splash of
paddle-wheels would give warning that some guilty vessel was trying to
steal into port under cover of darkness. Then came the flare of rockets
to notify the rest of the blockading fleet, the hot pursuit with boilers
crowded to bursting, the boom of the big guns fired at random in the
dark, and the exultation of a capture or the disappointment of failure.

Blockade-running became a regular business, enormously profitable.
Moonless and cloudy nights were of course the most favorable times for
eluding the blockade; but the swift steamers, sitting low in the water
and painted a light neutral tint, could not easily be detected by day at
a little distance, especially as they burned smokeless coal. The bolder
skippers would take all chances. Under cover of a fog they would steal
into or out of harbor at risk of going aground, or set sail boldly on a
bright moonlight night, when the blockaders would naturally relax their
vigilance a little. Occasionally some dare-devil would crowd on all
steam and dash openly through the sentinel fleet, trusting to speed to
escape being hit or captured. When hard pressed, the blockade-runner
would beach his craft, set it afire, and take to the woods. At the close
of the war thirty wrecks of blockade-runners were rotting on the sands
near Charleston Harbor.

In connection with the blockade a number of naval expeditions were sent
against various points along the coast. In October, 1861, a fleet under
Flag-Officer Dupont, consisting of a steam frigate, a dozen or more
gunboats, with numerous transports and coaling-schooners, and carrying
12,000 troops under General T. W. Sherman, set sail from Hampton Roads
for Port Royal, S. C. After a stormy passage the fleet anchored off the
harbor on November 4th. On opposite sides of the entrance, two and a
half miles apart, stood Forts Walker and Beauregard--strong earthworks,
mounting one 23 the other 20 guns, and garrisoned by 1,700 men. The 7th
dawned bright and clear, the sea smooth as glass. About nine o'clock the
bombardment began. The fleet steamed slowly round and round in an
ellipse between the forts, each vessel as it came within range pouring
in its fire, then passing on and waiting its turn to fire again. The
cannonade was concentrated upon Fort Walker. The moving ships offered a
poor mark to the fort, while the aim of the fleet was very accurate,
covering the gunners with sand and dismounting the guns. After four
hours' action Fort Walker was evacuated, and soon Fort Beauregard also
in consequence.


[Illustration: Map.]
Map of Hampton Roads.


Port Royal was the finest harbor on the coast, and was of great value to
the navy all through the war as a repair and supply station. Dupont sent
out expeditions, and by the end of the year had possession of a large
part of the coast of South Carolina and Georgia. In the following spring
expeditions from Port Royal regained Fernandina and St. Augustine on the
Florida coast. In April Fort Pulaski, a strong brick work at the mouth
of the Savannah River, was reduced by eleven batteries planted on a
neighboring island, its surrender completing the blockade of Savannah.

[1862]

Albemarle and Pamlico Sounds, on the coast of North Carolina, swarmed
with blockade-runners. Rivers, canals, and railroads formed a network of
communications with the interior, and vessels were constantly slipping
to sea with cargoes of cotton, to return with munitions of war. Hatteras
Inlet, seized in August, 1861, was not a sufficient basis for the
blockade. In February, 1862, a fleet bearing 11,500 soldiers, under
General Burnside, arrived at Roanoke Island, which lies between the two
great sounds. The troops were landed, and on the 8th, charging over
marshy ground, sometimes waist-deep in water, carried the batteries and
gained possession of the island. Newbern, one of the most important
ports of North Carolina, was captured a month later, and Fort Macon,
commanding the entrance to Beaufort Harbor, surrendered in April.

Meanwhile what had the Confederates been doing in naval matters? When
the Norfolk navy-yard was abandoned in April, 1861, the fine old frigate
Merrimac was scuttled. She was raised by the Davis Government and
converted into an ironclad ram--a novelty in those days. The hull was
cut down to the water's edge, and a stout roof, 170 feet long, with
sloping sides and a flat top, built amidships and plated with four
inches of iron. This roof was pierced for ten guns--four rifles and six
nine-inch smooth-bores.

On March 8, 1862, the Union fleet, consisting of the Cumberland,
Congress, Minnesota, and some smaller craft, rode lazily at anchor in
Hampton Roads. About noon a curious looking structure was seen coming
down Elizabeth River. It was the Merrimac. She steered straight for the
Cumberland. The latter poured in a broadside from her heavy ten-inch
guns, but the balls glanced off the ram's sloping iron sides like peas.
The Merrimac's iron beak crashed into the Cumberland's side, making a
great hole. In a few minutes the old warsloop, working her guns to the
water's edge, went down in fifty-four feet of water, 120 sick and
wounded sinking with her.


[Illustration: Sea battle a close quarters.]
The Sinking of the Frigate Cumberland by the Merrimac in Hampton Roads,
March 8, 1862.


The Congress had meanwhile been run aground. The Merrimac fired hot
shot, setting her afire. Nearly half the crew being killed or wounded,
she surrendered, her magazine exploding and blowing her up at midnight.
The Minnesota, hastening up with two other vessels from Fortress Monroe
to aid her sisters, had run aground. Being of heavy draught, the
Merrimac could not get near enough to do her much damage, and at
nightfall steamed back to her landing. As the telegraph that night
flashed over the land the news of the Merrimac's victory, dismay filled
the North, exultation the South. What was to stay the career of the
invulnerable monster? Could it not destroy the whole United States navy
of wooden ships?

Next morning the Merrimac reappeared to complete her work of
destruction. As she drew near the stranded Minnesota, a strange little
craft moved out from the side of the big frigate and headed straight for
the iron-clad. It was Ericsson's Monitor, which had arrived from New
York at midnight. The Confederate characterization of it as a "cheese-box
on a raft" is still the best description of its appearance. Its
lower hull, 122 feet long and 34 wide, was protected by a raft-like
overhanging upper hull, 172 feet long and 41 wide. Midway upon her low
deck, which rose only a foot above the water, stood a revolving turret
21 feet in diameter and nine in height. It was made of iron eight inches
thick, and bore two eleven-inch guns throwing each a 180-pound ball.
Near the bow rose the pilot-house, made of iron logs nine inches by
twelve in thickness. The side armor of the hull was five inches thick,
and the deck was covered with heavy iron plates.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
John Ericsson.


[Illustration: Cross section of monitor.]
Sectional View of Monitor through Turret and Pilot House.

[1863]

For three hours the iron-clads fought. The Merrimac's shot glanced
harmlessly off the round turret, while her attempts to run the Monitor
down failed. Meanwhile the big guns in the Monitor's turret, firing
every seven minutes, were pounding the ram's sides with terrible blows.
The Merrimac's armor was at points crushed in several inches, but
nowhere pierced, About noon the fight stopped, as if by mutual consent.
It was a drawn battle, but the career of the Merrimac had ended. Upon
McClellan's advance, in May, she was blown up. The Monitor received no
serious injury in this action, but the next December she foundered in a
storm off Cape Hatteras.

The invention of the Monitor revolutionized naval warfare, and set
European nations to building the ponderous iron-clad navies of the
present day. The United States Government soon contracted for twenty
single-turret monitors, and four double-turreted ones with fifteen-inch
guns.

The Confederates now went to building iron-clads on the model of the
Merrimac. On the morning of January 31, 1863, the iron-clads Palmetto
State and Chicora steamed out of Charleston Harbor, in a dense fog, and
attacked the blockading fleet of wooden vessels. After ramming one ship
and sending a shot through the boiler of another, they put back to port.

In April, Admiral Dupont tried to seize Charleston Harbor with his fleet
of seven monitors and two iron-clads. In a two hours' action the
monitors were seriously injured by the heavy guns of the forts, and the
fleet withdrew. In August, land batteries reduced Fort Sumter almost to
ruins, and in the following month Fort Wagner was abandoned. June 17th,
the iron-clad Atlanta, armed with a torpedo at the end of a spar, ran
down from Savannah to engage with two monitors guarding the mouth of the
river. She got aground, rendering the torpedo useless. The fifteen-inch
guns of the monitors pierced her armor, and in a few minutes she
surrendered.

[1884]

The Albemarle proved a more dangerous foe. The last of April, 1864, it
descended Roanoke River, smashed the gunboats at the mouth, and
compelled the surrender of the forts and the town of Plymouth. A few
days later it attacked a fleet of gunboats below the mouth of the river.
After a severe tussle, inflicting and receiving considerable damage, it
steamed back to Plymouth. Here it lay at the wharf till October, when it
was sunk by Lieutenant Cushing, already famous for daring exploits under
the very noses of the enemy. On the night of October 27th, young Cushing
approached the ironclad in a steam launch with a torpedo at the end of a
spar projecting from the bow. Jumping his boat over the log boom
surrounding the ram, in the thick of musketry fire from deck and shore,
Cushing calmly worked the strings by which the intricate torpedo was
fired. It exploded under the vessel's overhang, and she soon sunk. At
the moment of the explosion a cannonball crashed through the launch.
Cushing plunged into the river and swam to shore through a shower of
bullets. After crawling through the swamps next day, be found a skiff
and paddled off to the fleet. Of the launch's crew of fourteen, only one
other escaped.


[Illustration: Outside view.]
The Original Monitor.


The stronghold of the Confederacy on the Gulf was Mobile. Two strong
forts, mounting twenty-seven and forty-seven guns, guarded the channel
below the city, which was further defended by spiles and torpedoes. In
the harbor, August 5, 1864, lay the iron-clad ram, Tennessee, and three
gunboats, commanded by Admiral Buchanan, formerly captain of the
Merrimac. Farragut determined to force a passage. Before six o'clock in
the morning his fleet of four monitors and fourteen wooden ships, the
latter lashed together two and two, got under way, Farragut taking his
station in the main rigging of the Hartford. The action opened about
seven. One of the monitors struck a torpedo and sunk. The Brooklyn,
which was leading, turned back to go around what seemed to be a nest of
torpedoes. The whole line was in danger of being huddled together under
the fire of the forts. Farragut boldly took the lead, and the fleet
followed. The torpedo cases could be heard rapping against the ships'
bottoms, but none exploded.

The forts being safely passed, the Confederate gunboats advanced to the
attack. One of these was captured, the other two escaped. The powerful
iron-clad Tennessee now moved down upon the Union fleet. It was 209 feet
long, with armor from five to six inches thick. Farragut ordered his
wooden vessels to run her down. Three succeeded in ramming her squarely.
She reeled under the tremendous blows, and her gunners could not keep
their feet. A monitor sent a fifteen-inch ball through her stern. Her
smoke-stack and steering-chains were shot away, and several port
shutters jammed. About ten A.M., after an action of an hour and a
quarter, the ram hoisted the white flag. The forts surrendered in a few
days.

January 15, 1865, Fort Fisher, a strong work near Wilmington, N. C,
mounting seventy-five guns, was captured by a joint land and naval
expedition under General Terry and Admiral Porter. This was the last
great engagement along the coast.

The story of the war upon the high seas is quickly told. Swift and
powerful cruisers were built in English ship-yards, with the connivance
of the British Government, whence they sailed to prey upon our commerce.
The Florida, Georgia, Shenandoah, Chameleon, and Tallahassee, were some
of the most famous in the list of Confederate cruisers. During 1861,
fifty-eight prizes were taken by them. American merchant vessels were
driven from the sea. The Shenandoah alone destroyed over $6,000,000
worth in vessels and cargoes.

[1862]

The two most celebrated of these sea-rovers were the Sumter and the
Alabama, both commanded by Captain Semmes, formerly of the United States
Navy. The Sumter was a screw steamer of 600 tons, a good sailer and
sea-boat. She was bought by the Confederate Government and armed with a
few heavy guns. On June 30, 1861, she ran the blockade at Charleston,
and began scouring the seas. All through the fall she prowled about the
Atlantic, taking seventeen prizes, most of which were burned. Many
United States cruisers were sent after her, but she eluded or escaped
them all. Early in 1862 the Sumter entered the port of Gibraltar. Here
she was blockaded by two Union gunboats, and Semmes finally sold her to
take command of the Alabama.

The Alabama was built expressly for the Confederacy at Laird's
ship-yard, Liverpool, and although her character was perfectly well
known, the British Government permitted her to go to sea. She was taken
to one of the Azores Islands, where she received her armament and her
captain. The officers were Confederates, the crew British. She began her
destructive career in August, 1862. By the last of October she had taken
twenty-seven prizes. In January she sunk the gunboat Hatteras, one of
the blockading fleet off Galveston, Tex. After cruising in all seas, the
Alabama, in 1864, returned to the European coast, having captured
sixty-five vessels and destroyed property worth between $6,000,000 and
$7,000,000.

[1864]

On June 11th, Semmes put into the harbor of Cherbourg, on the coast of
France. Captain Winslow, commanding the United States steamer Kearsarge,
cruising in the neighborhood, heard of the famous rover's arrival, and
took his station outside the harbor. About ten o'clock on the morning of
June 19, 1864, the Alabama was seen coming out of port, attended by a
French man-of-war and an English steam yacht. Captain Winslow
immediately cleared the decks for action. It was a clear, bright day,
with a smooth sea. The fight took place about seven miles from shore.
The two ships were pretty equally matched, each being of about 1,000
tons burden. The Kearsarge had the heavier smooth-bore guns, but the
Alabama carried a 100-pound Blakely rifle. The Kearsarge was protected
amidships by chain cables.

The Alabama opened the engagement. The Kearsarge replied with a cool and
accurate fire. The action soon grew spirited. Solid shot ricochetted
over the smooth water. Shells crashed against the sides or exploded on
deck. The two ships sailed round and round a common centre, keeping
about half a mile apart. In less than an hour the Alabama was terribly
shattered and began to sink. She tried to escape, but water put out her
engine fires. Semmes hoisted the white flag. In a few minutes the
Alabama went down, her bow rising high in the air. Boats from the
Kearsarge rescued some of the crew. The English yacht picked up others,
Semmes among them, thus running off with Winslow's prisoners. The
Kearsarge had received little damage.


[Illustration]
The Sinking of the Alabama.


The sinking of the Alabama ended the career of the Confederate cruisers.
American commerce had been nearly driven from the ocean, and, moreover,
the days of peace on land and sea alike were near at hand.



CHAPTER X.

FOREIGN RELATIONS--FINANCES--EMANCIPATION

[1861]

A civil war of vast proportions in the world's greatest republic
naturally aroused deep interest among the monarchies of Europe. Russia
evinced warm friendliness to the United States. The rest of the world,
save England and France, showed us no ill-will.

England, with unfriendly haste, admitted the belligerent rights of the
Confederacy before Mr. Adams, our minister, could reach the British
court. The North was surprised and shocked that liberty-loving,
conservative England should so far side with "rebellious slave-holders."
It would seem that, besides sympathy with the aristocratic structure of
southern society, national envy helped to put England into this false
position. Commercial interests had greater weight. Four millions of
people in England depended upon cotton manufactures for support.
Three-fourths of the cotton they had used came from our southern ports,
which the blockade closed. Moreover, the Confederacy declared for free
trade, while the North adopted a high war tariff which drove many
English goods out of American markets. The London Times complained that
nearly $4,000,000 worth of English cutlery alone had been made worthless
by our tariff.

An incident early in the war heightened the ill-will between the two
countries. On a dark night in October, 1861, Messrs. Mason and Slidell,
Confederate commissioners to England and France, ran the blockade at
Charleston, and soon after took passage at Havana on the English mail
steamer Trent. November 8th, 250 miles out from Havana, the United
States sloop of war San Jacinto, Captain Wilkes, compelled the Trent, by
a shot across her bows, to heave to, and took off the commissioners.

All England was hot with resentment. Troops were shipped to Canada, and
other war preparations begun. A special messenger was hurried to
Washington, demanding an apology and the release of the prisoners.
Wilkes's action, though without authority in international law, was
warmly approved by the people. The House of Representatives tendered him
a vote of thanks. But the Government disavowed the seizure and gave up
the commissioners. Mr. Seward, Secretary of State, in a dignified reply
to England, insisted that the seizure was fully justified by England's
own practice of searching neutral vessels on the high seas; but that, as
the United States had always condemned this practice, the prisoners
would be released, especially as Captain Wilkes should have brought the
Trent before a prize court instead of deciding the validity of the prize
himself. The action of the Government, though unpopular at the time, was
undoubtedly as prudent as it was just. We could not afford to provoke
war with England.


[Illustration: Rowboats filled with soldier approaching city docks.]
The Landing of the Allied Troops at Vera Cruz.


Our real grievance against Great Britain was that the Queen's
proclamation of neutrality was not obeyed. Confederate cruisers were
built in English yards, whence they publicly and boastfully sailed to
prey upon our then vast merchant marine. Crews as well as ships were
English. The British ministry were perfectly aware of their destination,
but used all manner of artifices to avoid interfering.

Our most vicious enemy abroad was Napoleon III., so profuse yet so
hypocritical in his professions of good-will. He, too, hastened to
accord belligerent rights to the Confederacy. Had England not been too
wary to join him, the two nations would certainly have recognized the
South's independence. Napoleon was on the point of doing this alone.
Seven war-vessels were, with his sanction, built for the Confederates at
Bordeaux and Nantes, though he was too wily to allow them to sail when
he became aware that their destination was fully known to our minister.

Far-reaching political schemes were at the bottom of Napoleon's wish for
a dismembered Union. He was plotting to restore European influence in
America by setting up an empire on the ruins of the Mexican republic,
and he knew that the United States would never allow this while her
power was unbroken. In the latter part of 1861 a French army invaded
Mexico. The feeble government was overthrown after a year or two of
fighting. In 1863 an empire was established, and Napoleon offered the
throne to the Austrian archduke Maximilian. Meanwhile, the protests of
the United States were disregarded. But when our hands were freed by the
collapse of the Confederacy, Napoleon changed his tone. The French
troops were withdrawn early in 1867, and Maximilian was left to his
fate. The unhappy prince, betrayed by his own general, fell into the
hands of the old Mexican Government, now in the ascendant, and was tried
by court-martial and shot. It should be remembered, however, that
France's unfriendly attitude all through the Rebellion was maintained by
her unscrupulous emperor and did not reflect the wish of the French
people.

The expenses of the war were colossal. From beginning to close they
averaged $2,000,000 a day, sometimes running up to $3,500,000. The
expenditure for the fiscal year ending July 1, 1865, was nearly
$2,000,000,000. Of this the War Department required, in round numbers,
$1,000, 000,000; the navy department, $123,000,000. These figures reveal
the vast scale upon which the war was waged by land and sea. The
national debt rose with frightful rapidity. It was $64,000,000 in 1860,
$1,100,000,000 in 1863, $2,800,000,000 (the highest point reached) in
1865. State and local war debts would swell the amount to more than
$4,000,000,000.

The position of Secretary of the Treasury during the war was anything
but a bed of roses. The ordinary national income was hardly a drop in
the bucket compared with the enormous and constantly increasing
expenses. The total receipts for the year ending July 1, 1860, were only
$81,000,000. How should the vast sums needed to carryon the war be
raised? Resort was had to two sources of revenue--taxation and loans.

A considerable revenue was already derived from customs imposed upon
imported goods. In 1861, and again in 1863, tariffs were raised
enormously, professedly to increase the revenue. These high rates in a
measure defeated their own purpose, altogether stopping the importation
of not a few articles.

The war compelled the Government to resort to internal taxation--always
unpopular and now unknown in the United States for nearly half a
century. Taxes were laid upon almost everything--upon trades, incomes,
legacies, manufactures. The words of Sydney Smith will apply to our
internal taxes during the war:

"Taxes on the ermine which decorates the judge, and the rope which hangs
the criminal; on the poor man's salt and the rich man's spice; on the
brass nails of the coffin and the ribands of the bride." The tax on many
finished products ranged from eight to fifteen per cent.; on some it
rose to twenty per cent.


[Illustration: Two men looking out a window.]
Maximilian Watching the Departure of the
Last French Troops from the City of Mexico.

[1864]

But these taxes, severe as they were, could furnish only a small part of
the necessary income. The Government must borrow. In the first year of
the war the banks loaned the United States $150,000,000 at 7.3 per cent.
interest. Many other loans were secured as the war went on--one for
$500,000,000, another for $900,000,000. As security the Government
issued bonds, bearing various rates of interest and payable after a
certain number of years. Treasury notes were also issued and made legal
tender for all debts public and private. As the Government paid its own
debts with them, they were in the nature of a forced loan. Of those
which bore no interest (commonly known as greenbacks) $433,000,000 were
issued from first to last. Also, when property was seized for the use of
the army, the owners were given certificates of indebtedness which
entitled the holders to payment at the United States Treasury.

The proportion of revenue derived from each of the above sources is
illustrated by the report of the treasurer of the United States for the
year ending July 1, 1865. Customs yielded $85,000,000, internal revenue
$209,000,000, loans $1,470,000,000.

Finance legislation during the war was more patriotic than wise, due
partly to necessary haste, largely to ignorance. The internal taxes bore
very unequally upon different classes. The tariff was ill-adjusted to
the internal taxes, letting in at low rates some classes of goods whose
home production was heavily taxed, thus discriminating in favor of the
foreigner. Millions of debt and half the other economic evil of the war
might have been saved by doing more to keep the paper dollar on a par
with gold. Thus the banks should not have been compelled to pay in gold
the loan of 1861. It forced them to suspend specie payment altogether,
December 31st of that year--those of New York City first, followed by
others everywhere, and by the United States itself. Gold had been at a
nominal premium all through 1861, but the first recorded sale at an
advance was on January 13, 1862. It would have been better, also, to
resort earlier to heavy loans, even at high rates, instead of flooding
the country with greenbacks. The national banks, which were created on
purpose to help the sale of government bonds, should have been forced to
purchase new bonds instead of supplying themselves with bonds already
issued, their purchase of which did the Government no good whatever.
Neglect in these regards caused the paper dollar to fall in value. In
July, 1864, it was worth only thirty-five cents in gold.

The finances of the Confederacy went steadily from bad to worse. The
blockade cut off its revenue from import duties. Its poor credit forbade
large loans. The government had to rely mainly upon paper money. This
soon became almost worthless. In December, 1861, it took $120 in paper
money to buy $100 in gold; in 1863 it took $1,900; in 1864, $5,000.
Nearly $1,000,000,000 in paper money was issued in all. The Confederate
debt at the close of the war was $2,000,000,000. Under the combined
influence of depreciated currency and scarcity of goods, prices became
ludicrously high. As early as 1862 flour was $40 a barrel and salt $1 a
pound. Before the war was over, a pound of sugar brought $75, a spool of
thread $20. Toward the end of the war a Confederate soldier, just paid
off, went into a store to buy a pair of boots. The price was $200. He
handed the store-keeper a $500 bill. "I can't change this," "Oh, never
mind," replied the paper millionaire. "I never let a little matter like
$300 interfere with a trade." Of course when the Confederacy collapsed
all this paper money became absolutely worthless.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Salmon Portland Chase,
Secretary of the Treasury during the Civil War.


Mr. Lincoln and the Republican Party resorted to arms not intending the
slightest alteration in the constitutional status of slavery. But the
presence of Union armies on slave soil led to new and puzzling
questions. What should be done with slaves escaping to the Union lines?
Generals Buell and Hooker authorized slave-holders to search their camps
for runaway slaves. Halleck gave orders to drive them out of his lines.
Butler, alleging that since slaves helped "the rebels" by constructing
fortifications they were contraband of war, refused to return those
fleeing into his camp. Congress moved up to this position in August,
1861, declaring that slaves used for hostile purposes should be
confiscated. But when Fremont and Hunter issued orders freeing slaves in
their military districts, President Lincoln felt obliged to countermand
them, fearing the effect upon slave States that were still loyal.

As the war went on the conviction grew that peace would never be safe or
permanent if slavery remained, and that the suppression of the Rebellion
was postponed, jeopardized, and made costlier by every hour of slavery's
life. Slaves raised crops, did camp work, and built fortifications,
releasing so many more whites for service in hostile ranks, instead of
doing all this, and fighting, even, for the Union.

It is interesting to trace the growth of emancipation sentiment during
1862 as it is reflected in congressional legislation.  In March army
officers were forbidden to return fugitive slaves. In April slavery was
abolished in the District of Columbia, with compensation to owners. At
the same time Congress adopted a pet scheme of Mr. Lincoln's, offering
compensation to any State that would free its slaves. None accepted.
There were about 3,000 slaves in the District. Upon the day of their
emancipation they assembled in churches and gave thanks to God. In June
slavery in the Territories--that bone of contention through so many
years--was forever prohibited. In July an act was passed freeing rebels'
slaves coming under the Government's protection, and authorizing the use
of negro soldiers.

[1863]

Already President Lincoln was meditating universal emancipation.
September 22d the friends of liberty were made glad by a preliminary
proclamation, announcing the President's intention to free the slaves on
January 1, 1863, should rebellion then continue to exist. It is said
that Mr. Lincoln would have given this notice earlier but for the gloomy
state of military affairs. The day comes. The proclamation goes forth
that all persons held as slaves in the rebellious sections "are and
henceforth shall be free." The blot which had so long stained our
national banner was wiped away. The Constitution of course does not
expressly authorize such an act by the President, but Mr. Lincoln
defended it as a "necessary war measure," "warranted by the Constitution
upon military necessity."

This bold, epoch-making deed, the death-warrant of slavery here and
throughout the world, evoked serious hostility even at the North. The
elections in the fall of 1862 and the spring of 1863 showed serious
losses for the administration party. Emancipation, too, doubtless added
rancor and verve for a time to southern belligerency. But the fresh
union, spirit, and strength it soon brought to the northern cause were
tenfold compensation. Besides, it vastly exalted our struggle in the
moral estimate of Christendom, and lessened danger of foreign
intervention.

The War President trod at no time a path of flowers. Strong and general
as was Union sentiment at the North, extremely diverse feelings and
views prevailed touching the methods and spirit which should govern the
conduct of the war. Certain timid, discouraged, or disappointed
Republicans, seeing the appalling loss of blood and treasure as the war
went on, and the Confederacy's unexpected tenacity of life, demanded
peace on the easiest terms inclusive of intact Union. Secretaries Seward
and Chase were for a time in this temper. The doctrinaire abolitionists
bitterly assailed President and Congress for not making, from the
outset, the extirpation of slavery the main aim of hostilities. Even the
great emancipation pacified them but little.

The Democrats proper entered a far more sensible, in fact a not wholly
groundless, complaint exactly the contrary. They charged that the
Administration, in hopes to exhibit the Democracy as a peace party
(which from 1862 it more and more became), was making the overthrow of
slavery its main aim, waging war for the negro instead of for the Union.
They complained also that not only in anti-slavery measures but in other
things as well, notably in suspending habeas corpus, the Administration
was grievously infringing the Constitution.

Yet a fourth class, a democratic rump of southern sympathizers,
popularly called "copperheads," wishing peace at any price, did their
best to encourage the Rebellion .. They denounced the war as cruel,
needless, and a failure. They opposed the draft for troops, and were
partly responsible for the draft riots in 1863. Many of them were in
league with southern leaders, and held membership in treasonable
associations. Some were privy to, if not participants in, devilish plots
to spread fire and pestilence in northern camps and cities, Partly
through influence of the more moderate, several efforts to negotiate
peace were made, fortunately every one in vain.

[1864]

But despite the attacks of enemies and the importunities of weak or
short-sighted friends, President Lincoln steadily held on his course.
The masses of the people rallied to his support, and in the presidential
election of 1864 he was re-elected by an overwhelming majority,
receiving 212 electoral votes against 21 for General McClellan, the
democratic candidate.



CHAPTER XI.

RECONSTRUCTION

Though arms were grounded, there remained the new task, longer and more
perplexing, if not more difficult, than the first, of restoring the
South to its normal position in the Union. It was, from the nature of
the case, a delicate one. The proud and sensitive South smarted under
defeat and was not yet cured of the illusions which had led her to
secede. Salve and not salt needed to be rubbed in to her wounds. The
North stood ready to forgive the past, but insisted, in the name of its
desolate homes and slaughtered President, that the South must be
restored on such conditions that the past could never be repeated. The
difficulty was heightened by the lack of either constitutional provision
or historical precedent. Not strange, therefore, that the actors in this
new drama of reconstruction played their parts awkwardly and with many
mistakes.


[Illustration: Handwriting.]
Facsimile of a portion of President Lincoln's draft of the
Preliminary Proclamation of Emancipation, September. 1862
From the original in the Library of the State of New York, Albany.

[1865]

A most interesting constitutional problem had to be faced at the outset:
What effect had secession had upon the States guilty of it; was it or
was it not an act of state suicide? This question was warmly debated in
Congress and out. Although ridiculed in some quarters as a mere
metaphysical quibble, it lay at the bottom of men's political thinking
on reconstruction, and their views of the proper answer to it powerfully
influenced their action.

All loyal Democrats and most Republicans answered it in the negative.
Secession, they said, being an invalid act, had no effect whatever; the
rebellious tracts were still States of the Union in spite of themselves.
But the two parties reasoned their way to this conclusion by different
roads. The Democrats deduced the view from the State's intrinsic
sovereignty, the Republicans from the national Constitution as ordaining
"an indestructible Union of indestructible States." This class of
thinkers, in whichever party they were found, naturally preferred the
term "restoration" to "reconstruction."

The theory of state suicide was held by many, but with a difference.
Sumner and a few others deemed that secession had destroyed statehood
alone; that over individuals the Constitution still extended its
authority and its protection, as in Territories. Thaddeus Stevens and
his followers viewed secession as having left the State not only defunct
but a washed slate governmentally, like soil won by conquest. Both these
parties conceived the work before Congress to be out-and-out
"reconstruction," involving the right to change old state lines and
institutions at will. Not even this position was more ultra than the
course which reconstruction actually took.

Closely related to this main problem were several other questions nearly
or quite as vexing. Were any conditions to be imposed upon the peoples
seeking re-admission to the Union as States? If so, what, aside from the
loyalty of voters and officeholders, were these conditions? Was the
President to initiate and oversee the process of redintegration,
prescribing the conditions of re-admission, and determining when they
were fulfilled, or was all this the business of Congress? And, lastly,
did the right thus to oversee and impose conditions depend upon a
certain war power of Congress or of President, or upon the clause of the
Constitution which guarantees to every State a republican form of
government? Nearly the same question as this, in another form, would be,
Was this right explicitly constitutional or only impliedly so?

The answer practically returned to these difficult inquiries was that
Congress, as a quasi war right, must exact of the States lately in
secession all the conditions necessary, in its view, to their permanent
loyalty and the peace of the Union.

The history of reconstruction divides into three periods: Reconstruction
during the war, President Johnson's work, and Congressional
reconstruction.

Restoration was the universal thought at first. Congressional
resolutions in 1861 declared that the war was not waged "for the purpose
of overthrowing or interfering with the rights or established
institutions" of the seceding States. Their action was looked upon as an
insurrection against the state government as well as against the United
States. Accordingly, when a handful of Virginia loyalists, in the summer
of 1861, formed a state government and elected national senators and
representatives, President and Congress recognized them as the true
State of Virginia.

Following out the same idea, President Lincoln proclaimed in 1863 that
as soon as one-tenth of the voters of any seceded State would swear to
abide by the Constitution and the emancipation laws they might form a
state government. In this way Louisiana, Arkansas, and Tennessee were
reconstructed during 1863 and 1865.

The hand of the assassin removed Lincoln from the scene of action at a
time when North and South alike stood most in need of his kind heart,
tact, and firmness. Andrew Johnson succeeded to a task for which he was
ill-fitted. Conceited, obstinate, and pugnacious, he began by alarming
the South with threats of wholesale punishment for the "crime of
treason," and ended by alienating his own party through his slack
methods of re-establishing the States. Johnson declared, and no doubt
honestly, that he was carrying out Lincoln's ideas. In May, 1865, he
offered amnesty to all but certain excepted classes, mainly civil and
military leaders, upon condition of an oath to support the Constitution,
including its Thirteenth Amendment, forbidding slavery. Though the
proclamation declaring this to be in force did not issue till December
18, 1865, it had been approved by Congress the preceding February.

President Johnson then proceeded to reorganize the state governments.
For each seceded State, except the four already reconstructed, he
appointed a provincial governor. The governor called a State convention.
Only whites who had taken the amnesty oath could elect delegates, or
themselves be elected, to this convention. At the instance of the
President the convention adopted a constitution or legislation which
forbade slavery, declared the ordinance of secession null and void, and
repudiated the Confederate debt. The convention then appointed times and
places for the election of a legislature and a permanent governor. In a
few months the governmental machinery had been set in motion in all the
late Confederate States, and in December senators and representatives
from all except Texas were knocking at the doors of Congress.

Thus far the President had had full sway. But upon the re-assembling of
Congress in December, it became apparent that he and his party were not
in harmony. Congress, still overwhelmingly republican, refused to admit
the southern delegates, and appointed a committee to investigate the
condition of affairs in the southern States. Its report was anything but
re-assuring, and Congress, mainly under the lead of Thaddeus Stevens,
boldly proceeded to rip up the entire presidential work.

Several considerations led Congress to this course. They denied the
President's right, on his own sole authority, to re-establish permanent
governments in the States in question. Furthermore, the new state
governments were declared unlawful because their constitutions had not
been submitted to the people for ratification. Congress also maintained
that only the law-making power could of right determine the conditions
of re-admission to the Union, and judge whether or not those conditions
had been fulfilled.

But the consideration which outweighed all others in favor of the
congressional procedure was the alarming temper and acts of the South
itself. The Carolinas and Georgia had simply repealed the ordinance of
secession instead of declaring it null and void. The reconstructed
legislatures pensioned Confederate soldiers and their families.
"Notorious and unpardoned rebels" were elected as state officers and to
Congress.

Worse than this, nearly all the southern States passed laws which went
far toward reducing the blacks again to slavery. In Virginia, if a negro
broke his labor-contract, the employer could pursue him and compel him
to work an extra month, with chain and ball if necessary. In Mississippi
negro children who were orphans, or whose parents did not support them,
were to be apprenticed till they became of age. Their masters could
inflict upon them "moderate corporal punishment," and re-capture such as
ran away. In South Carolina any negro engaging in business had to pay
one hundred dollars yearly as a license. Mechanics were fined ten
dollars each a year for prosecuting their trades. No negro could settle
in the State without giving bonds for his good behavior and support. In
Louisiana a farm laborer was required to make a year's contract; if he
failed to work out the time, he could be punished by forced labor upon
public works. Not all the new southern legislation was of this savage
character, and this itself must be viewed in the light of the fact that
the negroes, trained in irresponsibility, were inclined to idleness and
theft. But it was nevertheless unjust. In some sections only the
interposition of the military and of the Freedman's Bureau made life
tolerable to the blacks.

[1866]

As an offset to the above dangerous acts and tendencies, Congress, in
the spring of 1866, passed the Fourteenth Amendment [footnote: Declared
in force July 28, 1868, having been ratified by three-fourths of the
States] and submitted it to the States for ratification. It was meant to
insure to negroes in every State all the rights of citizens and the
equal protection of the laws. If and so long as negroes were in any
State forbidden to vote, it reduced that State's representation in
Congress proportionally; it excluded from national and state offices
certain specified Confederate leaders; and it guarded the national debt,
repudiating all indebtedness on behalf of the Rebellion. Every secession
State but Tennessee rejected the amendment.

[1868]

Congress replied by the "iron law" of March 2, 1867. "Secessia" was
divided into five districts and placed under military rule, there to
remain until certain conditions were fulfilled. These conditions were,
in brief, the calling of a state convention by the loyal citizens,
blacks included; the framing by the convention of a constitution
enfranchising negroes; the ratification of this constitution by the
people and its approval by Congress; the ratification of the Fourteenth
Amendment by the new legislature. Having conformed to these
prescriptions the State might be represented in Congress and consider
itself fully restored to the Union. A supplementary law of March 19th
hastened the process by giving the district commanders surveillance of
registration and the initiative in calling conventions.

By June, 1868, a sufficient number of the southern States had complied
with the conditions to make the Fourteenth Amendment law. Virginia,
Mississippi, and Texas held out till 1870, and hence were forced to
ratify the Fifteenth Amendment also. Not till January 30, 1871, were all
the States again represented in both Houses of Congress as in 1860.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Edwin M. Stanton.


All through the days of congressional reconstruction the antagonism
between President and Congress steadily increased. Every step in the
progress encountered the President's uttermost opposition and spite. He
vetoed all important reconstruction measures, which were promptly
carried over his veto. There was much violent language and bitter
feeling on both sides. The irritation finally culminated when the House
entered articles of impeachment against Johnson--the only case of the
kind in our history involving a President. The charges were tried before
the Senate in March, 1868, the Chief Justice presiding, and occupied
three weeks. William M. Evarts was Johnson's counsel, and a glittering
array of legal talent appeared on both sides. The main charge was that
the President had wilfully violated the Tenure of Office Act in removing
Secretary Stanton from the Cabinet after the Senate had once refused to
concur in his removal. The House was hasty in bringing the prosecution.
The President was acquitted by a vote of 19 against and 35 for
impeachment--one vote less than the two-thirds necessary to impeach. The
Johnson-Congressional conflict proved one of the most mortifying
episodes in our country's history.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Ulysses S. Grant.



PERIOD V.

THE CEMENTED UNION

1868-1888

CHAPTER I.

POLITICAL HISTORY OF THE LAST TWO DECADES

[1868]

The presidential election of 1868 was decided at Appomattox. General
Grant was borne to the White House on a floodtide of popularity,
carrying twenty-six out of the thirty-four voting States. Schuyler
Colfax, of Indiana, became Vice-President. The Democrats had nominated
Horatio Seymour, of New York, and F. P. Blair, of Missouri.
Reconstruction was the great issue. The democratic platform demanded
universal amnesty and the immediate restoration of all the commonwealths
lately in secession, and insisted that the regulation of the franchise
should be left with States.

[1870]

The management of the South was the most serious problem before the new
administration. The whites were striving by fair means and foul to get
political power back into their own hands. The reconstructed state
governments, dependent upon black majorities, were too weak for
successful resistance. The Ku-Klux and similar organizations were
practically a masked army. The President was appealed to for military
aid, and he responded. Small detachments of United States troops hurried
hither and thither. Wherever they appeared resistance ceased; but when
fresh outbreaks elsewhere called the soldiers away, the fight against
the hated state government was immediately renewed. The negroes soon
learned to stay at home on election day, and the whites, once in the
saddle, were too skilful riders to be thrown.

[1872]

Congress, meanwhile, still strongly republican, was taking active
measures to protect the blacks. In 1870 it passed an act imposing fines
and damages for a conspiracy to deprive negroes of the suffrage. The
Force Act of 1871 was a much harsher measure. It empowered the President
to employ the army, navy, and militia to suppress combinations which
deprived the negro of the rights guaranteed him by the Fourteenth
Amendment. For such combinations to appear in arms was made rebellion
against the United States, and the President might suspend habeas corpus
in the rebellious district. By President Grant, in the fall of 1871,
this was actually done in parts of the Carolinas. State registrations
and elections were to be supervised by United States marshals, who could
command the help of the United States military or naval forces.

The Force Act outran popular feeling. It came dangerously near the
practical suspension of state government in the South, and many at the
North, including some Republicans, thought the latter result a greater
evil than even the temporary abeyance of negro suffrage. The "Liberal
Republicans" bolted. In 1872 they nominated Horace Greeley for the
Presidency, and adopted a platform declaring local self-government a
better safeguard for the rights of all citizens than centralized power.
The platform also protested against the supremacy of the military over
the civil power and the suspension of habeas corpus, and favored
universal amnesty to men at the South. Charles Sumner, Stanley Matthews,
Carl Schurz, David A. Wells, and many other prominent Republicans
engaged in the opposition.

Thinking their opportunity had come, the Democrats indorsed the
Liberals' platform and nominees. The Republicans re-nominated Grant by
acclamation, and joined with him on the ticket Henry Wilson, of
Massachusetts.

As the campaign went on, the Greeley movement developed remarkable
strength and remarkable weakness. Speaking for years through the New
York Tribune, Mr. Greeley had won, in a remarkable degree, the respect
and even the affection of the country. His offer to give bail for
Jefferson Davis in his imprisonment, and his stanch advocacy of mercy to
all who had engaged in secession, so soon as they had grounded arms,
made him hosts of friends even in the South, He took the stump himself,
making the tour of Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Indiana, and crowds of
Republicans came to see and hear their former champion.

But the Democrats could not heartily unite in the support of such a
lifelong and bitter opponent of their party. Some supported a third
ticket, while many others did not vote at all. Mr. Greeley, too, an
ardent protectionist, was not popular with the influential free-trade
element among the Liberals themselves. The election resulted in a
sweeping victory for the republican ticket. The Democrats carried but
six States, and those were all in the South. Within a month after the
election, Mr. Greeley died, broken down by over-exertion, family
bereavement, and disappointed ambition.

[1874]

Troubles in the South continued during Grant's second term. The turmoil
reached its height in Louisiana in 1874. Ever since 1872 the whites in
that State had been chafing under republican rule. The election of
Governor Kellogg was disputed, and he was accused of having plunged the
State into ruinous debt. In August, 1874, a disturbance occurred which
ended in the deliberate shooting of six republican officials. President
Grant prepared to send military aid to the Kellogg government. Thereupon
Penn, the defeated candidate for Lieutenant-governor in 1872, issued an
address to the people, claiming to be the lawful executive of Louisiana,
and calling upon the state militia to arm and drive "the usurpers from
power." Barricades were thrown up in the streets of New Orleans, and on
September 14th a severe fight took place between the insurgents and the
state forces, in which a dozen were killed on each side. On the next day
the state-house was surrendered to the militia, ten thousand of whom
had responded to Penn's call. Governor Kellogg took refuge in the
custom-house. Penn was formally inducted into office. United States
troops were hurried to the scene. Agreeably to their professions of
loyalty toward the Federal Government, the insurgents surrendered the
state property to the United States authorities without resistance, but
under protest. The Kellogg government was re-instated.

[1875]

Troops at the polls secured quiet in the November elections. The
returning board decided that the Republicans had elected their governor
and fifty-four members of the legislature. Fifty-two members were
democratic, while the election of five members remained in doubt, and
was left to the decision of the legislature. The Democrats vehemently
protested against the decision of the returning board, claiming an
all-round victory. Fearing trouble at the assembling of the legislature
in January, 1875, President Grant placed General Sheridan in command at
New Orleans. The legislature met on January 4th. Our reports of what
followed are conflicting. The admitted facts are that the democratic
members, lawfully or unlawfully, placed a speaker in the chair. Some
disorder ensuing, United States soldiers were called in and, at the
request of the democratic speaker, restored quiet. The Republicans
meanwhile had left the house. The Democrats then elected members to fill
the five seats left vacant by the returning board. Later in the day,
United States troops, under orders from Governor Kellogg, to whom the
republican legislators had appealed, ejected the five new members. The
Republicans re-entered the house, and the Democrats thereupon withdrew.
Subsequently a congressional committee made unsuccessful attempts to
settle the dispute. The democratic members finally returned, and a
sullen acquiescence in the Kellogg government gradually prevailed.

[1876]

By 1876 every southern State was solidly democratic except Louisiana,
South Carolina, and Florida, and in these republican governments were
upheld only by the bayonet.

The presidential election of 1876 was a contest of general tendencies
rather than of definite principles. The opposing parties were more
nearly matched than they had been since 1860. The Democrats nominated
Samuel J. Tilden, of New York, and Thomas A. Hendricks, of Indiana.
Rutherford B. Hayes, of Ohio, and William A. Wheeler, of New York,
became the republican standard-bearers. The election passed off quietly,
troops being stationed at the polls in turbulent quarters. Mr. Tilden
carried New York, New Jersey, Indiana, and Connecticut. With a solid
South, he had won the day. But the returning boards of Louisiana,
Florida, and South Carolina, throwing out the votes of several
democratic districts on the ground of fraud or intimidation, decided
that those States had gone republican, giving Hayes a majority of one in
the electoral college. The Democrats raised the cry of fraud. Suppressed
excitement pervaded the country. Threats were even muttered that Hayes
would never be inaugurated. President Grant quietly strengthened the
military force in and about Washington. The country looked to Congress
for a peaceful solution of the problem, and not in vain.

The Constitution provides that "the President of the Senate shall, in
presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the
[electoral] certificates, and the votes shall then be counted." Certain
Republicans held that the power to count the votes lay with the
President of the Senate, the House and Senate being mere spectators. The
Democrats naturally objected to this construction, since Mr. Ferry, the
republican president of the Senate, could then count the votes of the
disputed States for Hayes.

The Democrats insisted that Congress should continue the practice
followed since 1865, which was that no vote objected to should be
counted except by the concurrence of both houses. The House was strongly
democratic; by throwing out the vote of one State it could elect Tilden.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Samuel J. Tilden.
After a pastel by Sarony in the house at Gramercy Park.


[1877]

The deadlock could be broken only by a compromise. A joint committee
reported the famous Electoral Commission Bill, which passed House and
Senate by large majorities; 186 Democrats voting for the bill and 18
against it, while the republican vote stood 52 for and 75 against. The
bill created a commission of five senators, five representatives, and
five justices of the United States Supreme Court, the fifth justice
being chosen by the four appointed in the bill. Previous to this choice
the commission contained seven Democrats and seven Republicans. It was
expected that the fifth justice would be Hon. David Davis, of Illinois,
a neutral with democratic leanings; but his unexpected election as
democratic senator from his State caused Justice Bradley to be selected
to the post of decisive umpire. The votes of all disputed States were to
be submitted to the commission for decision.

It was drawing perilously near to inauguration day. The commission met
on the last day of January. The cases of Florida, Louisiana, Oregon, and
South Carolina were in succession submitted to it by Congress. Eminent
counsel appeared for each side. There were double sets of returns from
everyone of the States named. In the three southern States the governor
recognized by the United States had signed the republican certificates.
The democratic certificates from Florida were signed by the state
attorney-general and the new democratic governor; those from Louisiana
by the democratic gubernatorial candidate, who claimed to be the lawful
governor; those from South Carolina by no state official, the Tilden
electors simply claiming to have been chosen by the popular vote and
rejected by the returning board. In Oregon the democratic governor
declared one of the Hayes electors ineligible because an office-holder,
and gave a certificate to Cronin, the highest Tilden elector, instead.
The other two Hayes electors refused to recognize Cronin, and,
associating with them the rejected republican elector, presented a
certificate signed by the secretary of state. Cronin, appointing two new
electors to act with him, cast his vote for Tilden, his associates
voting for Hayes. This certificate was signed by the governor and
attested by the secretary of state.

After deciding not to go behind any returns which were prima facie
lawful, the commission, by a strict party vote of eight to seven, gave a
decision for the Hayes electors in every case. March 2d it adjourned,
and three days later Hayes was inaugurated without disturbance.

The whole country heaved a sigh of relief. All agreed that provision
must be made against such peril in the future; but it was not till late
in 1886 that Congress could agree upon the necessary measure. The
Electoral Count Bill was then passed, and signed by the President on
February 3, 1887. It aims to throw upon each State, so far as possible,
the responsibility of determining how its own presidential vote has been
cast. It provides that the President of the Senate shall open the
electoral certificates in the presence of both houses, and hand them to
the tellers, two from each house, who are to read them aloud and record
the votes.

If there has been no dispute as to the list of electors from a State,
such list, where certified in due form, is to be accepted as a matter of
course. In case of dispute, the procedure is as follows: If but one set
of returns appears and this is authenticated by a state electoral
tribunal constituted to settle the dispute, such returns shall be
conclusive. If there are two or more sets of returns, the set approved
by the state tribunal shall be accepted. If there are two rival
tribunals, the vote of the State shall be thrown out, unless both
houses, acting separately, agree upon the lawfulness of one tribunal or
the other. If there has been no decision by a tribunal, those votes
shall be counted which both houses, acting separately, decide to be
lawful. If the houses disagree, the votes certified to by the governor
shall be accepted.

[1880]

President Hayes's first important action was the withdrawal of troops
from South Carolina and Louisiana, where the rival governments existed
side by side. The republican governments at once fell to the ground. As
the Democrats had already got control in Florida, the "solid South" was
now an accomplished fact. Financial questions were those which chiefly
occupied the public mind during Hayes's administration. They are
referred to in Chapter VII., below.

Returning from a remarkable tour around the world, General Grant became
in 1880 a candidate for a third-term nomination. The deadlock in the
republican convention between him and Mr. Blaine was broken by the
nomination of James A. Garfield, of Ohio. Chester A. Arthur, of New
York, was the vice-presidential candidate. The Democrats nominated the
hero of Gettysburg, the brave and renowned General W. S. Hancock, of
Pennsylvania, and William H. English, of Indiana. Garfield was elected,
receiving 214 electoral votes against 155 for Hancock. Hancock carried
every southern State; Garfield every northern State except New Jersey,
Nevada, and California.

[1881]

President Garfield had hardly entered upon his high duties when he was
cut down by the hand of an assassin. On the morning of July 2, 1881, the
President entered the railway station at Washington, intending to take
an eastern trip. Charles J. Guiteau, a disappointed office-seeker, crept
up behind him and fired two bullets at him, one of which lodged in his
back. The President died on September 19th, after weeks of suffering.
Vice-President Arthur succeeded to the presidency, and had an uneventful
but respectable administration.

[1882]

Guiteau's trial began in November and lasted more than two months. The
defence was insanity. The assassin maintained that he was inspired to
commit the deed, and that it was a political necessity. The "stalwart"
Republicans, headed by Senator Conkling, had quarrelled with the
President over certain appointments unacceptable to the New York
senator; Guiteau pretended to think the removal of Mr. Garfield
necessary to the unity of the party and the salvation of the country.
The prosecution showed that Guiteau had long been an unprincipled
adventurer, greedy for notoriety; that he first conceived of killing the
President after his hopes of office were finally destroyed; and that he
had planned the murder several weeks in advance. Guiteau was found
guilty, and executed at Washington on June 30, 1882. The autopsy showed
no disease of the brain.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
James A. Garfield.
From a photograph by C. M. Bell, Washington, D. C.


[1881]

Although it had no logical connection with the "spoils" system, the
assassination of President Garfield called the attention of the whole
country to the crying need of reform in the civil service. Ever since
the days of President Jackson, in 1829, appointments to the minor
federal offices had been used for the payment of party debts and to keep
up partisan interest. This practice incurred the deep condemnation of
Webster, Clay, Calhoun, and others, but no practical steps toward reform
were taken till 1871. The abuses of the spoils system had then become so
flagrant that Congress created a civil service commission, which
instituted competitive examinations to test the merits of candidates for
office in the departments at Washington. President Grant reported that
the new methods "had given persons of superior capacity to the service'"
But Congress, always niggardly in its appropriations for the work of the
commission, after 1875 cut them off altogether, and the rules were
suspended.

Under President Hayes civil service reform made considerable progress in
an  irregular way. Secretary Schurz enforced competitive examinations in
the Interior department. They were also applied by Mr. James to the New
York Post-office, and, as the result, one-third more work was done with
less cost. Similar good results followed the enforcement of the "merit
system" in the New York custom-house after 1879. President Hayes also
strongly condemned political assessments upon office-holders, but with
small practical effect.

[1874]

The alarming increase of corruption in political circles generally,
after the war, helped to create popular sentiment for reform. Corrupt
"rings" sprang up in every city. The "whiskey ring," composed of
distillers and government employees, assumed national proportions in
1874, cheating the Government out of a large part of its revenue from
spirits. Liberal appropriations for building a navy were squandered.

During the campaign of 1872, the Democrats charged several prominent
Congressmen with having taken bribes, in 1867-68, to vote for
legislation desired by the Union Pacific Railroad. At the request of the
accused, an examination was had by a House committee. The committee's
report in 1873 recommended the expulsion of Representatives Oakes Ames
and James Brooks. Mr. Ames was accused of selling to Congressmen at
reduced rates, with intent to influence their votes, shares of stock in
the "Credit Mobilier," a corporation for the construction of the Union
Pacific Railroad. Mr. Brooks, who was a government director in the
railroad, was charged with receiving such shares. The House did not
expel the two members, but severely condemned them. Shadows of varying
density fell upon many prominent politicians and darkened their
subsequent careers.

[1883]

The tragic fate of President Garfield, following these and other
revelations of political corruption, brought public sentiment on civil
service reform to a head. A bill prepared by the Civil Service Reform
League, and introduced by Senator Pendleton, of Ohio, passed Congress in
January, 1883, and on the 16th received the signature of the President.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
James G. Blaine.


It authorized the President, with the consent of the Senate, to appoint
three civil service commissioners, who were to institute competitive
examinations open to all persons desiring to enter the government
employ.  It provided that the clerks in the departments at Washington,
and in every customs district or post-office where fifty or more were
employed, should be arranged in classes, and that in the future only
persons who had passed the examinations should be appointed to service
in these offices or promoted from a lower class to a higher, preference
being given according to rank in the examinations. Candidates were to
serve six months' probation at practical work before receiving a final
appointment. The bill struck a heavy blow at political assessments, by
declaring that no official should be removed for refusing to contribute
to political funds. Congressmen or government officials convicted of
soliciting or receiving political assessments from government employees
became liable to a five thousand dollar fine, or three years'
imprisonment, or both. Persons in the government service were forbidden
to use their official authority or influence to coerce the political
action of anyone, or to interfere with elections.

[1873-1884]

Dorman B. Eaton, Leroy B. Thoman, and John M. Gregory were appointed
commissioners by President Arthur. By the end of the year the new system
was fairly in operation. Besides the departments at Washington, it
applied to eleven customs districts and twenty-three post-offices where
fifty or more officials were employed. The law could be thoroughly
tested only when a new party came into power; that time was near at
hand.

The deepest and most significant political movement of the last twenty
years has been the gradual recovery of power by the Democracy. For some
years after the Rebellion, this party's war record was a millstone
around its neck. The financial distress in 1873 and the corruption
prevalent in political circles weakened the party in power, while the
Democracy, putting slavery and reconstruction behind its back, turned to
new issues, and raised the cry of "economy" and "reform."

The state elections of 1874 witnessed a "tidal wave" of democratic
victories. Out of 292 members of the House in 1875, 198 were democratic.
Two-thirds of the Senators were still republican. Even by republican
reckoning, the democratic presidential ticket in 1876 received a popular
majority of 157,000 and lacked but one electoral vote. In 1879 both
houses of Congress were democratic, by small majorities, for the first
time since 1856. The tide ebbed in 1880, the Democrats losing control of
the House, and suffering a decisive defeat in the presidential election;
but with 1884 the fortune of the Democracy reached high-water mark.

In this year James G. Blaine, of Maine, and John A. Logan, of Illinois,
received the republican nomination for President and Vice-President. A
number of Independent Republicans, including the most earnest advocates
of civil service reform, were strongly opposed to Mr. Blaine, alleging
him to be personally corrupt and the representative of corrupt political
methods. They met in conference, denounced the nominations, and later
indorsed the democratic nominees--Grover Cleveland, governor of New
York, and Thomas A. Hendricks, of Indiana. George W. Curtis, Carl
Schurz, and other prominent Republicans took part in the movement.
Several influential Independent Republican papers, including the New
York Times, Boston Herald, and Springfield Republican, joined the bolt.

The campaign was bitterly personal, attacks upon the characters of the
candidates taking the place of a discussion of principles. Mr. Cleveland
was elected, receiving 219 electoral votes against 182 for Mr. Blaine.
He carried every southern State, besides New York, Connecticut, Indiana,
Delaware, Maryland, and New Jersey. The total popular vote was over
10,000,000--the largest ever cast. Cleveland had 4,911,000, a plurality
of 62,000 over Blaine. The Democrats regained control of the House in
1883, and held it by a considerable majority to the end of Mr.
Cleveland's first term. In the Senate, until the election of 1892, the
Republicans continued to have a small majority.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Grover Cleveland.
From a photograph copyrighted by C. M. Bell, Washington, D. C.


Upon the accession of the new administration to power, the country
waited with deep interest to see its effect upon the civil service. Mr.
Cleveland had pledged himself to a rigid enforcement of the new law, and
encouraged all to believe that with him impartial civil service would
not be confined to the few offices thus protected. After the first few
months of Cleveland's administration, one fact was apparent: for the
first time since the days of Jackson a change of the party in power had
not been followed by a clean sweep among the holders of offices. But, as
the subsequent record painfully shows, office-holders' pressure proved
too strong for Mr. Cleveland's resolution.

There were then about 120,000 government employees. Of these, not far
from 14,000 were covered by the Pendleton law. All the other minor
places were held at the pleasure of superior officers. These latter
officers numbered about 58,000. In August, 1887, from 45,000 to 48,000
of them had been changed, implying change in the offices dependent upon
them.  There were some 55,000 postmasters, 2,400 of whom were appointed
by the President for a term of four years, the rest by the
postmaster-general at pleasure. At the date named, from 37,000 to 47,000
changes had been made in this department. These changes, of course, were
not all removals, as many vacancies occur by expiration of terms, death
of incumbents, and other causes.

[1886]

An important statute regarding the presidential succession, introduced
by Senator Hoar, passed Congress in January, 1886. By previous statutes,
in case of the removal, death, resignation, or disability of the
President and Vice-President, the presidency passed in order to the
temporary President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House. The
latter two might be of the opposite party from the President's, so that
by the succession of either the will of the people as expressed in the
presidential election would manifestly be defeated. Moreover, in case of
a President's death and the accession of the Vice-President, the latter,
too, might die, and thus both the presidency and the vice-presidency
become vacant in the interim between two Congresses, when there is
neither President of the Senate nor Speaker of the House. Thus President
Garfield died September 19, 1881, and the XLVlllth Congress did not
convene to choose a Speaker until the next December. The Senate had
adjourned without electing a presiding officer. Had President Arthur
died at any moment during the intervening period--and it is said that he
was for a time in imminent danger of death--the distracting contingency
just spoken of would have been upon the country.

According to the new law, in case of a vacancy in both presidency and
vice-presidency, the presidency devolves upon the members of the
cabinet in the historical order of the establishment of their
departments, beginning with the Secretary of State. Should he die, be
impeached, or disabled, the Secretary of the Treasury would become
President, to be followed in like crisis by the Secretary of War, he by
the Attorney-General, he by the Postmaster-General, he by the Secretary
of the Navy, he by the Secretary of the Interior, and he by the
Secretary of Agriculture.

We have still no legal or official criterion of a President's
disability. We do not know whether, during Garfield's illness, for
instance--apparently a clear case of disability--it was proper for his
cabinet to perform his presidential duties, or whether Arthur should not
have assumed these. Barring this chance for conflict, it is not easy to
think of an emergency in which the chief magistracy can now fall vacant,
or the appropriate incumbent thereof be in doubt.



CHAPTER II.

THE TREATY OF WASHINGTON

[1871]

The year 1871 was marked by the conclusion of an important treaty
between England and the United States. Besides settling certain
questions which threatened the friendly relations of the two countries,
the treaty enunciated important principles of international law, and
afforded the world a shining instance of peaceful arbitration as a
substitute for the horrors of war.

Ever since 1863 the United States had been seeking satisfaction from
Great Britain for the depredations committed by the Alabama and other
Confederate cruisers sailing from English ports. Negotiations were
broken off in 1865 and again in 1868. The next year Reverdy Johnson,
American Minister to England, negotiated a treaty, but it was rejected
by the Senate.  In January, 1871, the British Government proposed a
joint commission for the settlement of questions connected with the
Canadian fisheries. Mr. Fish, our Secretary of State, replied that the
settlement of the "Alabama Claims" would be "essential to the
restoration of cordial and amicable relations between the two
governments." England consented to submit this question also to the
commission, and on February 27th five high commissioners from each
country met at Washington. The British delegation included cabinet
officers, the minister to the United States, and an Oxford professor of
international law. The American commissioners were of equally high
station, the Secretary of State, an associate justice of the Supreme
Court, and our minister to England being of their number.

On May 8th the commission completed a treaty which was speedily ratified
by both governments. It provided for arbitration upon the "Alabama
Claims," upon other claims by citizens of either country for damages
during the Rebellion, upon the fisheries, and upon the northwest
boundary of the United States. Provisions were also made by it for the
common use of the lakes, rivers, and canals along the Canadian border,
and for the transit of merchandise free of duty, under certain
conditions, across either country to and from certain ports.

The fisheries part of the treaty is discussed in the next chapter. The
question of the northwest boundary was referred to the decision of the
German emperor, William I. The treaty of 1846 had left it doubtful
whether the boundary line through the channel between Vancouver Island
and the main-land should be so run as to include the island of San Juan,
with its group, in the United States or in Canada. The emperor's
decision, given in 1872, was in favor of the United States.

Three commissioners--one appointed by each government and a third
appointed jointly--met in Washington, September 26, 1871, to pass
judgment upon the war claims other than the "Alabama Claims." The
American claims of this class, amounting to less than $1,000,000, were
all rejected on the ground that the British Government was not proved
responsible for the damages incurred. British subjects put in claims for
$96,000,000. The commission allowed less than $2,000,000, which the
United States Government promptly paid into the British treasury.

But far the most important and interesting part of the treaty was the
provision for the settlement of the "Alabama Claims." England's
unfriendly attitude during the war and her subsequent refusal to submit
the "claims" to arbitration, had stirred up much hard feeling throughout
the United States. The graceful expression, in the preamble to the
treaty, of England's regret for the ravages of the cruisers was
therefore very gratifying. More material satisfaction was to follow. The
treaty provided that the claims should be submitted to a tribunal of
five persons--one appointed by each government and one each by the
Emperor of Brazil, the President of Switzerland, and the King of Italy.

The tribunal met at Geneva, Switzerland, December 15, 1871. Charles
Francis Adams, our minister to England during the war, was the United
States member, and Lord Chief Justice Cockburn the English. Baron
Itajuba, the Brazilian minister plenipotentiary to France, Count
Sclopis, an Italian minister of State, and M. Jaques Staempfli, of
Switzerland, comprised the rest of the tribunal. Each side was
represented by counsel, Caleb Cushing, William M. Evarts, and Morrison
R. Waite appearing for the United States. An agent presented the printed
case of each government.

[1872]

The American claims included direct and indirect losses--direct, by the
destruction of vessels with their cargoes and by national expenditure in
chasing the Confederate cruisers; indirect, by the loss of a large part
of the United States ocean carrying trade, by increased marine insurance
rates, and by the prolongation of the war with proportionally increased
expense. Great Britain vehemently objected to the indirect claims coming
before the tribunal, and at one time seemed about to withdraw. Upon
reassembling in June, 1872, the tribunal decided that the indirect
claims were not admissible, and the case went forward. Counsel having
presented their respective arguments, the tribunal took up the case of
each cruiser separately. During the consideration of damages it sat with
closed doors, only the arbitrators being present. On September 14th,
after thirty-two conferences, the tribunal gave its decision.

The Geneva case is of two-fold interest, first, for its decision of the
facts involved, and the consequent award; second, for its enunciation of
important principles of international law.

The Treaty of Washington laid down three rules for the guidance of the
tribunal. They are such important contributions to international law
that they must be quoted in full.

"A neutral government is bound,

"First: To use due diligence to prevent the fitting out, arming or
equipping, within its jurisdiction, of any vessel which it has
reasonable ground to believe is intended to cruise or to carry on war
against a power with which it is at peace, and also to use like
diligence to prevent the departure from its jurisdiction of any vessel
intended to cruise or carry on war as above, such vessel having been
specially adapted, in whole or in part, within such jurisdiction, to
warlike use.

"Secondly: Not to permit or suffer either belligerent to make use of its
ports or waters as the base of naval operations against the other, or
for the purpose of the renewal or augmentation of military supplies or
arms, or the recruitment of men.

"Thirdly: To exercise due diligence in its own ports and waters, and as
to all persons within its jurisdiction, to prevent any violation of the
foregoing obligations and duties."

Great Britain denied, in the text of the treaty, that these rules were a
true statement of the principles of international law in force during
the Rebellion, but consented that the "Alabama Claims" should be decided
in accordance with them. Both countries also agreed to abide by them in
future and to invite other maritime powers to do the same.

Questions being raised by the counsel as to the interpretation of
certain terms and the scope of certain provisions in the three rules,
the tribunal found it necessary to make the following preliminary
decisions:

1. The meaning of "due diligence." The tribunal took the ground that
what constitutes "due diligence" varies with the circumstances of the
case. The greater the probable damage to either belligerent, the greater
must be the care taken by the neutral government to prevent the escape
of cruisers from its ports.

2. Should a neutral detain an escaped cruiser when it re-enters the
neutral's jurisdiction, the cruiser having in the meantime been
regularly commissioned by its government? The arbitrators decided that
the neutral had a right to detain such a cruiser, in spite of its
commission, but was under no positive obligation to do so.

3. Does a neutral's responsibility end with the enforcement of its local
laws to prevent the escape of cruisers, even if those laws are
inadequate? Decision was given that the case must be determined by
international law and not by national legislation. If a country's
regulations for carrying out its acknowledged international duties are
ineffective, they ought to be changed.

These decisions in international law, coming from so exalted a source,
were of world-wide significance. The verdict on the facts in the case
had, however, more immediate interest for the two contestants.

The American case claimed damages for losses inflicted by fourteen
cruisers and four tenders. The award allowed for only the Alabama with
her tender, the Florida with her three tenders, and the Shenandoah
during a part of her career. With regard to the Alabama the culpability
of the British Government was so clearly shown that even the English
arbitrator voted in favor of the American claim. The Florida was
permitted to escape from Liverpool although Mr. Adams, the United States
minister, repeatedly called the attention of the authorities to her
notorious warlike character. The vessel was, furthermore, libelled at
Nassau, a British colonial port, but the British officials allowed her
to take in supplies and put to sea. The Shenandoah set sail from
Liverpool with the connivance of the Government, received her armament
at the Madeira Islands, and after a destructive career was welcomed at
the British port of Melbourne, repaired in a government slip, and
furnished with supplies and recruits. The award held Great Britain
responsible only for her career after leaving Melbourne.

The American case further claimed damages for national expense in
chasing the cruisers, and for the prospective earnings of the lost
merchantmen, but these claims, along with those explicitly denounced as
indirect, were rejected.

The tribunal awarded $15,500,000 damages in gold for the vessels and
cargoes destroyed by the three cruisers and their tenders. Of this sum,
about $2,000,000 was interest at six per cent. The only dissenting voice
was that of the British member, who submitted a long and able, but
somewhat spiteful, minority report.

The award naturally gave great satisfaction in the United States. The
money compensation was in itself a source of considerable gratulation;
but the fact that stiff-backed England had by a clearly impartial
tribunal of the highest character been declared in the wrong was not the
least pleasurable side of the result. American citizens should never
forget the services, in this delicate and difficult matter, of Mr.
Adams. By his great knowledge of law, his careful gathering of evidence,
and his brave, sturdy and incessant, though apparently useless,
remonstrances with the British authorities while the cruisers were
building and their depredations going on, he established a case which
could not be gainsaid. Hardly had he opened his portfolio at Geneva when
the learned arbitrators saw that his suit must be allowed.

England promptly handed over to the United States the price of her
sympathy with rebellion and slavery. The course of Congress in dealing
with the award was not very creditable. For four years the money lay in
the treasury vaults, piling up interest at five per cent. until it
amounted to $20,000,000. A Court of Alabama Claims was then convened,
where private claimants might press their suits. Insurance companies
which could show that their losses on vessels destroyed by the cruisers
exceeded the premiums received, were entitled to be paid the difference,
with interest at four per cent.



CHAPTER III.

THE FISHERIES DISPUTE

[1783 ]

Our glance at the Treaty of Washington introduces us to an international
complication which has been transmitted from the very birthday of the
nation, and is, alas, still unsettled, spite of the earnest efforts to
this end made since 1885. Article 3 of the treaty of 1783 was as
follows: "It is agreed that the people of the United States shall
continue to enjoy unmolested the right to take fish of every kind on the
Grand Bank and on all the other banks of Newfoundland; also in the Gulf
of St. Lawrence and at all other places in the sea where the inhabitants
of both countries used at any time heretofore to fish; and also that the
inhabitants of the United States shall have liberty to take fish of
every kind on such part of the coast of Newfoundland as British
fishermen shall use [but not to dry or cure the same on that island];
and also on the coasts, bays, and creeks of all other of his Britannic
Majesty's dominions in America, and that the American fishermen shall
have liberty to dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays, harbors,
and creeks of Nova Scotia, Magdalen Islands, and Labrador, so long as
the same shall remain unsettled; but so soon as the same, or either of
them, shall be settled, it shall not be lawful for the said fishermen to
dry or cure fish at such settlement without a previous agreement for
that purpose with the inhabitants, proprietors, or possessors of the
ground."

This provision conveyed to fishermen from the United States two valuable
privileges--that of fishing in British waters, namely, within three
miles of the British coast, and that of drying and curing fish, wherever
caught, upon certain convenient parts of the British coast. They had,
of course, like the men of all nations, apart from any treaty
stipulation, the right to fish outside the three mile limit, but this
would avail them nothing, under the then mode of conducting the
industry, unless they could freely make harbor in case of storm, and
also land to cure their catch before lading it for the homeward cruise.
What worth these rights had will be clear if we remember that fishing
had always been one of New England's foremost trades, and that the
waters off Newfoundland and Nova Scotia had from, and probably before,
Columbus's time been known as the richest fishing grounds of the globe.

[1812]

The commissioners at Ghent, who drew up the treaty ending the War of
1812, wrangled long over the question whether or not the war had
nullified the just cited Article 3 of 1783. Unable to agree, they signed
their treaty without deciding the question, leaving this for the future
to settle as it might. Great Britain held that our former rights had
lapsed by the war, and excluded our fishing vessels from the bays,
harbors, and creeks named above. Several of our vessels were arrested on
charge of trespass. The utmost tension still existed, in spite of the
peace, especially as in the United States the view prevailed that our
rights by the old treaty had outlived the war, notwithstanding the
silence of the Ghent document.

[1818 ]

At length, in 1818, a new treaty was entered into upon the question,
signed October 20th, ratified by England November 2d, and by the United
States January 28, 1819. This instrument ignored our contention that
Article 3 of the treaty of 1783 was of perpetual obligation, and
restricted our right to fish in shore to the southern shores of the
Magdalen Islands, the west and southwest coasts of Newfoundland from the
Rameau Islands round to Quirpon Island, and the Labrador coast from
Mount Joly northward. Only here could our fishermen fish within the
three mile limit, and they could dry and cure only on the named parts of
Labrador and Newfoundland, Magdalen Islands being now excluded from this
use. Even on Labrador and Newfoundland the privilege of drying and
curing was to be cut off by settlement, except as agreement should be
made beforehand with the inhabitants.

But the fateful clause of this treaty was the following: "And the United
States hereby renounce forever any liberty heretofore enjoyed or claimed
by the inhabitants thereof, to take, dry, or cure fish on or within
three marine miles of any of the coasts, bays, creeks, or harbors of his
Britannic Majesty's dominions in America not included within the
above-mentioned limits: Provided, however, that the American fishermen
shall be admitted to enter such bays or harbors for the purpose of
shelter and of repairing damages therein, of purchasing wood, and of
obtaining water, and for no other purposes whatever. But they shall be
under such restrictions as may be necessary to prevent their taking,
drying, or curing fish therein, or in any other manner whatever abusing
the privileges hereby reserved to them."

[1854-1870]

Troubles were soon as abundant as ever. The Canadians applied the word
"bay" to all indentations of their coast, affecting entirely to exclude
our fishermen from great bodies of water like Fundy, Chaleurs, and
Miramichi, however far parts of these might be from shore. This was the
famous "headland theory" for defining national waters. They also denied
our right to navigate the Gut of Canso, which separates Cape Breton
Island from Nova Scotia, thus forcing far out of their nearest course
our ships bound for the permitted inshore fisheries. United States
fishermen on their part persisted in exploiting the great bays, landed
upon the Magdalen Islands, pushed through the Gut, and were none too
careful at any point to find or heed the three mile line.

June 5, 1854, was signed a treaty of reciprocity between the United
States and the British provinces, under which all the coasts of British
North America were opened to our fishing vessels, in return for similar
liberty to those of the provinces in all United States waters north of
Cape May, latitude 36 degrees, the salmon and shad fisheries of each
country being, however, reserved to itself. This arrangement was to
continue ten years at least, and then to be terminable on a year's
notice by either of the high contracting parties. Such notice having
been given by the United States one year before, reciprocity in fishing
privilege came to an end March 7, 1865. This, of course, renewed the wry
and perplexing rules of the 1818 convention, with all the naturally
consequent strife. The worst evils were, indeed, put off for a time, by
a continuance to our vessels of the right to fish in provincial water on
the payment of a small license fee. This favor was taken away in 1870,
for the alleged reason that American captains failed to procure
licenses, and in the course of this year many of our ships were seized
and confiscated. New sternness had been imparted to the provincial
policy by the Canadian Act of Confederation, valid from July I, 1867,
which joined Ontario and Quebec with Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, thus
inspiring our neighbors to the north with a new sense of their strength
and importance.

[1871-1886]

Now came the Treaty of Washington, 1871. Its Article 18 revived Article
1 of the 1854 Reciprocity Treaty, except that Canadians could now go so
far south as the 39th parallel, and that two years' notice must precede
abrogation. Article 21 ordained between the two countries free trade in
fish-oil and in all salt-water fish. Both sides assumed that mere
reciprocity would advantage the United States the more, so that by
Article 22 a commission was provided for to award Canada a proper
balance in money. By bungling diplomacy on our part the real power in
this commission was swayed by M. Maurice Delfosse, Belgian minister at
Washington, a gentleman certain to favor Great Britain at our expense.
As a consequence, we were forced to pay for reciprocity to the round
note of $5,500,000. The money was a trifle; but its exorbitant amount
had the unhappy effect of prejudicing our people against the new
arrangement. The result was that at the earliest possible moment, viz.,
July 1, 1883, our Government gave the notice necessary for its
abrogation. This followed on July 1, 1885, in the very midst of the
fishing season. A temporary diplomatic arrangement was effected, which
continued to our fishermen for the remainder of 1885 the advantages of
the recent treaty; but with the dawn of the new year, 1886, the old
convention of 1818 came once more into operation.

So soon as the fishing season was opened the plan of the British
Government was evident. It was to deny the fishing vessels all
facilities not guaranteed by the treaty of 1818--that is, fishing
vessels of the United States would be permitted to enter Canadian ports
for shelter, repairs, wood, and water, and "for no other purposes
whatever;" also to compel all such vessels strictly to conform to both
customs and port laws. Circular letters of instruction, enjoining
vigilance, were sent to all customs officers, and swift cruisers fitted
out to look sharply after all fishing vessels from the States.  On the
other hand our fishermen were not, as a whole, disposed to conform to
the existing regulations. The Treaty of Washington had been abrogated at
their request, and now many, probably most, of them were inclined to
exercise all the liberty possible in the Canadian waters. Least of all
were they willing to submit to the British interpretation of the treaty
of 1818.

Complaints early reached Washington that the headland theory was being
applied by the provincial customs officials to exclude our vessels from
legitimate fishing places; but the Canadian Government denied that any
such thing had been done by its authority, and evidently did not incline
to push its old contention on this point. While the fishing schooner
Marion Grimes, of Gloucester, Mass., was under detention at Shelburne,
Nova Scotia, for an infraction of the customs rules, her captain having
hoisted the United States flag, this was pulled down by order of the
Canadian officer in temporary charge of her. The flag was again hoisted
and again forcibly lowered. This act awakened great resentment in the
United States, until it, too, was disavowed by the Governor-General in
Council. The Sarah H. Prior lost at sea a valuable net, which a Canadian
schooner picked up and wished to return. This was forbidden, and being
permitted to purchase no other seine, the ship came home with a broken
voyage and in debt. Captain Tupper, of the Jeannie Seaverns, having
entered the harbor of Liverpool, Nova Scotia, for shelter, was denied
permission to go and see his relatives near by or to receive them aboard
his vessel. The water-tank of the schooner Mollie Adams having burst,
her captain sought to buy two or three barrels to hold water for his
crew on their homeward voyage of five hundred miles. His request was
refused.

The same Mollie Adams found a Nova Scotia vessel in distress and rescued
her crew. Captain Jacobs, of the Mollie, cared for the men several days,
and finally, as no assistance of any sort was proffered by the
Canadians, sent them home at his own expense. His aid to them delayed
his homeward journey, and he was also caught in a harbor from which his
vessel could pass only during very high water, which caused further
delay. Owing to these incidents his supply of provisions ran low, yet he
was denied permission to purchase anything, and as a result his homeward
tour was made on half rations or less. Many other aggravating
circumstances were connected with this case.

In quite a number of instances American masters were refused water, the
only excuse being that they had not conformed to all the port or customs
regulations. There can be no doubt that many fishing captains were quite
too lax in this, presuming on the power of their nation and remembering
the liberties enjoyed under reciprocity, while too forgetful of the
stern letter of the treaty which the Canadians were executing against
them. It was plain on the other hand that however wrongly Canadian
subalterns may at times have acted, both the Canadian and the British
Government intended to keep within the letter of the law, while forcing
us to fish off their coasts at as great a disadvantage as possible.

The real source of the difficulty was well characterized by Mr. Phelps,
our Minister to England. "It is to be found in the irritation that has
taken place among a portion of the Canadian people on account of the
termination by the United States Government of the treaty of Washington
on the 1st of July, 1885, whereby fish imported from Canada into the
United States, which so long as that treaty remained in force was
admitted free, is now liable to the import duty provided by the general
revenue laws; and the opinion appears to have gained ground in Canada
that the United States may be driven, by harassing and annoying their
fishermen, into the adoption of a new treaty, by which Canadian fish
shall be admitted free."

In their efforts to carry out such a policy the treaty gave the
Canadians a very great advantage. As Mr. Secretary Bayard insisted, it
certainly trangressed usual international comity when our ships were
refused needed pilots, or our hungry crews were forbidden to purchase
food in Canadian ports; but our President and Senate had, in 1818,
agreed that such cruelty should be legal. To ask for comity in the
matter was to ask for the voidance of the treaty.

As little could we, agreeably to the treaty, presume, by use of home
permits to "touch and trade," to turn a fishing vessel at will into a
merchant vessel, as was often tried in order to evade the offensive
restrictions, or demand the liberty of freighting fish home overland in
bond. It would equally have amounted to a quashing of the treaty, had
the British and Canadians interpreted it by the easy canon of Mr.
Phelps: "The question is not what is the technical effect of the words,
but what is the construction most consonant to the dignity, the just
interests, and the friendly relations of the sovereign powers."

Interesting but also untenable was our Government's plea for freedom to
purchase bait for deep-sea fishing. Of old, mackerel had been caught
almost solely with hooks, by the "chumming" process. In 1850 the purse
seine was introduced. Soon after 1870 its use became general, and
entirely revolutionized the business of taking mackerel. Huge quantities
of the fish could now be captured far out in the open sea, making
fishing much more profitable near home, and greatly lessening the value
to us of Canada's fishing-grounds. From these premises Mr. Bayard
argued that the true intent of the 1818 agreement, which was to protect
inshore fishing territory, would not be violated should we be allowed to
buy bait in Canada. It was replied that the old treaty was meant to
prevent our fishermen from making Canadian harbors in any way a base of
operations.

"It was framed with the object of affording a complete and exclusive
definition of the rights and liberties which the fishermen of the United
States were thenceforward to enjoy in following their vocation, so far
as those rights could be affected by facilities for access to the shores
or waters of the British Provinces, or for intercourse with their
people. It is therefore no undue expansion of the scope of that
convention to interpret strictly those of its provisions by which such
access is denied, except to vessels requiring it for the purposes
specifically described. Such an undue expansion would, upon the other
hand, certainly take place if, under cover of its provisions, or of any
agreements relating to general commercial intercourse which may have
since been made, permission were accorded to United States fishermen to
resort habitually to the harbors of the Dominion, not for the sake of
seeking safety for their vessels or of avoiding risk to human life, but
in order to use those harbors as a general base of operations from which
to prosecute and organize with greater advantage to themselves the
industry in which they are engaged.

"Mr. Bayard suggests that the possession by a fishing vessel of a permit
to 'touch and trade,' should give her a right to enter Canadian ports
for other than the purposes named in the treaty, or, in other words,
should give her perfect immunity from its provisions. This would amount
to a practical repeal of the treaty, because it would enable a United
States collector of customs, by issuing a license, originally only
intended for purposes of domestic customs regulation, to give exemption
from the treaty to every United States fishing vessel. The observation
that similar vessels under the British flag have the right to enter the
ports of the United States for the purchase of supplies loses its force
when it is remembered that the convention of 1818 contained no
restriction on British vessels, and no renunciation of any privileges in
regard to them."

[1887]

For some weeks in the spring and summer of 1886, the fishery dispute
greatly excited our country. Even threats of war with Canada were
uttered in case its government should not recede from its aggravating
position, and careful estimates made of the force we could throw across
our northern border in three days. In May, 1886, Congress placed in the
President's hands power to suspend commercial intercourse between the
two countries. Later in the year a bill was introduced in the House
cutting off all commercial relations with Canada by land or water. The
Senate advanced a more moderate proposition, to limit the proposed
arrest of traffic to water commerce and to Canadian vessels, also to
leave its enforcement optional with the President. This became law on
March 3, 1887. Under this legislation the President, on being assured
that fishing masters or crews were treated in Canadian ports any less
favorably than masters or crews of trading vessels from the most favored
nations, could, "in his discretion, by proclamation to that effect, deny
vessels, their masters and crews, of the British dominions of North
America, any entrance into the waters, ports, or places of or within the
United States."

[1888]

The President, however, did not think best at once to use this fearful
power, likely enough to lead to war. He preferred to make another
attempt at a peaceful settlement, through a new treaty. This had
constantly been the wish of the British Government. Accordingly, later
in the year 1887, a joint commission, consisting of Secretary Bayard,
President Angell, of Michigan University, Hon. William L. Putnam, of
Maine, on the part of the United States, and of Rt. Hon. Joseph
Chamberlain, Sir Charles Tupper, of Canada, and Sir Lionel West, the
British minister, on the part of Great Britain, met at Washington. The
commission toiled nearly all winter, and passed to the President the
result of its deliberations on February 16, 1888.

The treaty which it drafted was necessarily a compromise. Canada thought
the British commissioners had yielded too much; many in the United
States believed our commissioners to have done the same. The document,
approved by the President, went to the Senate, where, after long debate,
it was refused ratification, August 21st.

The commission had agreed upon a modus vivendi, to hold good, unless
revoked by the Governor-General and Council of Canada, till February,
1890, under which our fishermen might obtain in Canadian ports, on
payment of a license, the privileges of merchantmen. Many such licenses
were taken out during the season of 1888, showing the advantages which
they conveyed. Most of the fishing-masters, however, did not seek
licenses and were averse to the new treaty, preferring the terms of 1818
to granting their rivals any further rights in our markets. Fresh fish,
including frozen and slack-salted, was already free in our ports,
competing sharply with our own catch. No one longer cared to fish
inside, or, except in emergencies, to provision at Canadian towns.
Convenient as would be the power to obtain bait near the fishing-grounds
and to trans-ship fish home in bond, neither was indispensable. Cod are
still caught with trawls and baited hooks. The best bait is squid, whose
abundance upon the Banks is what causes the cod so to frequent them. The
squid can be had freshest as well as cheapest from the peasantry of the
Newfoundland and Nova Scotia coasts; but clams carried from home were
found to do nearly as well. They would remain fresh better than squid,
but got off the hooks more easily. Accordingly, few collisions occurred
in 1888, and as the season of that year closed there was prospect that,
even without a new convention, no necessity for American retaliation
would arise.

[1892]

This chapter shall close with a word touching the Alaska fisheries
question, which, fortunately, had advanced a good step. In 1870 the
United States leased the Pribylov, or Seal Islands off Alaska, to the
Alaska Commercial Co. Pressed by this company, which naturally wished
the completest possible monopoly of seal-fishing, our Government
foolishly affected to treat the entire Behring Sea as a mare clausum,
belonging to the United States. Several British craft engaged in taking
seals were seized by United States vessels considerably more than three
miles from land. Great Britain of course protesting, a treaty, ratified
in March, 1892, submitted to arbitration the question between the two
governments. Seven arbitrators sat, two from the United States, Justice
Harlan and Senator Morgan, and one each from Canada, Great Britain,
Sweden, France, and Italy. This Board decided against the American
contention, denying the right of the United States to assume the
protection of seals or any property in them outside the ordinary
three-mile limit. Happy provisions were, however, made for a joint
police of Behring Sea by the two nations, for an open and a closed
fishing season, and for the careful licensing of sealing vessels.



CHAPTER IV.

THE SOUTH

[1886-1870]

It cannot be denied that the radical method of reconstruction resorted
to by Congress occasioned dreadful evils. Among other things it ignored
the natural prejudices of the whites, many of whom were as loyal as any
citizens in the land. The South, subjected to a second conquest after
having laid down its arms, felt outraged and grew sullen. To most people
in that section, as well as to very many at the North, this dictation by
Congress to acknowledged States in time of peace seemed high-handed and
guilty usurpation. Northern Congressmen incessantly called slavery
barbarism, and yet combined to transmute to-day into electors and
law-makers those who but yesterday had been slaves. Black legislatures
inevitably abused their power, becoming the instruments of base
carpetbag leaders and rings in robbing white property-holders.


[Illustration: Political cartoon. Two men labeled "Ohio" hanging from
a tree.]
A Facsimile put in Evidence before the Congressional Committee.
"[From the Independent Monitor, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, September 1, 1868.]"
"A PROSPECTIVE SCENE IN THE CITY OF OAKS, 4TH OF MARCH, 1869."
"Hang, curs, hang!  * * * * * Their complexion is perfect gallows,
Stand fast, good fate, to their hanging! * * * * *
If they be not born to be hanged, our case is miserable."
"The above cut represents the fate in store for those great pests of
Southern society--the carpet-bagger and scalawag--if found in Dixie's
land after the break of day on the 4th of March next."


Nor could any except doctrinaires or the stupid have expected that the
whites would long submit to such a regime. If the South was to become
again genuine part and parcel of this Union, it could not, nor would the
North consent that it should, be permanently under bayonet rule; and so
soon as bayonets were gone, fair means or foul would speedily remove the
sceptre from colored hands. Precisely this happened. In State after
State, the whites, without the slightest formal change of constitution
or law, recovered their ancient ascendency. Where their aims could not
be realized by persuasion or other mild means, resort was had to
merciless intimidation and violence.

The Ku-Klux Klan, a great secret society, was organized for this rough
business, numbering at first, among either its members or its abettors,
citizens of the highest respectability. Its local lodges were called
"dens," its members "ghouls," " Giants," "goblins," "titans," "furies,"
"dragons," and "hydras," were names of different classes among its
officers. Usually the very existence of a "den" in the vicinity was
sufficient to render every negro docile. If more was required, a
half-dozen ghouls, making their nocturnal rounds in their hideous masks
and uniforms, frightened all but the most hardy. Any who showed fight
were whipped, maimed, or killed, treatment which extended on occasion to
their "carpet-bag" and "scalawag" friends--these titles denoting
respectively northern and southern men bold enough to take the negroes'
side. The very violence of the order, which it at last turned against
the old Southrons themselves, brought it into disrepute with its
original instigators, who were not sorry when federal marshals, put up
to it by President Grant, hunted den after den of the law-breakers to
the death.

Yet, after all, one cannot see how the giant problem of resuscitating
the South could, under the circumstances, have been solved more
successfully. The plan proposed by President Johnson had sufficient
trial to show that it must have led to ills worse than those actually
experienced. A qualified colored suffrage would, as things then were,
have been abused. It must be remembered that the war left in the South
much less of white loyalty than it found, and Congress was certainly
justified in insisting that the revived States should be placed on the
most loyal basis possible.

Withal, considering the stupendous upheaval in southern society marked
by the erection of bondmen into full citizens, dark days were few.
Schools arose, partly from the application of a large fund left by Mr.
George Peabody for that purpose, partly from the beneficence of the
various religious denominations interested in the elevation of the
blacks, and partly from provision by the southern States themselves. The
ballot itself proved an educator, rough but thorough. The negro vote,
now that it had become a fixed fact, was little by little courted by the
jarring factions of whites, and hence protected. Political parties,
particularly in state elections, more and more divided on other lines
than that of color. The administration of President Cleveland taught the
negro that even in National affairs he had nothing to fear from
democratic dominance. And it was plainly to the freedman's infinite
advantage, meanwhile, that he was fighting not to acquire status and
rights, but for acquired status and rights guaranteed in the organic law
of his State and the Nation.

[1875]

Among the white people loyalty to the old flag increased with the days.
Of course none of them would ever confess regret at having drawn the
sword, or cease to think of the lost cause with a sigh. At the same time
a rational conviction settled down upon all its most thoughtful minds
that in secession the South had been misguided. Universal was the
admission that at least for the dominant race the death of slavery was a
blessing. Northern people and intelligent immigrants from Europe
thronged in. Coolly received at first, and in some cases maltreated if
freely expressing opinions which traversed those prevalent in the
section, in the end they were tolerated and even welcomed.

The multiplication of railways facilitated the acquaintance of southern
with northern people far beyond what had been possible before the war.
Travelling salesmen from the North penetrated the remotest hamlets at
the South, inclined from every consideration to produce the most
favorable impression possible. The selection of southerners for
important national offices by Presidents Grant, Hayes, Arthur, and
Cleveland, the election of the last-named, a Democrat, as President in
1884 and 1892, and the existence of a democratic majority in the House
of Representatives almost constantly from 1874, all felicitously
combined to beget in the people of the South a conviction that they were
really and truly citizens of the Union again. The rise in several
southern States of a strong republican organization among the whites
wrought in the same direction. Nor must we overlook as another cementing
influence the fraternizing of northern and southern soldiers in great
reunions such as occurred at Gettysburg, Richmond, and Chickamauga.

[1890]

The South's material prosperity kept pace with her political advance. It
had always been said that cotton was to be produced only by slave labor.
Nothing could have been more false. The largest cotton crop under
slavery, that of 1860, reached 4,669,770 bales. In 1871, 1876, and 1877
each, notwithstanding the economic chaos and the infinite destruction of
capital occasioned by the war, those figures were almost equalled; in
1878 they were surpassed; in 1879 and 1880 each, over 5,000,000 bales
were raised; in 1881, 1883, and 1886 each, over 6,000,000, the exact
figure for the year last named being 6,550,215. In 1890, 7,472,511 bales
were produced.

This cotton exhibit was sufficiently gratifying, yet the post-bellum
crops might have been far larger had not much energy at the South been
happily diverted into manufacturing channels. This was one of the most
hopeful features of the New South. Nearly every department of industry
in this kind was now pushed there at many points. Nashville became a
great manufacturing and commercial city. It boasted one of the largest
foundries in the country, and several flourishing cotton factories.
Chattanooga, Birmingham, and Anniston were all thrifty with iron and
steel industries, which rivalled the most prosperous ones at the North;
nor were there wanting those who predicted that the region of those
cities, viz., Southern Tennessee with Northern Georgia and Alabama, was
speedily to become the centre of iron and steel production for the
world.

The lumber trade of Chattanooga, particularly in the white woods, was
said to be second only to Chicago's. The city also had a tannery
believed to be the largest in the world, and more than one fully
appointed Bessemer steel manufactory. These steel works and the tannery
employed colored operatives almost alone, many of these exceedingly
skilful. Birmingham was entirely a creation of the days since the war,
yet it had in 1890 more than 26,000 inhabitants against 3,000 in 1880,
and enjoyed marvellous prosperity, hindered only by speculation in land.
Much of the marble in the mountains of Tennessee, Alabama, and Georgia
was finer than any elsewhere to be found in this country. The block of
it which was forwarded from Alabama for the Washington monument, experts
condemned for the purpose as certainly Italian, nor was it permitted a
place in that structure till the Governor of the State and the Members
of Congress therefrom had certified upon honor, and the quarry-masters
made affidavit, that it came out of the Alabama hills. Atlanta had risen
from the ashes in which the war left it, to be a city of over 65,000
people, with every manifestation of great industrial life and progress.

Between 1870 and 1880, although the population of Mobile decreased, that
of Charleston rose about 1-1/5 per cent., that of Savannah about 5-1/4
per cent., that of New Orleans about thirteen per cent., that of
Richmond about twenty-six per cent. Between 1880 and 1890 Mobile
advanced about 6-1/2 per cent., Charleston almost 10 per cent., Savannah
over 40 per cent., New Orleans over 12 per cent., and Richmond exactly
28 per cent.

It would be misleading to suppose the progress in welfare indicated by
these and the foregoing statements to be true of every district at the
South. The merely agricultural regions were still far behind. Methods of
tilling the soil were the same as prevailed forty years earlier, and it
was not unlikely that the colored people, who for the most part had the
immediate charge of this work, prosecuted it, as yet, with less skill
than did overseers and planters before slavery was done away. Yet in
1890 the farm valuation of the South was found to exceed its highest
ante-bellum figure and almost to equal one-fifth of the entire farm
valuation of the country.

To the general backwardness of southern agriculture there was one quite
striking exception. The State of Florida underwent after the war a most
astounding transition for the better. Her total railway mileage of 416
miles when the war ended had grown to 2,470 miles by 1890. The farm
valuation was, in 1880, $20,500,000. The population in 1890 exceeded
that of 1880 by almost 50 per cent. Steamboats were upon every coast and
river. This was due not alone to the State's popularity as a winter
sanitarium for northern people. Florida was also the early market-garden
for the North. Its oranges largely supplied the trade, and were much
sought for their excellent quality. The State was excessively rich in
the finest ornamental woods, which were rapidly finding their way into
the market. Nearly all the crops of the temperate zone and the fruits of
the torrid flourished here with the utmost luxuriance, many of them
being natives, others taking to the soil with a greater friendliness
than they displayed for that whence they were transplanted. The State
bade fair to rival Louisiana in the production of sugar, and South
Carolina in that of rice, as well as one day to supply the entire
American demand for cocoanuts. The mulberry was indigenous to every part
of this new Eden, which promised to become at no late date an immense
producer of raw silk. Cattle fed and fattened everywhere without
shelter, in winter as in summer.


[Illustration: Small river reaching the ocean; palm trees in background.]
The Mouth of the Miami River, Florida


The future of the colored race no one could predict with certainty.
After the census of 1870, which reduced the percentage of our African
population from 14.13, the figure in 1860, to 12.7, many rushed to the
conclusion that these people might, in no long time, vanish from our
land. The census of 1880 dispelled this fancy, raising the percentage to
13.12. That of 1890 lowered it again to 11.93. Previously to 1870 the
race had been constantly decreasing in fecundity, but it was possible
that the better conditions afforded by freedom had changed this. Even
should the decrease go on, the colored people bade fair to be at least
eight or ten per cent. of our total population in 1900. As a matter of
fact the proportion was in 1900 11.6 per cent. These decreasing
proportions did not, of course, necessarily imply any positive decadence
in the black race, as they might be accounted for by greater prolificacy
or vitality on the part of the whites, or in part by immigration. The
subject will be resumed in Chapter IX. of Period VI.



CHAPTER V.

THE WEST

[1890]

Aside from West Virginia, made during the war from the loyal part of
Virginia, the new States created between 1860 and 1900 were Kansas,
1861; Nevada, 1864; Nebraska, 1867; Colorado, 1876; North Dakota, 1889;
South Dakota, 1889; Montana, 1889; Washington, 1889; Idaho, 1890;
Wyoming, 1890; and Utah, 1896. The whole number of States had thus
become forty-five. We had also, in the year 1896, three organized
territories, Arizona, New Mexico, and Oklahoma, the last carved out of
Indian Territory in the year 1890. Alaska was as yet a partially
organized territory, having no territorial legislature, and being under
the laws of the United States and of the State of Oregon. It was
purchased by the United States from Russia in 1867, for the sum of
$7,200,000. It remained without any organization until the act of May
17, 1884, which gave it a governor, a district court, an attorney, a
marshal, and commissioners.



[Illustration: Swampy area on shore of Lake Michigan.]
The Site of Chicago.

The value to our Union of this new acquisition, with its 531,409 square
miles and a coast-line longer than that upon our Atlantic and Gulf
coasts together, was at first doubtful, and continued so till gold was
found on the Yukon and at Cape Nome. Clearly, however, the money had not
been thrown away.  Governor Swineford, appointed over the Territory in
1885, declared that throughout Southern Alaska and the Aleutian Islands
the climate was moderate, even in winter; and he gave records of
thermometrical observations which seemed to prove this. He further
maintained that, in the parts named, all our hardier plants and crops
grew to maturity in summer, and attained extraordinary luxuriance. In
1890, 4,298 white people had homes in Alaska, besides 1,823 mixed,
23,531 Indians, and 2,288 Mongolians, a total population of 32,052.

The Alaska Commercial Company paid the United States $55,000 yearly for
its monopoly of the Alaska seal-fur trade. The product of this business
was about $2,500,000 each year. An official report made to our
Government stated that in the year 1880, $2,181,832 worth of Alaska furs
found sale in London alone. Coal had been discovered in various places.
So had beautiful white marble. Gold-bearing ledges were numerous, and
the only one of these yet broached, that on Douglas Island, had
certainly yielded well. The mill connected with it, working only the
equivalent of two-thirds time, turned out during its first twelve months
a little over $750,000 worth of gold bullion. For the year 1889,
according to imperfect returns, the product from this remote patch of
our national domain was as follows: Seal fisheries, $314,925, a falling
off of over 80 per cent. in nine years; other fisheries, $1,059,365, an
increase of about 100 per cent. for the same period; 43,762 troy ounces
of gold and 9,219 troy ounces of silver. In 1890 there were ten
manufacturing establishments, whose product amounted to $58,440.

After 1860 there was a steady filling up of the Pacific coast, and an
equally continual extension of population to the west on the east side
of the Rockies. All Iowa was in cultivation, and all Minnesota but the
extreme northwest corner. In fifteen years the rate of interest went
down in Iowa from ten to seven or eight per cent., in Michigan from ten
to six or seven per cent. Chicago, from being only a borrower of money,
grew to be an immense lender for enterprises in the West. Settlement in
Kansas, Nebraska, and Texas rolled westward with strength and rapidity.
Some of the finest new towns in these States were well toward their far
western border.


[Illustration: Four men navigating a boat with oars. It is about 10 feet
wide and 30 feet long, covered with barrels and other freight.]
An Ohio River Flat-Boat.


The construction of the five great Pacific railway lines, the Northern,
the Union, the Santa Fe, the Southern, and the Great Northern, with
their various branches, brought into valuable employ infinite reaches of
fertile land previously as good as desert. Texas made most remarkable
advance both in square miles occupied and in density of population,
brought about by great extension of railway mileage, and of cattle,
sheep, and wheat culture. Large patches of the Dakotas, Montana, and
Idaho filled with settlers. Colorado became a giant in production, the
rush of population thither in consequence of very extensive and rich
mineral discoveries having been a stampede almost like that of 1849-50
to California. Every hill was black with miners. The growth of New
Mexico, Arizona, and Nevada, considering their natural wealth, was slow,
owing in part to Indian hostilities. New Mexico fell from rank 37 in
1870 to rank 43 in 1890. Tucson, Ariz., according to the best figures,
fell between 1880 and 1887, from 10,000 to 7,500 inhabitants. In
material things Utah prospered greatly under the thrift, economy, and
hard work of the Mormons. Here mining and speculation were less rigidly
pressed, and more energy devoted to agricultural pursuits.


[Illustration: Orange tree and small water channels.]
An Irrigated Orange Grove at Riverside, California.


In California, a smaller proportion than formerly of all industry was
now applied to mining, a larger to agriculture and cattle-raising.
Southern California became the competitor of Florida as a winter
residence. Oregon and Washington vied with Minnesota for the world-medal
in wheat culture. Over the infinite pasture lands at both feet of the
Rocky Mountains roamed herds of bullocks destined to feed distant cities
in America and in Europe. It was foreseen that many of these lands would
in the course of time be ploughed, and by the aid of irrigation turned
into corn-fields, wheat-fields, and market-gardens, a process which in
New Mexico had already gone far. Even the tract inclosed by the
parallels 31 and 45 degrees and the meridians 100 and 120 degrees, which
long seemed destined for perpetual sterility, spite of the many
enterprises conceived, and the others, like the scheme of the Colorado
River Irrigation Company, initiated for redeeming it, grew valuable when
it was believed that the National Government would undertake to irrigate
there. Crops in that region grew bountifully under irrigation, and
permanent water-supplies could easily be created. Natural woodland
existed there only near the few streams, and of the scanty trees which
grew scarcely a single variety of hard wood was found; but the state and
national afforestation of vast tracts bade fair to change this. The
region comprised in the States and Territories named was not only the
richest precious-metal field in America, but one of the very richest on
the globe.

The picture we have presented is too glowing for the year 1893-94,
during which great depression afflicted the whole West; but this was
only temporary. Recovery was indicated by the success of the
Trans-Mississippi Exposition at Omaha, in 1898. There were 2,600,000
admissions. The total cash receipts were $1,761,364, and the
stockholders in the enterprise were paid dollar for dollar.

The city of San Francisco had 500 inhabitants in 1840, 34,776 in 1850,
56,802 in 1860, 149,473 in 1870, 233,959 in 1880, 298,997 in 1890. This
progress may be taken as in some sense an index to that of the West as a
whole, far more so than the apparently spasmodic increase in some of
California's smaller centres. Los Angeles mounted from a population of
5,728 in 1870, and of 11,183 in 1880, to one of 50,395 in 1890. Oakland
had but 10,500 in 1870. Ten years later the figure was 34,555; and in
1890 it was 48,682. Stockton leaped from 10,287 in 1880 to 14,424 in
1890. In 1858 Denver was uninhabited. In 1870 it numbered 4,759 souls;
in 1880, 35,629; in 1890, 106,713. Portland, Oregon, had in 1890, 46,000
inhabitants; in 1900, 90,000. In the decade 1880-90 Wyoming grew from
20,789 to 60,705.

The growth and prosperity of this great western section of our country
become apparent from an inspection of the following table, compiled from
authentic sources:

                    Population.        Property valuation. $
STATES.         1870.       1890.        1880.             1890.
California      560,247    1,208,130   1,343,000,000   2,533,733,627
Colorado         39,864      412,198     240,000,000   1,145,712,267
Dakota, Total    14 181                  118,000 000
  Dakota, North              182,719                     337,006,506
  Dakota, South              328,808                     425,141,299
Idaho            14,999       84,335      29,000,000     207,896,591
Kansas          364,399    1,427,096     760,000,000   1,799,343,501
Minnesota       439,706    1,301,826     792,000,000   1,691,851,927
Montana          20,595      132,159      40,000,000     453,135,209
Nebraska        122,993    1,058,910     385,000,000   1,275,685,514
Nevada           42,491       45,761     156,000,000     l80,323,668
New Mexico       91,874      153,593      49,000,000     231,459,897
Oregon           90,923      313,767     154,000,000     590,396,194
Texas           818,579    2,235,523     825,000,000   2,105,576,766
Utah             86,786      207,905     114,000,000     349,411,234
Washington       23,955      349,390      62,000,000     760,698,726
Wyoming           9,118       60,705      54,000,000     169,773,710
TERRITORIES
Alaska                        32,052
Arizona           9,658       59,620      41,000,000     188,800,976


                   Value of Farms. $
STATES.            1880.         1890.
California      262,051,262   697,116,630
Colorado         25,109,223    85,035,180
Dakota, Total    22 401 084
  Dakota, North                75,310,805
  Dakota, South               107,466,335
Idaho             2,832,890    17,431,560
Kansas           235,178,936   559,726,046
Minnesota       193,724,260   340,059,470
Montana           3,284,504    25,512,340
Nebraska        105,932,541   402,353,913
Nevada            5,408,325    12,339,410
New Mexico        5,514,399     8,140,800
Oregon           56,906,575   115,819,200
Texas           170,468,886   399,971,289
Utah             14,015,178    28,402,780
Washington       13,844,224    88,461,660
Wyoming             835,895    14,460,880
TERRITORIES
Alaska
Arizona           1,127,946     7,222,230


            Rail Mileage  Periodicals    Gold Troy Oz.    Silver Troy Oz.
            1885.   1890. 1880 1893   1880     1889      1880       1889.
California  3,044  4,356  364   639  829,677  608,382    890,158   1,062,578
Colorado    2,884  4,176   90   298  130,608  187,881 12,800,120  18,375,551
Dakotas,     2877          66        159,920   54,770
North Dakota       2,003        139
South Dakota       2,470        269           149,538                104,672
Idaho                944    8    58   71,578   95,983    359,309   3,137,508
Kansas      4,441  8,306  349   759
Minnesota   4,331  5,379  224   558
Montana     1,047  2,181   18    90   87,354  151,861  2,246,938  13,511,455
Nebraska    2,988  5,300  189   645
Nevada        945    924   37    26  236,469  169,617   9,614,561  4,696,605
New Mexico  1,195  1,324   18    59    2,387   39,457     303,455  1,251,124
Oregon      1,181  1,433   74   194   53,101   46,648      21,496     17,851
Texas       6,687  8,630  279   678      330  323,438     829,438
Utah        1,085  1,085   24    71   14,105   23,591   3,668,566  7,005,193
Washington    736  1,774   29   253    6,569    9,005         789     23,464
Wyoming       617    941   10    43      838      711
TERRITORIES
Alaska                            4      238   43,762          39      9,219
Arizona       906  1,096   17    35   10,254   44,029   1,738,921  1,812,961


[Illustration: Small lake.]
The Irrigating Reservoir at Walnut Grove, Arizona,
showing the Artificial Lake partly filled.


We shall be pardoned for recurring again to Minnesota. So recently as
1838, where St. Paul and Minneapolis now stand, the former with a
population in 1890 of  133,156, the latter with one of 164,738, not a
white man's abode had risen. There were then but three cabins between
St. Paul and Prairie du Chien, a distance of 300 miles down the
Mississippi. Summit Avenue, St. Paul, was, in 1890, the finest street
in America, if not on the globe. West St. Paul, in 1880 a hamlet of a
few huts, had by 1890 20,000 to 30,000 people, with street-cars, large
business blocks, fine houses and stores. The pioneer railway in
Minnesota was laid in 1862, from St. Paul to St. Anthony, the first
shovelful of earth being lifted by a citizen of St. Paul, who probably
lived to see his State gridironed with 5,379 miles of track; his own
firm constructing over 1,100 miles in the single year 1887. Minneapolis
in 1887 turned out 5,000,000 barrels of flour, an average of 100,000
barrels a week.

Duluth had in 1880 but 3,740 people. In 1890, 33,115. The cause of
Duluth's advantage is obvious upon a glance at the map. It is by water
no farther from Lake Erie than Chicago is, while it is some hundreds of
miles nearer the great wheat-field. It is itself the very gate of
this--the gate of Minnesota--which in 1869 brought forth 18,000,000
bushels; in 1886, 50,000,000 bushels. To this enormous yield, that of
the Dakotas, about the same, had now to be added, the one as the other
finding its way out to the hungry world largely through Duluth.

The caravans of people necessary to populate these immense western
ranges were to a very great extent immigrants from Europe. The census of
1880 gave us 6,679,043 inhabitants of foreign nativity. We have no
figures for the exact proportion of the total immigration into the
country which found its home in the West, yet a glimpse at the total
from year to year is interesting at this point. The falling off in and
after 1893 is particularly noticeable. Immigrants arrived as follows:

In
1868  282,189
1869  352,768
1870  387,203
1871  321,350
1872  404,806
1873  459,803
1874  313,339
1875  227,498
1876  169,986
1877  141,857
1878  138,469
1879  177,826
1880  457,257
1881  669,431
1882  788,992
1883  603,322
1884  518,592
1885  395,346
1886  334,203
1890  455,302
1891  560,319
1892  579,663
1893  439,730
1894  285,631.



CHAPTER VI.

THE EXPOSITION OF 1876

[1876]

It was fitting that the one hundredth anniversary of a great industrial
nation should be celebrated by a World's Fair. Such a plan was first
publicly proposed for the United States in 1870, by an association of
Philadelphia citizens. It was adopted by Congress in the following year,
when an act was passed creating a Centennial Commission, to consist of a
delegate and an alternate from each State and Territory. The commission
organized for the great and difficult work before them by choosing
General J. R. Hawley, of Connecticut, president, and by appointing an
executive committee, a board of directors, and heads of various
administrative bureaus.

The Government declined to assume the financial responsibility of the
enterprise, but in 1872 Congress appointed a Centennial Board of Finance
with power to raise a capital stock of $10,000,000. Shares to the amount
of $2,400,000 were soon sold to private citizens. Philadelphia
appropriated $1,500,000, and Pennsylvania $1,000,000. In 1876 Congress
made a loan to the Board of $1,500,000. Thus the great problem of a
financial basis for the enterprise was solved.


[Illustration: Pedestrians walking among large buildings.]
At the Centennial Exposition, Philadelphia, 1876.


The first thought had been to make the exposition exclusively national,
but subsequent deliberation made it seem best to widen the plan so that
the arts and industries of the entire world should be represented.
President Grant formally proclaimed the Exhibition in 1873, and in the
following year foreign governments were invited to participate.
Thirty-three cordially responded.

Meanwhile, the commission was pushing preparations. Philadelphia, the
birth-place of the nation, was rightly chosen as the place for this
unique memorial of that event. In the beautiful and spacious Fairmount
Park, on the high bank of the Schuylkill River, an area of 285 acres was
inclosed, and here five main buildings were soon rising rapidly as by
magic. Besides these, there were at the time of opening, smaller
structures to the number of 175, filling every available space.

On May 10th the Exposition was opened with appropriate exercises, in the
presence of 100,000 people. Wagner had composed a Centennial March for
the occasion. Whittier's Centennial Hymn was sung by a chorus of 1,000
voices. The restored South chanted the praises of the Union in the words
of Sidney Lanier, the Georgia poet. President Grant, in a short speech,
then declared the International Exhibition open. A procession of
dignitaries moved to Machinery Hall, where the President of the United
States and Dom Pedro II., Emperor of Brazil, set in motion the great
Corliss engine, and with the whirr of spindle and clatter of machinery
the world's seventh great fair began.

Weeks and months of inspection were necessary to grasp the Exhibition as
a whole and in detail, but an imaginary stroll through the grounds will
give the reader some general idea of it.

Entering through one of the 106 gates, the sight-seer naturally turned
his eye first toward the colossal Main Building. A parallelogram in
form, 1,880 feet long by 460 wide, and 70 high, it covered twenty acres.
At the centre and ends were projecting wings, large buildings in
themselves. In the middle and at the four corners rose towers. In spite
of its size the building seemed light and almost graceful. Its brick
sub-structure, seven feet high, stood upon massive masonry foundations.
The rest of the building was mainly glass and iron. The iron trusses of
the roof rested upon 672 slender iron pillars. This hall had been
erected in a year, at a cost of $1,700,000.

In the Main Building manufactures were exhibited, also products of the
mine, along with various other evidences of the condition of science and
education. The broad aisles ran the whole length of the interior,
flanked on either side by exhibits. More than one-third of the space
was reserved for the United States, the rest being divided in varying
proportions among foreign countries. The products of all climates,
tribes, and times were here crowded together under one roof. The mighty
states of Great Britain, France, and Germany exhibited the work of their
myriad roaring looms side by side with the wares of the Hawaiian Islands
and the little Orange Free State. Here were the furs of Russia with
other articles from the frozen North; there the flashing diamonds of
Brazil and the rich shawls and waving plumes of India. At a step one
passed from old Egypt to the latest-born South American republic.
Chinese conservatism and Yankee enterprise confronted each other across
the aisle. All civilized nations but Greece were represented--more than
ever before took part in an international fair.

From the novelty of the foreign display the American visitor returned
proudly to the display made by his own land. Textiles, metal work, arms
and tools, musical instruments, watches, carriages, cutlery, books, and
furniture--a bewildering array of all things useful and ornamental--made
Americans realize as never before the wealth, intelligence, and
enterprise of their native country and the proud station she had taken
among the nations of earth.

Machinery Hall came next to the Main Building in size. Of plain
architecture, built of wood, with iron ties, 1,402 feet by 360, it
covered, with an annex, about thirteen acres. Here, with infinite
clatter and roar, thousands of iron slaves worked their master's will.
Three-fourths of the space was taken up with American machines. Visitors
from the foremost foreign nations marvelled at the ingenuity of the
Yankee mind here displayed. Great Britain led the foreign nations in the
size and number of articles exhibited. Canada, France, Russia, Sweden,
Brazil, and other countries sent ingenious or powerful machines.

But as a Titan, towering above all these and all others, stood the great
Corliss engine, built by George H. Corliss, of Providence, R. I., one of
the most remarkable mechanicians and inventors of the century. A modern
Samson, dumb as well as blind, its massive limbs of shining steel moved
with voiceless grace and utmost apparent ease, driving the miles of
shafting and the thousands of connected machines. The cylinders were
forty inches in diameter; the piston stroke, ten feet. The great
walking-beams, nine feet wide in the centre, weighed eleven tons each.
The massive fly-wheel, thirty feet in diameter, and weighing fifty-six
tons, made thirty-six revolutions a minute. The whole engine, with the
strength of 1,400 horses, weighed 700 tons.

Agricultural Hall, built of wood and glass in the form of a nave with
three transepts, covered ten acres. The display it contained of
agricultural products and implements was the largest ever made. Here the
United States stood forth far in advance of all sister nations.
Specimens of the rich and deep prairie soil excited the wonder and envy
of tillers of impoverished European lands. The great West, with its
monster steam-ploughs and threshing machines, placed before the eye the
farming methods of a race of giants. The choice and delicate fruits of
sunny lands mingled with the hardy cereals of Canada and Russia.

Memorial Hall, a beautiful permanent building of granite, erected by
Pennsylvania and Philadelphia at a cost of $1,500,000, was given up to
art. This was on the whole the poorest feature of the Exposition.
America had few works of the first order to show. Foreign nations, with
the exception of England, feared to send their choicest art products
across the ocean. France, Germany, Spain, Belgium, and the Netherlands,
with some other countries, were all represented. Italy, besides
paintings, sent many pieces of sculpture. England contributed a noble
lot of paintings, including works by Gainsborough and Reynolds. In spite
of all, the collection was the largest and most notable ever seen in
this country, and throngs crowded the galleries.

Horticultural Hall, built of iron and glass in the Moorish style of the
twelfth century, also a permanent structure, was erected by
Philadelphia. Here, one walked amid the glories of tropical vegetation.
Palm, orange, lemon, camphor, and india-rubber trees rose on every hand.
The cactus of the desert, rare English flowering plants, strange growths
from islands of the sea, here flourished each in its peculiar soil and
climate. Outside the building were beds of hardy flowering plants
covering twenty-five acres. Besides these five main structures, the
United States Building, where the working of the various administrative
departments of the Government was shown, attracted thousands of visitors
daily. A Woman's Pavilion contained products of female industry and
skill. A narrow-gauge railway ran in great loops from building to
building.

Twenty-six States erected buildings of their own. These served mainly as
headquarters, but two or three contained large exhibits of state
products. Thirty or more buildings were put up by private enterprise to
illustrate various manufacturing and industrial processes. Before the
close of the Exposition more than two hundred buildings stood within the
enclosure. Several foreign Governments erected small structures of
various sorts.

Through the summer months, in spite of the unusual heat that season,
thousands of pilgrims from all parts of the country found their way to
this shrine of the world's progress. The quiet old Quaker city was moved
with unwonted life. Amidst the crowds of new-comers its citizens became
strangers in their own streets.

On July 4th, simple but impressive ceremonies were held in the public
square at the rear of Independence Hall. On temporary platforms sat
5,000 distinguished guests, and a chorus of 1,200 singers. The square
and the neighboring streets were filled with a dense throng. Richard
Henry Lee, grandson of the mover of the Declaration of Independence,
came to the front with the original document in his hands. At sight of
that yellow and wrinkled paper, the vast audience burst forth into
prolonged cheering. Mr. Lee then read the Declaration. The recitation of
an ode by Bayard Taylor and the delivery of an oration by Hon. William
M. Evarts were the other main features of the exercises.

Through the early fall the interest in the Exposition spread farther and
farther over the land, and the attendance steadily increased. On
September 28th, Pennsylvania day, 275,000 persons passed through the
gates. During October, the visitors numbered over 2,500,000. From May
10th to November 10th, the total admissions were 9,900,000; 8,000,000
admission fees were collected, amounting to $3,800,000. The fair was
brought to an end on November 10th. After brief closing exercises,
President Grant gave the signal to stop the Corliss engine. The giant
slowly came to a standstill, the hum of the machinery died away, and the
International Exhibition of 1876 was closed.

The Centennial Exposition was not a complete financial success. After
returning the United States loan of $1,500,000, the stockholders could
not be paid in full. The attendance was, however, larger in the
aggregate than at any previous international exhibition, except that of
Paris in 1867. The admissions there reached 10,200,000, but the gates
were open fifty-one days longer than at Philadelphia. At Vienna, in
1873, there were but 7,255,000 admissions in 186 days against 159 days
at Philadelphia.

The larger and more important results of this exposition cannot be
measured with precision. A thousand silent influences were set at work
upon our social, intellectual, and political life, which operated in
secret for years afterward. The most obvious, and perhaps the most
important, effect was the broadening of sympathies and mental outlook.
Visitors to Philadelphia got something of the benefit of foreign travel.
Local prejudices were broken down. New ideas of life and civilization
were planted in hitherto sterile minds. The plodding Eastern farmer
caught something of the Westerner's dash and swing. North and South,
East and West, drew nearer together. A narrow patriotism caught glimpses
of a great and noble world without.

These influences touched the most careless observer. Special classes
derived each a peculiar benefit. Mechanical invention was stimulated.
Art received an impetus which can never cease to be felt. To our
household art, especially, came much quickening from the sight of
England's beautiful display of home decorations.

The Exposition exalted the United States in the eyes of her foreign
guests. Many were amazed at such proofs of the wealth, intelligence, and
progressive spirit of the great republic. A correspondent of the London
Times wrote, in 1876: "The American invents as the Greek sculptured and
the Italian painted; it is genius." We may hope that the exhibits were
educators to Europe as well as to America.

Lastly, the American returned from the great fair with an opinion of his
own country which, if more sober and just than he had previously
entertained, was not less proud but far prouder. The Nation laid aside
its holiday attire, and, despite manifest defects and dangers in our
national life, settled down to another century of work with increased
pride in its past and stronger confidence for its future.



CHAPTER VII.

ECONOMIC POLITICS

[1887]

The enormous strides with which we paid off our war debt amazed the
world. The debt had reached its highest point in August, 1865. At that
date the figure was $2,844,649,626, or, for the interest-bearing part
alone, $2,381,530,294, The total interest-bearing debt on April 30,
1888, was only $1,038,199,762. At the end of that fiscal year, June 30,
1888, the debt, less cash in the treasury, amounted to $1,165,584,656.
Its items at this time were $222,207,050 in bonds at 4-1/2 per cent.,
payable in 1891; $714,315,450 in four per cent. bonds, payable in 1907;
four per cent. refunding certificates amounting to $141,300; the three
per cent. navy pension fund of $14,000,000, and the Pacific Railway six
per cent. bonds, $64,623,512. Thus on June 30,1888, more than half of
the largest total had been paid off, and the net debt, aside from the
Pacific Railway bonds, which that corporation was to pay, having fallen
to below a billion. The reduction proceeded for the entire twenty-three
years between the first and last dates named, at an average rate of
$62,906,975 yearly, or $5,225,581 each month, $174,186 each day, $7,258
each hour, and $120.47 each minute.

The interest-bearing legal tender notes were first paid off. Greenbacks,
or non interest-bearing legal tenders were still, October 1, 1894,
outstanding to the amount of $346,681,000; yet this division of the
debt, too, had been vastly reduced, having stood at $433,160,569 on
August 31, 1865.

To the bonded obligations of the country the policy of refunding was
early applied, bonds of high rates being called in so soon as callable,
and replaced by others bearing lower rates. The income of the Government
was so immense that it proved unfortunate to have set so late a date as
1891 for the time at which the 4-1/2's could be paid off. To fix the
date of maturity for the 4's in 1907 was, of course, worse still. The
three per cents. of 1882, which supplanted earlier issues, were
fortunately made payable at the Government's option, and on May 20,
1887, the Secretary of the Treasury issued a call for the last of them,
amounting to $19,717,500, interest to cease with the first of the next
July.

From this time there were no bonds subject to par payment at the
discretion of the Government, and as revenues were vast the surplus
began to pile up in the treasury. December 1, 1887, after every possible
obligation of the Government had been provided for, $55,258,701
remained, a sum increased by the end of that fiscal year, namely, June
30, 1888, spite of considerable amounts in long bonds purchased at high
rates, to $103,220,464, There was no method at once legal and economical
for paying this out. The Secretary could of course buy 4's and 4-1/2's
in the open market, and during 1888 this was to some extent done.
Obviously, if entered upon in a large way, it must have greatly carried
up the price of those bonds. The question how to limit the surplus, how
to keep the money of the country from becoming locked up in the treasury
and sub-treasuries of the United States, was thus a grave one, and
entered hotly into the political campaign of the last-named year.

[1890]

On June 30, 1890, $109,015,750 in the 4-1/2 per cent. bonds, redeemable
September 1, 1891, were still outstanding. By April 1, 1891, they had,
by redemption or purchase, been reduced to $53,854,250, of which
one-half in value was held by national banks, to sustain their
circulation. To avoid contracting this circulation the Secretary of the
Treasury permitted holders of these bonds to retain them and receive
interest at two per cent. About $25,364,500 was so continued. Interest
on the remainder ceased at their maturity, and nearly all were soon paid
off. The bonds continued at two per cent. were all along quoted at par,
though payable at the will of the Government, revealing a national
credit never excelled in history. The national debt, less cash in the
treasury, stood on July 1, 1894, after an increase during the previous
fiscal year of $60,000,000, at $899,313,381.

The old tariff issue had emerged again soon after the end of the war.
The Morrill tariff of 1861 about restored the rates of 1846, and even
those rates had, on many things, been very decidedly increased during
the war. Still further protective duties had been laid in the course of
the war, called compensating duties, to offset the internal revenues
which burdened manufacturers in various ways. After the war the internal
taxes were nearly all swept away at the earliest possible moment, until,
after July 1, 1883, only spirits, fermented liquors, tobacco, banks and
bankers yielded internal revenue. Customs duties were also removed from
nearly all so-called revenue articles, as spices, tea, and coffee, not
produced in this country--the tax, therefore, not being of a protective
nature. Slight reductions were, indeed, made in protective duties, first
in 1872--replaced, however, almost entirely in 1875--and again in 1883.
The act of 1883 lowered protection less than appeared, and its rates on
woollens, high grade cottons, iron ore, steel, and a few other articles,
were now made even higher than the same had previously borne. It will be
seen that our policy during the years under survey was to limit national
income sufficiently without lowering or removing any protective duties.

In the republican platform of 1888 this policy was explicitly avowed. At
that time, as next to nothing could at present be done to pay off the
national indebtedness, both parties had to admit that some measure was
needed to lessen the revenue. The republican plan was to effect the
reduction mainly by lowering or removing the remaining internal taxes,
the democratic to secure the same result by changes in customs duties,
cutting down rates and enlarging the free list. President Cleveland's
message to Congress in December 1887, stated the issue with great
clearness, and this issue was the main one which divided the two parties
in the presidential election of the ensuing year.

Anticipating a little we may remark in this place that the Republicans,
having acquired control of all three legislative branches of the
Government, passed, in 1890, the McKinley Tariff Act, considerably
raising rates, though somewhat enlarging the free list. It removed the
duty from raw sugar, affixing a bounty to the production of sugar in the
United States. But in 1892 the Democrats again acquired power, electing
Mr. Cleveland and controlling the Senate. In 1894 they passed the
Wilson-Senate Tariff Act, greatly reducing rates in general, and
free-listing the important commodities of wool, salt, and lumber. Raw
sugar was now taxed again, and the bounty upon its production abolished.

[1873]

The revenue question in this campaign was not a little complicated by
the existence of numerous and powerful Trusts, which anti-protectionists
believed to be fostered by our high tariff. The Trust System arose about
1876, and in the course of a few years almost every great enterprise in
the land was carried on under the form of a trust. The principal
corporations or men engaged in an industry would enter into combination,
more or less informal, for the regulation of production and prices.
Usually the result was an elevation of prices, and where the trust
constituted a necessary monopoly this rise might be indefinitely
perpetuated. High tariff as well as low tariff newspapers made great
outcry against these monopolies. The latter urged that a reduced tariff,
forcing these businesses more into competition with corresponding
producers abroad, was the only thing needful to break their solidarity
and consequent power. Advocates of high tariff denied this.

[1878]

The old silver dollar, "the Dollar of the Fathers," had, until 1873,
never ceased to be full legal tender, although it had since 1853 been
too valuable as compared with the gold dollar to circulate much. In 1873
a law was passed demonetizing it, and making gold the exclusive form of
United States hard money. The new German Empire did the same this very
year. There at once began a great apparent depreciation of silver in
comparison with gold at the historic ratio. For a long time this change
involved no decrease in the value or purchasing power of silver even in
the form of bullion, but consisted rather in a rise of the value of
gold.

In view of this, as all the Government bonds outstanding in 1873 had
been made payable in coin, it was as good as universally believed in
most sections of the Union that the demonetizing of silver, if persisted
in, would work hardship to taxpayers in liquidating the national debt. A
bill was therefore brought forward, and in 1878 passed, restoring to the
silver dollar its full legal tender character. In this legislation,
however, so great was the then disparity in value between gold and
silver at the ratio of 16 to 1, Congress did not venture to give back to
the white metal the right of free coinage, but instead required the
Secretary of the Treasury to purchase monthly not less than $2,000,000
worth of silver and coin it into dollars.

The act was disapproved by President Hayes, but immediately passed over
his veto, February 28, 1878. The advocates of gold monometallism
believed that the issue of these dollars would speedily drive gold from
the country. Owing to the limitation of the new coinage no such effect
was experienced, and the silver dollars, or the certificates
representing them, floated at par with gold, which, indeed, far from
leaving the country, was imported in vast amounts nearly every year.
After 1880 the money in circulation in the United States was gold coin,
silver coin gold certificates, greenbacks or United States notes, and
the notes of the national banks. The so-called Sherman Law, of 1890,
added a new category, the treasury notes issued in payment for silver
bullion. It stopped the compulsory coinage of full-tender silver, though
continuing and much increasing the purchase of silver bullion by the
Government. The repeal of the purchase clause of this law, in 1893, put
an end to the acquisition of silver by the United States.

[1879]

January 1, 1879, the next year after the silver bill was passed, the
United States, under the Resumption Act of January 14, 1875, began again
the payment, which had been suspended ever since 1862, of specie in
liquidation of greenbacks. The possibility of this had been under
discussion for some years, and was disbelieved in by many thoughtful
financiers and public men. The credit of the momentous step was mostly
due to John Sherman, Secretary of the Treasury in the cabinet of
President Hayes. He believed resumption to be as possible as it was
important. By the sale of 4-1/2 per cent. bonds redeemable in 1891, he
had accumulated before the appointed day $ 138,000,000 of coin, nearly
all in gold, amounting to about forty per cent. of the greenbacks then
outstanding.

Resumption proved easier than even he anticipated. The greenbacks had
risen to par--the first time in seventeen years--December 18th,
thirteen days before the date fixed for beginning gold payments, and
when the day arrived only straggling applications for coin were made,
less in amount than was asked for in greenbacks as interest by
bondholders, who could have demanded coin. During the entire year only
$11,456,536 in greenbacks were offered for redemption, while over
$250,000,000 in them were paid out in coin obligations. It was found
that people preferred paper to metal money, and had no wish for gold
instead of notes when assured that the exchange could be made at their
option. Notwithstanding our acceptance of greenbacks for
customs--$109,467,456 during 1879--the treasury at the end of that year
experienced a dearth of these and a plethora of coin, having actually to
force debtors to receive hard money.

[1876-1877]

Such popularity of the greenbacks stimulated to fresh life the "fiat
greenback" theory, long in vogue and very influential in many parts of
the country. Its pith lay in the proposition that money requires in its
material no intrinsic value, its worth and purchasing power coming
entirely from the "fiat" of the government issuing it, so that paper
money put forth by authority of a solvent and powerful government will
be the peer of gold. This idea was the rallying point of the National
Labor Greenback Party, organized at its Indianapolis convention, May 17,
1876, when Peter Cooper was put in nomination for President. At the
subsequent presidential election in November, he received 82,640 votes.
The next year his party polled 187,095 votes; in 1878, 1,000,365.

From the moment of its issue, there had been in the country many who
went to the opposite extreme with reference to the greenback. They
believed it unconstitutional and pernicious, a menace to the nation's
credit and financial weal. The question came to the Supreme Court during
the war, and this form of contracting debt on the part of the Government
was then justified as a war measure. When the war was over the question
whether the greenback's legal tender quality could still be maintained,
also had to be passed upon by the court. The first decision was in the
negative, but it was subsequently reversed. Still a third question was
whether a man could be forced to take greenbacks in liquidation of debt
after the resumption of specie payments. This was tried out in the
famous case of Juilliard vs. Greenman, and the decision was, as on the
other two occasions, in favor of the greenback. In spite of all this,
however, the zeal for the fiat or non-promissory theory and practice of
paper money almost totally died away after about 1880.

The most desperate and extensive strike that had yet occurred in this
country was that of 1877, by the employees of the principal railway
trunk lines, the Baltimore and Ohio, the Pennsylvania, the Erie, the New
York Central, and their western prolongations. At a preconcerted time
junctions and other main points were seized. Freight traffic on the
roads named was entirely suspended, and the passenger and mail service
greatly impeded. When new employees sought to work, militia and United
States troops had to be called out to preserve order. Baltimore and
Pittsburgh were each the scene of a bloody riot. At the latter place,
where the mob was immense and most furious, the militia were overcome
and besieged in a roundhouse, which it was then attempted to burn by
lighting oil cars and pushing them against it. Fortunately the soldiers
escaped across the river. The torch was applied freely and with dreadful
effect. Machine-shops, warehouses, and 2,000 freight-cars were pillaged
or burnt. The loss of property was estimated at $10,000,000. In
disturbances at Chicago nineteen were killed, at Baltimore nine, at
Reading thirteen, and thrice as many wounded. One hundred thousand
laborers were believed to have taken part in the movement, and at one
time or another 6,000 or 7,000 miles of road were in their power. The
agitation began on July 14th and was serious till the 27th, but had
mostly died away by the end of the month, the laborers nearly all
returning to their work.

Hosts of Pennsylvania miners went out along with the railroad men. The
railway strike itself was largely sympathetic, the ten per cent.
reduction in wages assigned as its cause applying to comparatively few.
The next decade witnessed continual troubles of this sort, though rarely
if in any case so serious, between wage-workers and their employers in
nearly all industries. The worst ones befell the manufacturing portions
of the country. Strikes and lock-outs were part of the news almost every
day. The causes were various. One lay in the vast numbers of immigrants
hither and the low, ignorant character of many of them--clay for the
hand of the first unscrupulous demagogue.

Another cause was the wide and sedulous inculcation in this country of
the communist and anarchist doctrines long prevalent in Europe.
Influences concurrent with both these were the actual injustice and the
proud, overbearing manner of many employers. Capital had been mismanaged
and wasted. The war had brought unearned fortunes to many, sudden wealth
to a much larger number, while the unexampled prosperity of the country
raised up in a perfectly normal manner a wealthy class, the like of
which, in number and power, our country had never known before. As
therefore immigration along with much else multiplied the poor, the
eternal, angry strife of wealth with poverty, of high with low, of
classes with masses, crossed over from Europe and began on our shores.

The rise of trusts and gigantic corporations was connected with this
struggle. Corporations worth nigh half a billion dollars apiece were
able to buy or defy legislatures and make or break laws as they pleased;
and as such corporations, instead of individuals, more and more became
the employers of labor, not only did the old-time kindliness between
help and hirers die out, but men the most cool and intelligent feared
the new power as a menace to democracy. Strikes therefore commanded
large public sympathy. Stock-watering and other vicious practices,
involving the ruin of corporations themselves by the few holders of a
majority of the shares, in order to re-purchase the property for next to
nothing, contributed to this hostility; as did the presence in many
great corporations of foreign capital and capitalists, and also the
mutual favoritism of corporations, showing itself, for instance, in
special freight rates to privileged concerns. Minor interests and
individual employees, powerless against these Titan agencies by any of
the old legal processes, resorted to counter organization.

The Patrons of Husbandry grew up in the West, with influence longer than
the Order's nominal life, of which the often unwise "Granger" railroad
legislation was one sign. In the East trades-unions secured rank
development, and the Knights of Labor, intended as a sort of Union of
them all, attained in 1887 a membership of a million. The manufacturers'
"black list," to prevent any "agitator" laborer from securing work, was
answered by the "boycott," to keep the products of obnoxious
establishments from finding sale. Labor organizations, so strong, often
tyrannized over their own members, and boycotting became a nuisance that
had to be abated by law.

[1880]

Labor agitation had of late years become greatly easier owing to the
extraordinarily increased percentage of our urban population. In 1790
only 3.3 per cent. of the people in the country lived in places of 8,000
inhabitants and upward, and so late as 1840 only 8.5 per cent. In 1850
the percentage was 12.5; in 1860, 16.1; in 1870, 20.9; in 1880, 22.5;
and in 1890, 29.2. The year 1880 saw within our borders twenty cities
each with a population of over 100,000; 286 each with over 8,000. In
1890 there were twenty-eight cities each having 100,000 inhabitants or
more, and 448 having 8,000 or more. It was mostly manufacturing and
mechanical industry which thus brought these hordes of human beings
together.



CHAPTER VIII.

THE MARCH OF INDUSTRY

[1869]

We can give but little idea of the advance in industrial artifice and
appliances of all kinds made in the United States in the two decades
after the Civil War. Take it first in textile manufacturing. A century
earlier one person in every family had to work incessantly at spinning
and weaving to keep the whole of them in clothing. Now one day's work a
year per person sufficed for this. The speed of spindles had risen since
1860 from 5,000 to 7,500 revolutions a minute. Looms had gone from 120
picks to 160, and one hand tended from 25 to 50 per cent. more work. The
"slasher" dresser accomplished ten times more than the old machine,
supplying 400 looms in place of forty, and requiring to manage it only
one man and a boy instead of two men and ten girls. A generation earlier
one operative made three yards an hour, now he made ten. In the twenty
years under survey the annual production of cotton mills rose from two
and one-half to three and one-half tons per hand. One man formerly
tended forty spindles, now he tended sixty. In 1890 a single operative
in America could make cotton cloth enough to supply 1,500 persons.


[Illustration: Large ship.]
The American Line Steamship St. Louis, launched from the Cramps Docks,
November 12. 1894.  (554 feet long 11,000 tons, and 20,000 horse-power.)


The improvements in woollen, iron, and miscellaneous manufacturing had
perhaps not been quite as great, but were remarkable notwithstanding.
Power and automatic machinery were the order of the day. The Corliss
engine got 23 per cent. more heat and energy from a given amount of coal
than had ever been obtained before it was invented. Instead of the
twenty-five days which the first transatlantic steamer required for the
passage from America to England, many vessels now went from New York to
Liverpool in considerably less than six days, or at an average rate of
more than twenty miles an hour. The speed of passenger trains on the
main railways had doubled. So had the weight of the freight-car load and
the amount of freight which an engine could pull. The newest locomotives
weighed nearly or quite one hundred tons each.

In 1869 a submarine cable was laid which joined the United States to the
continent of Europe. It extended about 3,050 miles, from Duxbury, Mass.,
to Brest, France, via the Island of St. Pierre, south of Newfoundland.
The company owning the cable was chartered by the waning empire of Louis
Napoleon. In 1875 a new cable was stretched between the United States
and Great Britain. It was called the United States Direct Cable, and at
first operated in opposition to the original one. The rates for cable
messages were greatly reduced in consequence. The price, once ten
dollars a word, fell in anticipation of the competition to fifty cents,
and to twenty-five after the competition actually began. The two
Anglo-American lines were subsequently united.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Cornelius Vanderbilt.


[1863-1869]

The year 1869 witnessed the junction of the Union Pacific with the
Central Pacific Railway, forming a continuous railway line between the
Atlantic and Pacific shores. The last rail was put down on May 12th, and
on the 15th trains began to run. This work had been in process of
construction ever since 1863. It traversed the Rocky Mountain range at
an elevation of 8,243 feet above sea-level. The Northern Pacific Railway
Company was chartered by Congress in 1864. The road was not completed
till August, 1883, nor opened to traffic before September. Its length
from Duluth to its then terminus on the Columbia River, Washington, was
1,674 miles. The Southern Pacific and the Atlantic and Pacific, both
traversing the Rockies, soon followed. Still another line, the Great
Northern, connecting St. Paul with the extreme Northwest, was opened in
1893. The country's total railway mileage in 1885 was 128,967 miles; in
1893 it was 170,607 miles.

In the same years with the opening of these continental lines began the
consolidation of the older ones into great systems. The New York Central
had already been formed out of sixteen different fragments, but the
process of consolidation in a large way may be said to have been
instituted by Cornelius Vanderbilt in 1869, when he joined the Lake
Shore and Michigan Southern with the New York Central, thus placing
under a single administration the entire route from New York to Chicago.
The first train pierced the Hoosac Tunnel, in Western Massachusetts,
February 9, 1875, completing another artery between East and West. The
tunnel passed through the Hoosac Mountain, a distance of four miles and
three-quarters, and had been in process of boring, though not
continuously, about fifteen years.


[Illustration: Rail line looping through a steep, narrow valley.]
The Big Loop on the Georgetown Branch of the Union Pacific, Colorado.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Charles F. Brush.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Moses G. Farmer.


[1875-1878]

The lighting of large spaces by electricity in a profitable manner may
be dated from 1875. The possibility of producing a brilliant light with
this fluid had been well known to physicists ever since Sir Humphry
Davy's experiments in 1813, but no method of generating the electricity
cheaply had hitherto been invented. Utilizing among others the
inventions of Dr. C. W. Siemens, Mr. Charles G. Brush, of Cleveland, 0.,
gave to the world in 1875 his remarkably efficient dynamo or generator,
and from that time the illumination of streets and squares by
electricity began to be somewhat common. There was, to be sure another
difficulty to be overcome, even for lighting on a grand scale, that of
maintaining a steady and continuous light. In this the Jablochkoff
candle, used in the Paris streets by 1878, was measurably successful. It
was a voltaic arc arrangement, in which, by making each of the two
carbon pencils alternately positive and negative, their ends were
consumed with equal rapidity and so kept perpetually the same distance
apart.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
Thomas A. Edison.


[Illustration: Three men watching a train passing through a long tunnel.]
The Hoosac Tunnel Lit by Glow Lamps, after the Plan of the Marr
Construction Company.


But the voltaic light was too brilliant for a small area. How to divide
and subdue it so as to render it suitable for house lighting, was still
a difficult problem. Farmer, Sawyer, Mann, and Edison, all attacked it
at nearly the same time, going back with singular accord from the
voltaic arc principle to that of incandescence in a vacuum. Edison, the
prodigy of the century in inventive genius, was the most successful.
Besides improving the dynamo, he perfected with little difficulty a
cheap vacuum-globe.  After long experimenting he succeeded in the more
arduous task of securing an automatic checking of the current before it
became hot enough to consume the incandescent carbon. He also found that
a large current could be divided into smaller ones by splitting up the
conductor into minor filaments. Triumph in household illumination was
thus achieved, and when, in October, 1878, the results of Edison's
experimenting were announced to the world, gas fell from twelve to
twenty per cent. The alarm was premature, however, since the new
illumination did not, after all, prove so satisfactory as to displace
the old. It largely did so for streets, factories, and halls, but to no
very great extent for residences.


[Illustration: Drawing of lamp.]
Edison's Platinum Lamp on Carbon Support, 1879.


[Illustration: Drawing of lamp.]
Edison's Paper Carbon Lamp.


[Illustration: Drawing of lamp.]
Edison's First Incandescent Platinum Lamp.


[1883-1884]

The most stupendous engineering work yet accomplished by man, the great
bridge spanning East River between Brooklyn and New York, was completed
in May, 1883, excavations for its foundations having begun so early as
1870. This wonder of the world was designed by John A. Roebling, and
after his death in 1869 finished by his son, W. A. Roebling.  It cost
about $16,000,000, two-thirds coming from the city of Brooklyn,
one-third from New York. A gigantic stone tower, 277 feet high, was
built on each side of the river. Through arched apertures in these
toward the top ran the roadway, its ends being 119 feet above the water.
The centre of the bridge was supported by four steel wire cables, 16
inches in diameter, which passed from solid masonry structures nearly
1,000 feet away from the water's edge on either shore, up over the two
towers, dipping, at the centre of the river, to nearly the level of the
roadway. On account of their great weight they had to be braided, strand
by strand, in their permanent position. Suspenders from these cables
grappled the body of the bridge at frequent intervals. The main span was
I,595-1/2 feet long, the entire work about 6,000 feet. There were five
passageways--two on the outside for carriages, the next two for cable
cars, the middle one for foot passengers. The bridge curved upward from
each tower, being at the middle 135 feet above the water in summer, and
three feet higher in winter, owing to contraction by the cold. All but
the very largest ships sailed under without shortening their masts.

In connection with the great bridge, as likewise in a way possessing an
importance for the whole nation, we may mention the ingenious deepening
of Hell-gate Channel, East River, by tunnelling beneath the water and
using dynamite; and also the introduction of elevated railways in New
York City and Brooklyn. This project had been mooted by 1868. Exactly
ten years later two sections of railway were open for travel in New
York. The first elevated road in Brooklyn began operation in 1885. These
new avenues of travel at once became immensely popular. In 1884, no
fewer than 250 engines and 800 cars were in use by the New York lines,
carrying over 300,000 passengers daily, or about 103,000,000 for the
year. Nearly at the same time with the introduction of these roads in
New York, new methods of traction for surface street railways, by
electricity and by cable, were introduced in various cities of the
country, bidding fair soon to do away with horses for this service.


[Illustration: Bridge and surrounding city.]
The Brooklyn Bridge, looking up the East River.


[Illustration: Tracks elevated about 30 feet on iron beams.]
The Manhattan Elevated Railway, New York.


[1877-1887]

One of the most interesting and valuable inventions of this or any
century was that of the telephone, devised by Alexander Graham Bell, and
first put to business use in 1877. For ten years Mr. Bell had been
experimenting upon the possibility of conveying sound by means of the
electric wire. In 1876 he had so far succeeded as to exhibit a pair of
his instruments in successful operation at the Philadelphia Centennial
Exhibition. In April of the next year the Cambridge Water Board, the
Pennsylvania Railroad, and many other corporations ordered the
instrument for practical service. From this time the business grew with
incredible rapidity. The American Bell Telephone Company was
incorporated, and in January, 1886, had in use 330,000 telephones. There
were this year in various cities of the United States 752 telephone
exchanges. The total length of telephone wires operated by this company
was 114,371 miles. In addition to the system which centred in the Bell
Company there were several competing telephone establishments in
continual litigation with the Bell. The total mileage of telephone wires
in the United States in 1887 was estimated at 130,000 miles. There were
the same year 170,000 miles of telegraph wire, besides private lines. In
1893, the aggregate length of telegraph lines in the United States open
to the public exceeded 210,000 miles. There were, besides, government
and private lines to a length vast but not ascertainable. In addition to
all this, the Bell Telephone Company, which conducted the main telephone
business of the country, owned, the same year, 307,748 miles of wire,
which the lines of other companies increased to 440,750 miles.

[Illustration: Mass of wiring about 10 by 20 feet.]
Under Side of a Modern Switchboard, showing 2,000 Telegraph Wires.


[1862-1877]

From this account of our country's material advance after the war we
purposely omit mention of the great economic progress at the South, as
that has been already reviewed in Chapter IV. We must, instead, notice
several events which decidedly checked the prosperity of these years.

So soon as gold had ceased to circulate in 1862, speculation in it
began, which was one of the most pernicious results of the depreciation
of paper. The ups and downs in the gold price of the greenback from week
to week and from day to day during the war were largely due to this
cause. In 1869 a clique of speculators in New York thought to realize an
immense fortune by cornering gold, a large proportion of the stock east
of the Rocky Mountains being known to be in New York City.

By Wednesday, September 22d, they had pushed up the price of gold in
greenbacks from 131 to 141, causing a disastrous tumble in stocks and
almost a panic. The money market grew tight, and interest enormous.
Loans were to be had only on the very best securities. On Thursday gold
still advanced, showing that the corner remained solid. At the last call
it stood at 144; at the first on Friday, September 24th, 105 was the
figure. The ring was believed at this time to hold in gold and in
contracts to deliver the same, over $100,000,000, while all the gold in
New York outside the United States Sub-Treasury was hardly over
$10,000,000. Only the Government could break the corner. At eleven
o'clock gold was at 155, whence in half an hour it rose to 160, then to
162, then to 164. In the midst of an excitement never paralleled in the
Gold Room before or since, it was announced on authority that the
Government would sell. The price at once went down to 135, and the power
of the clique was instantly broken. This day passed into history under
the name of "Black Friday."

[Illustration: Several men watching Bell using a phone.]
Professor Bell Sending the First Message by Long-distance Telephone,
from New York to Chicago.


[Illustration: Hysterical traders shouting and waving their arms. The
room has a 30 foot ceiling and a balcony. ]
The New York Gold Room on "Black Friday," September 24, 1869.


The Chicago fire of October, 1871, was the most disastrous yet in the
chronicles of our country. It began in the evening of October 8th and
raged for over twenty-four hours. According to the best estimates 250
lives were lost, 98,500 persons made homeless, 17,500 buildings
consumed, and $192,000,000 worth of property destroyed. The main
business portion of the city was included in the tract burned. Thirteen
months later the most destructive conflagration that had ever visited
Boston swept the district below Washington Street from Summer nearly to
State, and eastward to the water's edge, being the most solid business
portion of the city. The loss was placed at $75,000,000.


[Illustration: People running away from smoke and fire.]
A Scene during the Chicago Fire.


The shocking destruction of wealth by these fires was part cause of the
hard times which began in 1873. But others concurred. During 1872 the
balance of trade was  strongly against the United States. The
circulation of depreciated paper money had brought to many an apparent
prosperity which was not real, leading to the free contraction of debts
by individuals, corporations, towns, cities, and States. An
unprecedented mileage of railways had just been constructed. During the
half decade ending with 1873, $1,700,000,000 had thus been spent in the
country. The supposed wealth of many consisted in the bonds of these
roads and of other newly created concerns, as mining and manufacturing
corporations. Thus the entire business of the country was on a basis of
inflation, and when contraction came by the resumption of specie
payments and the demonetization of silver, disaster was inevitable.

In the course of the summer solid values began to be hoarded and
interest rates consequently to rise. In September panic came. Credit in
business was refused, debtors were pressed for payment, securities were
rushed into the market and fell greatly in price, railway stocks from
ten to forty per cent., even United States bonds from five to ten. There
was a run upon savings banks, many of which succumbed. For ten days,
beginning September 20th, the New York Stock Exchange had to suspend, so
dubious was the value of most stock contracts. Manufactured products
were little salable, and the prices of agricultural painfully sank.
Factories began to run on short time, many closed entirely, many
corporations failed. The peculiarity of this crisis was the slowness
with which it abated. No date indeed can be set as its term, its evil
effects dragging on through years, so that the ill times of 1893-94 may
be regarded as the same fever, intermittent in the meantime.

[1880]

Notwithstanding all these drawbacks, the material progress of the United
States for the two decades which we are studying was something enormous.
We have no room for details. Our total population by 1880 had swollen to
50,155,783, by 1890 to 62,622,250. The census valuation of our national
wealth, which had been for 1860, $16,159,616,068. was, for 1870,
$30,068,518,507; for 1880, $43,642,000,000; and for 1890,
$65,037,091,197. The per capita wealth was, according to the census of
1860, $514, by that of 1870, $780, by that of 1880, $870, by that of
1890, $1,036. In 1870 the United States was in wealth the third nation
on the globe; in 1880 it had distanced France and stood second. "The
country whose population has been developed within two hundred and
eighty years, does already one-third of the world's mining, one-fourth
of its manufacturing, and one-fifth of its agriculture; and at least
one-sixth of the world's wealth is already concentrated in the strip of
territory in Central North America which is the home of the United
States." These words were written after the census of 1880. Still
stronger ones would have been true in 1895.



CHAPTER IX.

END OF THE PERIOD

[1890]

It is a long way that we have taken the reader, from the days of
Columbus to where we can espy the dawn of the twentieth century. Yet, in
comparison with the times which our narrative has here reached, those of
three decades earlier would seem almost as remote as Columbus's own, so
swiftly did the wheels of progress turn. Everything declared that a new
age had opened. In addition to the signs of this which have been set
down in the preceding chapters, we have only space for the bare mention
of a few others.

In 1888 the United States mails flew from point to point across the
continent with a rapidity which would have astounded people so few years
back as the close of the war. Their distribution effected through the
post-office cars that ran on all the main lines and by immediate
delivery in cities and large towns, was quite as great an improvement as
the speed. The postal-car system had origin in Chicago in 1864,
spreading thence East and West. Speedy delivery was introduced in 1886.
Postal rates were lower than ever before, and destined soon to be lower
still. Much business formerly left to the express companies was now done
by mail, and much carried on in this way which formerly was not done at
all.

Our country had developed an attention to art in all its forms far
beyond anything of the kind to be observed at the end of the war. In all
the principal cities concerts of the highest order were provided and
numerously attended. Our art galleries already vied with many of those
in the Old World. Students of art were found in abundance in our own
multiplying schools for them, while many from this country sought art
instruction in Europe. Not a few Americans attained eminence in this
department year by year. In one artistic line we already excelled every
other people, viz., the application of the principles of taste in
beautifying homes, churches, structures intended for business, such as
exchanges, railway stations, and bridges, cars, and all kinds of
machinery. We led the world, too, in propriety and neatness of apparel,
at least, for men.

After the war the right to vote was extended in nearly all the States,
until by 1890 manhood suffrage was legally the rule from North to South
and from East to West. In this, indeed, we were only keeping pace with
Great Britain, France, Italy, Switzerland, and Germany. The agitation
for woman's suffrage had, however, progressed further here than in any
other land. There was a large party, quasi-political, intent upon
bringing it about. A national convention was held in that interest each
year. In Wyoming and Utah the suffrage had already been enjoyed by women
since 1869. In Kansas, by a law going into effect February 16, 1887,
they voted on all municipal affairs. In many other localities they had
the privilege of voting on certain questions, as the election of school
committees, and were eligible to membership in these committees.
Occupations of honor and profit were, more and more as the years passed,
open to the female sex. Women preached, practised law and medicine, and
furnished many of the best bookkeepers, sales-people, and principals of
schools. Vassar College, the first institution in the world for the full
collegiate education of women, was opened in 1861. Smith and Wellesley
Colleges, for the same, were opened in 1875, Bryn Mawr following in
1885. Cornell, Michigan, and all the State Universities in the West,
like a number of the best universities in the East, educated young women
on the same terms as young men. Harvard opened its Radcliffe College for
female pupils. At its commencement in 1886, Columbia College, of which
the Barnard College for women became virtually a part, conferred the
degree of Doctor in Philosophy upon a woman. Yale University and the
University of Pennsylvania opened their graduate departments to women on
the same terms as to men. Brown University did the same, besides
providing for the undergraduate instruction of women.


[Illustration: Man holding his hat, leaning from a moving train.]
Catching the Mail Pouch from the Crane.


Another sign of the times, still more striking, was our advance toward
socialism and state socialism. This occurred for the most part in ways
so recondite as to escape observation, yet in many respects the course
of things in this direction was perfectly obvious. The powerful movement
for the legal prohibition of the manufacture and sale of intoxicants was
one instance. The extension and perfection of our public school system,
all at the expense of the taxpayers, was another, it being possible by
1890 in nearly every State for a young person of either sex to secure,
without paying a cent of tuition money, a better education than the
finest universities in the land could give a hundred years previous. The
extent of governmental surveillance over great industries was another
illustration. The Trusts spoken of in a preceding chapter were
unhesitatingly assumed to be subject to legislative investigation and
command. Great corporations and combinations, it was now well
understood, could not pursue their ends merely for profit, irrespective
of public interest. The Inter-State Railway Law of February 4, 1887,
instituting a National Commission, to which all railways crossing state
lines were responsible for obedience to certain rules which the same law
enjoined, was the boldest assertion of state supervision yet made; but
there was a great and growing number of thinkers who believed that mere
state oversight would not suffice, and that at least gigantic businesses
like telegraph, railway, and mining, must sooner or later be bought and
operated out and out by public authority. Nothing had done so much to
promote this conviction as the rise, procedure, and wealth of these
Trusts, for from the oppressive greed of many of them no legislative
regulation seemed sufficient to protect the people.

This tendency to over-exalt the State's industrial function was not the
only danger which confronted us. Another was that from immigration. So
enormous was the influx of foreigners that we were threatened with a
fatal emasculation of our national character. The manner in which we
incorporated alien elements theretofore was among the wonders of
history, but it was at least a question whether we could continue to do
this always. It seemed in part therefore a healthy sentiment which by
the law of 1882 excluded Chinese labor-immigrants. New-comers from other
lands were also refused domicile here if imported under contract,
[Footnote: Law of February 26, 1885] or unable to support themselves.
The stronger law against the Chinese at first sight seemed invidious,
but there was some justification for it in the fact that those people
almost never settled down permanently as citizens of the United States,
but returned to their native land so soon as they earned a competence.
Italians of the lowest class did this to some extent, but the great bulk
of our foreign-born population came here with the purpose of becoming
American.

Our Irish-American fellow-citizens gave concern to many. One complaint
was that they brought hither their anti-English prejudices, by the loud
and continual assertion of which they tended ever to embroil us with
England. There proved to be slight danger from this source, particularly
after the rise of a powerful pro-Irish sentiment and party among the
English themselves. Others had great fear of the Irish as Catholics,
they being the chief representatives of that faith in the United States.
The growth of the Roman Catholic Church in our borders was certainly
very rapid. An American clergyman, McCloskey, was made Cardinal in 1875.
A University, subject to the Catholic Church was erected in Washington.
Catholicism in America was no longer a mission church as it had been
until quite recently, but had a full national organization as in the
other great nations of the earth.

A strong movement was developed among the Catholic clergy against our
common schools as usually administered. Parochial schools were erected
in most Eastern cities and large towns, and efforts made to fill them
with children who, but for their existence, would be in the public
schools. Public schools were denounced as godless because they did not,
as of course they could not, give positive religious instruction. This
opposition was doubtless a menace to our time-honored and on the whole
very efficient school system, so that what the future of this was to be
no one could confidently predict. It was to be remarked, however, that
some of the warmest defenders of the public schools appeared in the
Catholic ranks; nor was there any evidence that, as a class, American
citizens of Irish birth and descent prized the free institutions of this
nation a whit less than the rest of the people.

A greater peril beset the nation in the decay which slowly crept over
our family life. The family has in every civilized age been justly
regarded as the pillar of the state, but the integrity which it
possessed among our fathers, their children invaded in many ways.
Mormonism, decadent if not dead, about which so much had been said, was
but one of these, and perhaps not the worst. If crimes of a violent
nature were becoming less frequent, crimes against chastity were on the
increase. Easy divorce was considerably responsible for this. The
diversity of marriage and divorce laws in the various States was a great
abomination. How to remedy it did not appear. Many called for a
constitutional amendment, lodging solely in Congress the power of making
laws upon this vital subject.

We proved very fortunate as a people in that our material prosperity
itself did not prove a greater curse. More than every other disaster was
to be feared the growth of a temper for mere material thinking and
enjoyment, the love of lucre and of those merely material comforts and
delights which lucre can buy. There was among us quite too little care
for the ideal side of life.  Too many who purchased books loved them
only for the money they cost. Rich engravings and bindings were often
sought rather than edifying matter. Costly daubs were purchased at
enormous prices for lack of true artistic taste or relish. In sadly
frequent cases the great captain of industry was nothing but a plodder.
There was too great rush for wealth. We became nervous. Nervous diseases
increased alarmingly. We read, but only market reports. Think, we did
not; we only reckoned.

The outlook, notwithstanding, embraced much that was hopeful. Very
worthful as well as very beautiful was the new sense of nationality that
had been developed in this country in consequence of the war. While men
still differed as to the original nature of our Union, while the State
remained as yet a vital though a decreasingly important organ of the
political frame, its real status offering to reward study as never
before because no longer a sectional issue, yet the war, as unmistakably
pronouncing the national will, laid the question of Nation's supremacy
over State forever at rest, having hereupon virtually the effect of a
constitutional amendment. Close construction of the Constitution could
never again throttle this Union. Whether such quasi-amendment altered
the Constitution, Stephens's view, or served but to bring out more
clearly its old meaning, our view, practically the war had entailed
enormous new exaltation and centralization of the Union, with answering
subordination of the State.


[Illustration: Several people standing outside small domes of snow blocks.]
Igloos, or Esquimau Huts.


[Illustration: Portrait.]
A. W. Greely.


A quickened sense of our duty as a nation might likewise be observed at
work in various directions. Our treatment of the Indians had been, since
the administration of President Grant, more humane than ever before.
Earnest and successful efforts were made, very largely at the national
expense, to educate them and prepare them for citizenship. They were
better protected from the rapacity of heartless agents and frontiersmen,
while the land in severalty legislation of 1887 opened the red man's way
to the actual attainment of civil rights and to all the advance in
civilization of which he was capable.

The part which our Government had begun to take in the advancement of
science was greatly to its credit. We have space to instance only the
expedition of 1881-1884, headed by Lieutenant Greely, to the northern
polar regions for scientific observation, reaching a point nearer to the
pole than had ever before been attained. The whole world admired the
daring and sympathized with the sufferings of these gallant explorers,
several of whom perished of cold and hunger before relief reached them,
the others rescued barely in season to save them from like fate.

The revision of King James's version of our English Bible, New Testament
finished in 1881, Old Testament in 1885, was an eminent historical event
falling in this period. American divines took prominent part in it,
though of course not under any commission from our Government.

Being the most trying crisis ever successfully met by a self-governed
people, the war lent powerful stimulus and tonic to the cause of free
institutions everywhere, proving republican loyalty to be as firm and
trustworthy as monarchical, and government by and for the governed to be
not necessarily either inefficient or ephemeral. It demonstrated that a
republic, without lessening its freedom, may become a great military
power, generals of highest genius passively obeying a popularly elected
Congress and Executive, these in turn maintaining full mastery, yet not
hampering military movements.

The achievement of this firmer national unity, with the success and the
martial and financial prodigies attending the struggle therefor, gave us
new and far higher place in the esteem of nations, with correspondingly
enlarged influence in mankind's greater affairs.

By 1890 one might observe a more or less conscious disposition on the
part of thoughtful Americans to insist that this influence be exerted,
to have the nation break over the policy wisely laid down by Washington,
for earlier times, and assert itself more in the Parliament of Man. It
was felt that our place and power among the nations of the earth had not
been given us for naught, and that, as the weal of mankind is to a
considerable degree determined by international politics, we had no
right longer to hold ourselves aloof from this field. The feeling was
emphasized by the annihilation of space between us and other nations,
brought about through steam navigation and ocean telegraphy.

Not only Great Britain and France, but Germany, Russia, and China were
now at our very doors. They would influence our weal whether or not we
reacted upon them. Why should we not, without being meddlesome, strive
to disseminate our ideas, extend our civilization, and make our national
personality felt? It was to President Arthur's praise that he caused the
United States to be represented at Berlin in the Congo Conference of
1884-85. Next, men said, our delegates would be present with voice and
vote in all regular Congresses of the Great Powers. Americans did not
prophesy, as more than one voice out of Europe itself had of late done,
that the United States would some day cross the Atlantic as a conqueror.
This, indeed, was a somewhat natural thought. The Old World reeled under
its crushing burden of national debts and military taxes, and in
material resources could not long compete with us, free from such
burdens. But the American thought was that we should express our
superiority in the form of ideas, not of arms, and use it in elevating
mankind to richer culture and a nobler life.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the United States, Volume 4, by 
E. Benjamin Andrews

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY UNITED STATES ***

***** This file should be named 22676.txt or 22676.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/6/7/22676/

Produced by Don Kostuch

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
