The Project Gutenberg EBook of At Pinney's Ranch, by Edward Bellamy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: At Pinney's Ranch
       1898

Author: Edward Bellamy

Release Date: September 21, 2007 [EBook #22709]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AT PINNEY'S RANCH ***




Produced by David Widger





AT PINNEY'S RANCH

By Edward Bellamy

1898


John Lansing first met Mary Hollister at the house of his friend Pinney,
whose wife was her sister. She had soft gray eyes, a pretty color in her
cheeks, rosy lips, and a charming figure. In the course of the evening
somebody suggested mind-reading as a pastime, and Lansing, who had some
powers, or supposed powers, in that direction, although he laughed
at them himself, experimented in turn with the ladies. He failed with
nearly every subject until it came Mary Hollister's turn. As she placed
her soft palm in his, closed her eyes, and gave herself up to his
influence, he knew that he should succeed with her, and so he did.
She proved a remarkably sympathetic subject, and Lansing was himself
surprised, and the spectators fairly thrilled, by the feats he was able
to perform by her aid. After that evening he met her often, and there
was more equally remarkable mind-reading; and then mind-reading was
dropped for heart-reading, and the old, old story they read in each
other's hearts had more fascination for them than the new science.
Having once discovered that their hearts beat in unison, they took no
more interest in the relation of their minds.

The action proper of this story begins four years after their marriage,
with a very shocking event,--nothing less than the murder of Austin
Flint, who was found dead one morning in the house in which he lived
alone. Lansing had no hand in the deed, but he might almost as well have
had; for, while absolutely guiltless, he was caught in one of those nets
of circumstance which no foresight can avoid, whereby innocent men are
sometimes snared helplessly, and delivered over to a horrid death. There
had been a misunderstanding between him and the dead man, and only
a couple of days before the murder, they had exchanged blows on the
street. When Flint was found dead, in the lack of any other clue, people
thought of Lansing. He realized that this was so, and remained silent as
to a fact which otherwise he would have testified to at the inquest,
but which he feared might now imperil him. He had been at Austin Flint's
house the night of the murder, and might have committed it, so far
as opportunity was concerned. In reality, the motive of his visit was
anything but murderous. Deeply chagrined by the scandal of the fight,
he had gone to Flint to apologize, and to make up their quarrel. But he
knew very well that nobody would believe that this was his true object
in seeking his enemy secretly by night, while the admission of the visit
would complete a circumstantial evidence against him stronger than had
often hanged men. He believed that no one but the dead man knew of the
call, and that it would never be found out. He had not told his wife of
it at the time, and still less afterward, on account of the anxiety she
would feel at his position.

Two weeks passed, and he was beginning to breathe freely in the
assurance of safety, when, like a thunderbolt from a cloud that seems to
have passed over, the catastrophe came. A friend met him on the street
one day, and warned him to escape while he could. It appeared that he
had been seen to enter Flint's house that night. His concealment of the
fact had been accepted as corroborating evidence of his guilt, and the
police, who had shadowed him from the first, might arrest him at any
moment. The conviction that he was guilty, which the friend who told him
this evidently had, was a terrible comment on the desperateness of
his position. He walked home as in a dream. His wife had gone out to
a neighbor's. His little boy came to him, and clambered on his knee.
"Papa, what makes your face so wet?" he asked, for there were great
drops on his forehead. Then his wife came in, her face white, her eyes
full of horror. "Oh, John!" she exclaimed. "They say you were at Mr.
Flint's that night, and they are going to arrest you. Oh, John, what
does it mean? Why don't you speak? I shall go mad, if you do not speak.
You were not there! Tell me that you were not there!" The ghastly face
he raised to hers might well have seemed to confess everything.

At least she seemed to take it so, and in a fit of hysterical weeping
sank to the floor, and buried her face in her hands upon a chair. The
children, alarmed at the scene, began to cry. It was growing dark, and
as he looked out of the window, Lansing saw an officer and a number of
other persons approaching the house. They were coming to arrest him.
Animal terror, the instinct of self-preservation, seized upon his
faculties, stunned and demoralized as he was by the suddenness with
which this calamity had come upon him. He opened the door and fled,
with a score of men and boys yelling in pursuit. He ran wildly, blindly,
making incredible leaps and bounds over obstacles. As men sometimes do
in nightmares, he argued with himself, as he ran, whether this could
possibly be a waking experience, and inclined to think that it could
not. It must be a dream. It was too fantastically horrible to be
anything else.

Presently he saw just before him the eddying, swirling current of the
river, swollen by a freshet. Still half convinced that he was in a
nightmare, and, if he could but shake it off, should awake in his warm
bed, he plunged headlong in, and was at once swirled out of sight of his
pursuers beneath the darkening sky. A blow from a floating object caused
him to throw up his arms, and, clutching something solid, he clambered
upon a shed carried away by the freshet from an up-river farm. All night
he drifted with the swift current, and in the morning landed in safety
thirty miles below the village from which he had fled for life.

So John Lansing, for no fault whatever except an error of judgment, if
even it was that, was banished from home, and separated from his family
almost as hopelessly as if he were dead. To return would be to meet an
accusation of murder to which his flight had added overwhelming weight.
To write to his wife might be to put the officers of the law, who
doubtless watched her closely, upon his scent.

Under an assumed name he made his way to the far West, and, joining the
rush to the silver mines of Colorado, was among the lucky ones. At the
end of three years he was a rich man. What he had made the money for, he
could not tell, except that the engrossment of the struggle had helped
him to forget his wretchedness. Not that he ever did forget it. His
wife and babies, from whose embraces he had been so suddenly torn,
were always in his thoughts. Above all, he could not forget the look of
horror in his wife's eyes in that last terrible scene. To see her again,
and convince her, if not others, that he was innocent, was a need which
so grew upon him that, at the end of three years, he determined to take
his life in his hand and return home openly. This life of exile was not
worth living.

One day, in the course of setting his affairs in order for his return,
he was visiting a mining camp remote from the settlements, when a voice
addressed him by his old name, and looking around he saw Pinney. The
latter's first words, as soon as his astonishment and delight had found
some expression, assured Lansing that he was no longer in danger. The
murderer of Austin' Flint had been discovered, convicted, and hanged two
years previous. As for Lansing, it had been taken for granted that he
was drowned when he leaped into the river, and there had been no further
search for him. His wife had been broken-hearted ever since, but she and
the children were otherwise well, according to the last letters
received by Pinney, who, with his wife, had moved out to Colorado a year
previous.

Of course Lansing's only idea now was to get home as fast as steam could
carry him; but they were one hundred miles from the railroad, and the
only communication was by stage. It would get up from the railroad the
next day, and go back the following morning. Pinney took Lansing out to
his ranch, some miles from the mining camp, to pass the interval. The
first thing he asked Mrs. Pinney was if she had a photograph of his
wife. When she brought him one, he durst not look at it before his
hosts. Not till he had gone to his room and locked the door did he trust
himself to see again the face of his beloved Mary.

That evening Mrs. Pinney told him how his wife and children had fared
in his absence. Her father had helped them at first, but after his death
Mary had depended upon needlework for support, finding it hard to make
the two ends meet.

Lansing groaned at hearing this, but Mrs. Pinney comforted him. It was
well worth while having troubles, she said, if they could be made up to
one, as all Mary's would be to her when she saw her husband.

The upcoming stage brought the mail, and next day Pinney rode into camp
to get his weekly newspaper, and engage a passage down the next morning
for Lansing. The day dragged terribly to the latter, who stayed at the
ranch. He was quite unfit for any social purpose, as Mrs. Pinney, to
whom a guest in that lonely place was a rare treat, found to her sorrow,
though indeed she could not blame him for being poor company. He passed
hours, locked in his room, brooding over Mary's picture. The rest of the
day he spent wandering about the place, smiling and talking to himself
like an imbecile, as he dreamed of the happiness so soon to crown his
trials. If he could have put himself in communication with Mary by
telegraph during this period of waiting, it would have been easier to
get through, but the nearest telegraph station was at the railroad.
In the afternoon he saddled a horse and rode about the country, thus
disposing of a couple of hours.

When he came back to the house, he saw that Pinney had returned, for his
horse was tethered to a post of the front piazza. The doors and windows
of the living-room were open, and as he reached the front door, he heard
Pinney and his wife talking in agitated tones.

"Oh, how could God let such an awful thing happen?" she was exclaiming,
in a voice broken by hysterical sobbing. "I 'm sure there was never
anything half so horrible before. Just as John was coming home to her,
and she worshiping him so, and he her! Oh, it will kill him! Who is
going to tell him? Who can tell him?"

"He must not be told to-day," said Pinney's voice. "We must keep it from
him at least for to-day."

Lansing entered the room. "Is she dead?" he asked quietly. He could not
doubt, from what he had overheard, that she was.

"God help him! He 'll have to know it now," exclaimed Pinney.

"Is she dead?" repeated Lansing.

"No, she is n't dead."

"Is she dying, then?"

"No, she is well."

"It's the children, then?"

"No," answered Pinney. "They are all right."

"Then, in God's name, what is it?" demanded Lansing, unable to conceive
what serious evil could have happened to him, if nothing had befallen
his wife and babies.

"We can't keep it from him now," said Pinney to his wife. "You 'll have
to give him her letter."

"Can't you tell me what it is? Why do you keep me in suspense?" asked
Lansing, in a voice husky with a dread he knew not of what.

"I can't, man. Don't ask me!" groaned Finney. "It's better that you
should read it."

Mrs. Finney's face expressed an agony of compassion as, still half
clutching it, she held out a letter to Lansing. "John, oh, John," she
sobbed; "remember, she's not to blame! She doesn't know."

The letter, was in his wife's handwriting, addressed to Mrs. Pinney, and
read as follows:--

     You will be surprised by what I am going to tell you. You,
     who know how I loved John, must have taken it for granted
     that I would never marry again. Not that it could matter to
     him. Too well I feel the gulf between the dead and living to
     fancy that his peace could be troubled by any of the
     weaknesses of mortal hearts. Indeed, he often used to tell
     me that, if he died, he wanted me to marry again, if ever I
     felt like doing so; but in those happy days I was always
     sure that I should be taken first. It was he who was to go
     first, though, and now it is for the sake of his children
     that I am going to do what I never thought I could. I am
     going to marry again. As they grow older and need more, I
     find it impossible for me to support them, though I do not
     mind how hard I work, and would wear my fingers to the bone
     rather than take any other man's name after being John's
     wife. But I cannot care for them as they should be cared
     for. Johnny is now six, and ought to go to school, but I
     cannot dress him decently enough to send him. Mary has
     outgrown all her clothes, and I cannot get her more. Her
     feet are too tender to go bare, and I cannot buy her shoes.
     I get less and less sewing since the new dressmaker came to
     the village, and soon shall have none. We live, oh so
     plainly! For myself I should not care, but the children are
     growing and need better food. They are John's children, and
     for their sake I have brought myself to do what I never
     could have done but for them. I have promised to marry Mr.
     Whitcomb. I have not deceived him as to why alone I marry
     him. He has promised to care for the children as his own,
     and to send Johnny to college, for I know his father would
     have wanted him to go. It will be a very quiet wedding, of
     course. Mr. Whitcomb has had some cards printed to send to a
     few friends, and I inclose one to you. I cannot say that I
     wish you could be present, for it will be anything but a
     joyful day to me. But when I meet John in heaven, he will
     hold me to account for the children he left me, and this is
     the only way by which I can provide for them. So long as it
     is well with them, I ought not to care for myself.


     Your sister,

     Maky Lansing.

The card announced that the wedding would take place at the home of the
bride, at six o'clock on the afternoon of the 27th of June.

It was June 27 that day, and it was nearly five o'clock. "The Lord help
you!" ejaculated Pinney, as he saw, by the ashen hue which overspread
Lansing's face, that the full realization of his situation had come
home to him. "We meant to keep it from you till to-morrow. It might be a
little easier not to know it till it was over than now, when it is going
on, and you not able to lift a finger to stop it."

"Oh, John," cried Mrs. Pinney once more; "remember, she does n't know!"
and, sobbing hysterically, she fled from the room, unable to endure the
sight of Lansing's face.

He had fallen into a chair, and was motionless, save for the slow and
labored breathing which shook his body. As he sat there in Pinney's
ranch this pleasant afternoon, the wife whom he worshiped never so
passionately as now, at their home one thousand miles away, was holding
another man by the hand, and promising to be his wife.

It was five minutes to five by the clock on the wall before him. It
therefore wanted but five minutes of six, the hour of the wedding, at
home, the difference in time being just an hour. In the years of his
exile, by way of enhancing the vividness of his dreams of home, he
had calculated exactly the difference in time from various points in
Colorado, so that he could say to himself, "Now Mary is putting the
babies to bed;" "Now it is her own bedtime;" "Now she is waking up;" or
"Now the church-bells are ringing, and she is walking to church." He
was accustomed to carry these two standards of time always in his
head, reading one by the other, and it was this habit, bred of doting
fondness, which now would compel him to follow, as if he were a
spectator, minute by minute, each step of the scene being enacted so far
away.

People were prompt at weddings. No doubt already the few guests were
arriving, stared at by the neighbors from their windows. The complacent
bridegroom was by this time on his way to the home of the bride,
or perhaps knocking at the door. Lansing knew him well, an elderly,
well-to-do furniture-maker, who had been used to express a fatherly
admiration for Mary. The bride was upstairs in her chamber, putting the
finishing touches to her toilet; or, at this very moment, it might be,
was descending the stairs to take the bridegroom's arm and go in to be
married.

Lansing gasped. The mountain wind was blowing through the room, but he
was suffocating.

Pinney's voice, seeming to come from very far away, was in his ears.
"Rouse yourself, for God's sake! Don't give it all up that way. I
believe there's a chance yet. Remember the mind-reading you used to do
with her. You could put almost anything into her mind by just willing
it there. That's what I mean. Will her to stop what she is doing now.
Perhaps you may save her yet. There's a chance you may do it. I don't
say there's more than a chance, but there 's that There's a bare chance.
That's better than giving up. I 've heard of such things being done. I
've read of them. Try it, for God's sake I Don't give up."

At any previous moment of his life the suggestion that he could, by mere
will power, move the mind of a person a thousand miles away, so as to
reverse a deliberate decision, would have appeared to Lansing as wholly
preposterous as no doubt it does to any who read these lines. But a man,
however logical he may be on land, will grasp at a straw when drowning,
as if it were a log. Pinney had no need to use arguments or adjurations
to induce Lansing to adopt his suggestion. The man before him was in
no mood to balance probabilities against improbabilities. It was enough
that the project offered a chance of success, albeit infinitesimal; for
on the other hand there was nothing but an intolerable despair, and a
fate that truly seemed more than flesh and blood could bear.

Lansing had sprung to his feet while Pinney was speaking. "I 'm going to
try it, and may God Almighty help me!" he cried, in a terrible voice.

"Amen!" echoed Pinney.

Lansing sank into his chair again, and sat leaning slightly forward, in
a rigid attitude. The expression of his eyes at once became fixed. His
features grew tense, and the muscles of his face stood out. As if to
steady the mental strain by a physical one, he had taken from the table
a horseshoe which had lain there, and held it in a convulsive grip.

Pinney had made this extraordinary suggestion in the hope of diverting
Lansing's mind for a moment from his terrible situation, and with not so
much faith even as he feigned that it would be of any practical avail.
But now, as he looked upon the ghastly face before him, and realized
the tremendous concentration of purpose, the agony of will, which it
expressed, he was impressed that it would not be marvelous if some
marvel should be the issue. Certainly, if the will really had any such
power as Lansing was trying to exert, as so many theorists maintained,
there could never arise circumstances better calculated than these to
call forth a supreme assertion of the faculty. He went out of the room
on tiptoe, and left his friend alone to fight this strange and terrible
battle with the powers of the air for the honor of his wife and his own.

There was little enough need of any preliminary effort on Lansing's
part to fix his thoughts upon Mary. It was only requisite that to the
intensity of the mental vision, with which he had before imagined her,
should be added the activity of the will, turning the former mood of
despair into one of resistance. He knew in what room of their house the
wedding party must now be gathered, and was able to represent to
himself the scene there as vividly as if he had been present. He saw
the relatives assembled; he saw Mr. Davenport, the minister, and, facing
him, the bridal couple, in the only spot where they could well stand,
before the fireplace. But from all the others, from the guests, from the
minister, from the bridegroom, he turned his thoughts, to fix them on
the bride alone. He saw her as if through the small end of an immensely
long telescope, distinctly, but at an immeasurable distance. On this
face his mental gaze was riveted, as by conclusive efforts his will
strove to reach and move hers against the thing that she was doing.
Although his former experiments in mental phenomena had in a measure
familiarized him with the mode of addressing his powers to such an
undertaking as this, yet the present effort was on a scale so much
vaster that his will for a time seemed appalled, and refused to go out
from him, as a bird put forth from a ship at sea returns again and again
before daring to essay the distant flight to land. He felt that he was
gaining nothing. He was as one who beats the air. It was all he could do
to struggle against the influences that tended to deflect and dissipate
his thoughts. Again and again a conviction of the uselessness of the
attempt, of the madness of imagining that a mere man could send a wish,
like a voice, across a continent, laid its paralyzing touch upon his
will, and nothing but a sense of the black horror which failure meant
enabled him to throw it off. If he but once admitted the idea of
failing, all was lost. He must believe that he could do this thing,
or he surely could not. To question it was to surrender his wife;
to despair was to abandon her to her fate. So, as a wrestler strains
against a mighty antagonist, his will strained and tugged in supreme
stress against the impalpable obstruction of space, and, fighting
despair with despair, doggedly held to its purpose, and sought to keep
his faculties unremittingly streaming to one end. Finally, as this
tremendous effort, which made minutes seem hours, went on, there came
a sense of efficiency, the feeling of achieving something. From this
consciousness was first born a faith, no longer desperate, but rational,
that he might succeed, and with faith came an instantaneous tenfold
multiplication of force. The overflow of energy lost the tendency to
dissipation and became steady. The will appeared to be getting the
mental faculties more perfectly in hand, if the expression may be used,
not only concentrating but fairly fusing them together by the intensity
with which it drove them to their object. It was time. Already, perhaps,
Mary was about to utter the vows that would give her to another.
Lansing's lips moved. As if he were standing at her side, he murmured
with strained and labored utterance ejaculations of appeal and
adjuration.

Then came the climax of the stupendous struggle. He became aware of a
sensation so amazing that I know not if it can be described at all,--a
sensation comparable to that which comes up the mile-long sounding-line,
telling that it touches bottom. Fainter far, as much finer as is mind
than matter, yet not less unmistakable, was the thrill which told the
man, agonizing on that lonely mountain of Colorado, that the will which
he had sent forth to touch the mind of another, a thousand miles away,
had found its resting-place, and the chain between them was complete.
No longer projected at random into the void, but as if it sent along an
established medium of communication, his will now seemed to work upon
hers, not uncertainly and with difficulty, but as if in immediate
contact. Simultaneously, also, its mood changed. No more appealing,
agonizing, desperate, it became insistent, imperious, dominating. For
only a few moments it remained at this pitch, and then, the mental
tension suddenly relaxing, he aroused to a perception of his
surroundings, of which toward the last he had become oblivious. He was
drenched with perspiration and completely exhausted. The iron horseshoe
which he had held in his hands was drawn halfway out.

Thirty-six hours later, Lansing, accompanied by Pinney, climbed down
from the stage at the railroad station. During the interval Lansing
had neither eaten nor slept. If at moments in that time he was able to
indulge the hope that his tremendous experiment had been successful, for
the main part the overwhelming presumption of common sense and common
experience against such a notion made it seem childish folly to
entertain it.

At the station was to be sent the dispatch, the reply to which would
determine Mary's fate and his own. Pinney signed it, so that, if the
worst were true, Lansing's existence might still remain a secret; for of
going back to her in that case, to make her a sharer of his shame, there
was no thought on his part. The dispatch was addressed to Mr. Davenport,
Mary's minister, and merely asked if the wedding had taken place.

They had to wait two hours for the answer. When it came, Lansing was
without on the platform, and Pinney was in the office. The operator
mercifully shortened his suspense by reading the purport of the message
from the tape: "The dispatch in answer to yours says that the wedding
did not take place."

Pinney sprang out upon the platform. At sight of Lansing's look of
ghastly questioning, the tears blinded him, and he could not speak, but
the wild exultation of his face and gestures was speech enough.

The second day following, Lansing clasped his wife to his breast,
and this is the story she told him, interrupted with weepings and
shudderings and ecstatic embraces of reassurance. The reasons which had
determined her, in disregard of the dictates of her own heart, to marry
again, have been sufficiently intimated in her letter to Mrs. Pinney.
For the rest, Mr. Whitcomb was a highly respectable man, whom she
esteemed and believed to be good and worthy. When the hour set for the
marriage arrived, and she took her place by his side before the minister
and the guests, her heart indeed was like lead, but her mind calm and
resolved. The preliminary prayer was long, and it was natural, as it
went on, that her thoughts should go back to the day when she had thus
stood by another's side. She had ado to crowd back the scalding tears,
as she contrasted her present mood of resignation with the mingling of
virginal timidity and the abandon of love in her heart that other day.
Suddenly, seeming to rise out of this painful contrast of the past
and the present, a feeling of abhorrence for the act to which she was
committed possessed her mind. She had all along shrunk from it, as any
sensitive woman might from a marriage without love, but there had
been nothing in that shrinking to compare in intensity with this
uncontrollable aversion which now seized upon her to the idea of holding
a wife's relation to the man by her side. It had all at once come
oyer her that she could not do it. Nevertheless she was a sensible and
rational woman as well as a sweet and lovely one. Whatever might be the
origin of this sudden repugnance, she knew it had none in reason. She
was fulfilling a promise which she had maturely considered, and neither
in justice to herself nor the man to whom she had given it could she
let a purely hysterical attack like this prevent its consummation. She
called reason and common sense to her aid, and resolutely struggled to
banish the distressing fancies that assailed her. The moisture stood out
upon her forehead with the severity of the conflict, which momentarily
increased. At last the minister ended his prayer, of which she had not
heard a word. The bridal pair were bidden to take each other by the
hand. As the bridegroom's fingers closed around hers, she could not
avoid a shudder as at a loathsome contact. It was only by a supreme
effort of self-control that she restrained from snatching her hand away
with a scream. She did not hear what the minister went on to say. Every
faculty was concentrated on the struggle, which had now become one of
desperation, to repress an outbreak of the storm that was raging within.
For, despite the shuddering protest of every instinct and the wild
repulsion with which every nerve tingled, she was determined to go
through the ceremony. But though the will in its citadel still held out,
she knew that it could not be for long. Each wave of emotion that it
withstood was higher, stronger, than the last. She felt that it was
going, going. She prayed that the minister might be quick, while yet
she retained a little self-command, and give her an opportunity to utter
some binding vow which should make good her solemn engagement, and avert
the scandal of the outbreak on the verge of which she was trembling. "Do
you," said the minister to Mr. Whitcomb, "take this woman whom you
hold by the hand to be your wife, to honor, protect, and love while
you live?" "I do," replied the bridegroom promptly. "Do you," said the
minister, looking at Mary, "take the man whom you hold by the hand to
be your husband, to love and honor while you live?" Mary tried to say
"Yes," but at the effort there surged up against it an opposition
that was almost tangible in its overpowering force. No longer merely
operating upon her sensibilities, the inexplicable influence that
was conquering her now seized on her physical functions, and laid its
interdict upon her tongue. Three times she strove to throw off the
incubus, to speak, but in vain. Great drops were on her forehead;
she was deadly pale, and her eyes were wild and staring; her features
twitched as in a spasm, while she stood there struggling with the
invisible power that sealed her lips. There was a sudden movement among
the spectators; they were whispering together. They saw that something
was wrong. "Do you thus promise?" repeated the minister, after a pause.
"Nod, if you can't speak," murmured the bridegroom. His words were the
hiss of a serpent in her ears. Her will resisted no longer; her soul
was wholly possessed by unreasoning terror of the man and horror of the
marriage. "No! no! no!" she screamed in piercing tones, and snatching
her hand from the bridegroom, she threw herself upon the breast of the
astonished minister, sobbing wildly as she clung to him, "Save me, save
me! Take me away! I can't marry him,--I can't! Oh, I can't!"

The wedding broke up in confusion, and that is the way, if you choose
to think so, that John Lansing, one thousand miles away, saved his wife
from marrying another man.

"If you choose to think so," I say, for it is perfectly competent to
argue that the influence to which Mary Lansing yielded was merely an
hysterical attack, not wholly strange at such a moment in the case of a
woman devoted to her first husband, and reluctantly consenting to second
nuptials. On this theory, Lansing's simultaneous agony at Pinners
ranch in Colorado was merely a coincidence; interesting, perhaps, but
unnecessary to account for his wife's behavior. That John and Mary
Lansing should reject with indignation this simple method of accounting
for their great deliverance is not at all surprising in view of the
common proclivity of people to be impressed with the extraordinary side
of circumstances which affect themselves; nor is there any reason why
their opinion of the true explanation of the facts should be given more
weight than another's. The writer, who has merely endeavored to put
this story into narrative form, has formed no opinion on it which is
satisfactory to himself, and therefore abstains from any effort to
influence the reader's judgment.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of At Pinney's Ranch, by Edward Bellamy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AT PINNEY'S RANCH ***

***** This file should be named 22709.txt or 22709.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/7/0/22709/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
