Project Gutenberg's Two Days' Solitary Imprisonment, by Edward Bellamy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Two Days' Solitary Imprisonment
       1898

Author: Edward Bellamy

Release Date: September 21, 2007 [EBook #22706]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO DAYS' SOLITARY IMPRISONMENT ***




Produced by David Widger





TWO DAYS' SOLITARY IMPRISONMENT

By Edward Bellamy

1898


Mr. Joseph Kilgore was suffering from one of those spring influenzas
which make a man feel as if he were his own grandfather. His nose had
acquired the shape of a turnip and the complexion of a beet. All his
bones ached as if he had been soundly thrashed, and his eyes were weak
and watery. Your deadly disease is oftener than not a gentleman who
takes your life without mauling you, but the minor diseases are
mere bruisers who just go in for making one as uncomfortable and
unpresentable as possible. Mr. Kilgore's influenza had been coming on
for several days, and when he woke up this particular morning and heard
the rain dripping on the piazza-roof just under his bedroom-window, he
concluded, like a sensible man, that he would stay at home and nurse
himself over the fire that day, instead of going to the office. So he
turned over and snoozed for an hour or two, luxuriating in a sense of
aches and pains just pronounced enough to make the warmth and softness
of the bed delightful.

Toward noon, the edge of this enjoyment becoming dulled, he got up,
dressed, and came downstairs to the parlor, where his brother's wife (he
was a bachelor, living with a married brother) had considerately kindled
up a coal-fire in the grate for his benefit.

After lying off in the rocking-chair till past dinner-time, he began to
feel better and consequently restless. Concluding that he would like to
read, he went rummaging about the bookcases for a likely-looking novel.
At length he found in the upper shelf of a closet a book called "Roles
of a Detective," containing various thrilling accounts of crimes and the
entanglement of criminals in the meshes of law and evidence.

One story in particular made a strong impression on his mind. It was a
tale of circumstantial evidence, and about how it very nearly hung an
innocent man for a murder which he had no thought of committing.
It struck Joseph rather forcibly that this victim of circumstantial
evidence was as respectable and inoffensive a person as himself, and
probably had never any more thought of being in danger from the law.
Circumstances had set their trap for him while he was quite unconscious
of peril, and he only awoke to find himself in the toils. And from this
he went on to reflect upon the horrible but unquestionable fact that
every year a certain proportion, and perhaps a very considerable
proportion, of those who suffered the penalties of the law, and even
the death-penalty, are innocent men,--victims of false or mistaken
evidence. No man, however wise or virtuous, can be sure that he will not
be taken in this fearful conscription of victims to the blind deity of
justice. "None can tell," thought Joseph, with a shudder, "that the word
he is saying, the road he is turning, the appointment he is making, or
whatever other innocent act he is now engaged in, may not prove the
last mesh in some self-woven death-net, the closing link in some damning
chain of evidence whose devilish subtlety shall half convince him that
he must be guilty as it wholly convinces others."

Timidity is generally associated with imaginativeness, if not its
result, and Joseph, although he concealed the fact pretty well under
the mask of reticence, was constitutionally very timid. He had an
unprofitable habit of taking every incident of possible embarrassment
or danger that occurred to his mind as the suggestion for imaginary
situations of inconvenience or peril, which he would then work out,
fancying how he would feel and what he would do, with the utmost
elaboration, and often with really more nervous excitement than he would
be likely to experience if the events supposed should really occur.
So now, and all the more because he was a little out of sorts, the
suggestions of this story began to take the form in his mind of an
imaginary case of circumstantial evidence of which he was the victim.
His fancy worked up the details of a fictitious case against himself,
which he, although perfectly innocent, could meet with nothing more than
his bare denial.

He imagined the first beginnings of suspicion; he saw it filming the
eyes of his acquaintances, then of his friends, and at last sicklying
over the face even of his brother Silas. In fancy he made frantic
attempts to regain the confidence of his friends, to break through the
impalpable, impenetrable barrier which the first stir of suspicion had
put between their minds and his. He cried, he begged, he pleaded. But in
vain, all in vain. Suspicion had made his appeals and adjurations sound
even to his friends as strange and meaningless as the Babel-builders'
words of a sudden became to each other. The yellow badge of suspicion
once upon him, all men kept afar, as if he were a fever-ship in
quarantine. No solitary imprisonment in a cell of stone could so utterly
exclude him from the fellowship of men as the invisible walls of this
dungeon of suspicion. And at last he saw himself giving up the hopeless
struggle, yielding to his fate in dumb despair, only praying that the
end might come speedily, perhaps even reduced to the abject-ness of
confessing the crime he had not committed, in order that he might at
least have the pity of men, since he could not regain their confidence.
And so strongly had this vision taken hold on him that his breath came
irregularly, and his forehead was damp as he drew his hand across it.

As has been intimated, it was Mr. Joseph Kil-gore's very bad habit to
waste his nervous tissue in the conscientiously minute elaboration of
such painful imaginary situations as that above described, and in his
present experience there was nothing particularly novel or extraordinary
for him. It was the occurrence of a singular coincidence between this
internal experience and a wholly independent course of actual events,
which made that waking nightmare the beginning of a somewhat remarkable
comedy, or, more properly, a tragedy, of errors. For, as Joseph lay back
in his chair, in a state of nervous exhaustion and moral collapse, the
parlor-door was thrown open, and Mrs. Silas Kilgore, his sister-in-law,
burst into the room. She was quite pale, and her black eyes were fixed
on Joseph's with the eager intensity, as if seeking moral support,
noticeable in those who communicate startling news which they have not
had time to digest.

The effect of this apparition upon Joseph in his unstrung condition may
be readily imagined. He sprang up, much paler than Mrs. Kilgore, his
lips apart, and his eyes staring with the premonition of something
shocking. These symptoms of extraordinary excitement even before she
had spoken, and this air as if he had expected a shocking revelation,
recurred to her mind later, in connection with other circumstances, but
just now she was too full of her intelligence to dwell on anything else.

"A man was murdered in our barn last night. They 've found the body!"
she exclaimed.

As the meaning of her words broke on him, Joseph was filled with
that sort of mental confusion which one experiences when the scene or
circumstances of a dream recur in actual life. Was he still dreaming
that ghostly vision of suspicion and the death-trap of circumstances?
Was this a mere continuation of it? No, he was awake; his sister-in-law
standing there, with pallid face and staring eyes, was not an
apparition. The horrid, fatal reality which he had been imagining was
actually upon him.

"I did not do it!" dropped from his ashen lips.

"You do it? Are you crazy? Who said anything about your doing it?" cried
the astounded woman.

The ring of genuine amazement in her voice was scarcely needed to recall
Joseph to the practical bearing of his surroundings, and break the spell
of superstitious dread. The sound of his own words had done it. With a
powerful effort he regained something like self-control, and said, with
a forced laugh:--

"What an absurd thing for me to say! I don't know what I could have been
thinking of. Very odd, was it not? But, dear me! a man murdered in our
barn? You don't tell me! How terrible!"

His constrained, overdone manner was not calculated to abate Mrs.
Kilgore's astonishment, and she continued to stare at him with an
expression in which a vague terror began to appear. There are few
shorter transitions than that from panic to anger. Seeing that her
astonishment at his reception of the news increased rather than
diminished, he became exasperated at the intolerable position in which
he was placed. His face, before so pale, flushed with anger.

"Damnation! What are you staring at me that way for?" he cried fiercely.

Mrs. Kilgore gave a little cry, half of indignation, half of fright, and
went out of the room, shutting the door after her.

Joseph had ample opportunity to review the situation before he was again
disturbed, which, indeed, was not till some hours later, at dusk, when
Silas came home, and the tea-table was set. Silas had been promptly
summoned from his shop when the discovery of the body was made, and had
been busy all the afternoon with the police, the coroner, and the crowds
of visitors to the scene of the tragedy.

The conversation at the tea-table ran entirely upon the various
incidents of the discovery, the inquest, and the measures of the police
for the apprehension of the criminal. Mrs. Kilgore was so full of
questions that she scarcely gave Silas time to answer, and Joseph
flattered himself that his comparative silence was not noticeable.
Nevertheless, as they rose from the table, Silas remarked:--

"You don't seem much interested in our murder, Joseph; you have n't
asked the first question about it."

Mrs. Kilgore was just leaving the room, and she turned her head to
see how he would answer. But he, too, turned off the matter by saying
something about Maria's loquaciousness having left him no chance. After
tea the little family circle was gathered in the parlor. Mrs. Kilgore
was sewing; Silas read the newspaper, and Joseph sat up by the fire.
From time to time, as he glanced around, he caught Mrs. Kilgore's eyes
studying him very intently. Her manner indicated that her indignation
at his behavior and language earlier in the afternoon had been quite
neutralized by her curiosity as to its cause.

"There 's nothing in the paper to-night but the murder, and I know that
already," exclaimed Silas, finally. "Maria, where's there something to
read? Hullo! what's this?"

He had taken up from the table the story of circumstantial evidence
which Joseph had been reading that morning.

"Why, Maria, here's that murder-book you wouldn't let me finish last
summer for fear I'd murder you some night. Who on earth hunted up that
book of all books, to-day of all days?"

"I did," replied Joseph, clearing his throat, in order to speak with a
natural inflection.

"You did?" exclaimed Silas.

"You must have looked the house over to find it, for I hid it
carefully," said Mrs. Kilgore, looking sharply at him. "What made you so
anxious to get it?"

"I was not particularly anxious. I was merely looking for something to
read," said Joseph, making a pretense of yawning, as if the matter was a
very trivial one.

"I suppose the murder brought it to his mind," said Silas.

"Why, no!" exclaimed Mrs. Kilgore quickly. "You must have been reading
it before the murder. Now that I remember, I saw it in your hands."

"Before the murder, were you, Joseph? Why, that's almost enough to make
one feel superstitious," said Silas, turning around in his chair, so as
to look fairly at him.

Joseph had half a mind to make a clean breast of the matter then and
there, and explain to them how curiously the reading of that book had
affected him. But he reflected that Silas was rather unimaginative, and
would probably be more mystified than enlightened by his explanation.

"I do believe it was reading that book which made you act so queerly
when I brought you in the news of the murder," pursued Mrs. Kilgore.

"How is that? How did he act queerly?" asked Silas.

"I am not aware that I acted queerly at all," said Joseph doggedly.

He knew well enough he had acted queerly, and did not mean to deny
that; but, as children and confused persons often do, he answered to the
underlying motive rather than the language. He only thought of denying
the inference of suspicion that her words seemed to him to suggest. But
to Mrs. Kilgore he very naturally seemed to be prevaricating.

"Why, Joseph!" said she, in a raised voice, and with a slight asperity;
"you know how you jumped up, looking like a ghost, the moment I opened
the door, and the first thing you said after I 'd told you that they
'd found a murdered man in the barn, was--Why, Joseph, what's the
matter?"

But I must go back a little. When the conversation turned on the book
and Joseph's connection with it, a minute or so previous, Silas had
quite naturally glanced over at his brother, and, as the talk went on,
his glance had become a somewhat concentrated gaze, although expressive
of nothing but the curiosity and slight wonder which the circumstances
suggested. It would not do to have Silas think that he avoided his eyes,
and so Joseph had, as soon as he felt this gaze, turned his own face
rather sharply toward it. He had meant merely to meet his brother's look
in a natural and unaffected manner. But, although never more sensible of
just what such a manner would be, he was utterly unable to compass it.
He was perfectly aware that the expression of his eyes was much too
serious and challenging,--and yet he could not, for the soul of him,
modify it. Nor did he dare to withdraw his gaze after it had once met
his brother's, although knowing that it was fast becoming a fierce
stare, and perceiving that Silas had already noticed something peculiar
in it. For to drop his eyes would be utter discomfiture and rout. As
Mrs. Kilgore alluded to his queer demeanor when she told him the news,
his face began to flush with the anticipation of the revelation that was
coming at this most unfavorable moment, even while his eyes were locked
with the already startled ones of Silas. As she went on, the flush
covered the lower part of his face, and rose like a spring-tide up his
cheeks, and lent a fierce, congested glare to his eyes. He felt how
woeful and irretrievable a thing it would be for him just then to lose
his countenance, and at the thought the flush burned deeper and merged
higher. It overspread his high, bald, intellectual forehead, and
incarnadined his sconce up to the very top of it. At this moment it was
that Mrs. Kilgore broke off her narrative with the exclamation, "Why,
Joseph, what's the matter?"

At her words it seemed as if every drop of blood in his body poured into
his face. He could endure it no longer. He rose abruptly, strode out of
the parlor, and went to his room, although it was but eight o'clock,
and he had no fire there. If he had staid another moment he must have
brained Silas and his wife with the poker, such an ungovernable anger
boiled up in him with the sense of his causeless, shameful discomfiture.

As Joseph left the parlor the eyes of Silas and his wife met each other,
--his dull with bewilderment and terror at a spectral fear; hers keen
with a definite suspicion. But even her loquacity was subdued by a real
fright. She had nothing to say. Her sensation was like that of one who,
hunting a hare, stumbles upon a wolf. She had been both offended and
made curious by Joseph's demeanor that afternoon, but the horrid idea
that within a moment had been suggested to both their minds had so
little occurred to her as a serious possibility that she was even on the
point of rallying Joseph on it before her husband. Some time after he
had left the parlor Silas asked, with averted face:--

"What was it that he said when you told him the news?" and then she
repeated his words.

And Joseph, sitting wild-eyed upon his bed in the darkness in the room
above, red no longer, but pale as death, heard the murmur of the voices,
and knew that she was telling him. No one of the household slept much
that night, except Mrs. Kil-gore. Whenever she awoke she heard her
husband tossing restlessly, but she dared not ask him what was
the matter. In vain did Silas rehearse to himself all through the
night-hours how petty were the trifles in Joseph's demeanor which
had disturbed him. They were of the sort of trifles which create that
species of certainty known as moral certainty,--the strongest of all
in the mind it occupies, although so incapable of being communicated to
others. It mattered little how much evidence there was, if it sufficed
to lodge the faintest trace of suspicion in his mind. For, like some
poisons, an atom of suspicion is as fatal as the largest quantity, Nay,
perhaps, even more surely so, for against great suspicion the mind often
takes arms and makes valiant head; but a little doubt, by its timid and
hesitant demeanor, disarms opposition, and is readily entertained. And
all that night, lying awake, and knowing that Silas was sleepless just
the other side of the partition, and that the fungus of suspicion was
moment by moment overgrowing his mind, he could hardly wait for morning,
but would fain have rushed, even now in the darkness, to his bedside to
cry: "I did not do it! Believe me, brother, I did not do it!"

In the morning, however, the sun shone brightly into his room, and last
night's events and misunderstandings seemed like a bad dream. He went
downstairs almost cheery. He did not find Silas, but Mrs. Kilgore
was about. He was rather startled to observe the entire change in her
demeanor. Yesterday she was constantly following him up with her sharp
black eyes and brisk questions and exclamations, but now she seemed
frightened, acted in a constrained manner, and avoided his eyes.

"Where is Silas?" he asked, as they sat down to table.

"He said that there was something he must see to at the shop before work
began, so he had an early breakfast," replied Mrs. Kilgore, with her
eyes on her plate.

Had she been looking up, she would have seen a piteous constriction in
the muscles of Joseph's face. His heart was sick, and all his regained
courage sank away. It was no bad dream. Silas was afraid to meet him.
He left his meal untasted, and went to the office. A dozen acquaintances
stopped him on his way down-street to ask about the murder; and all day
long somebody was dropping in to pester him on the same subject. He told
them with a dull, abstracted air all the fresh details he knew, but
felt all the time as if he cheated each auditor of the vital part of the
matter, in that he failed to shout after him:--

"Silas suspects me of it!"

Silas had, indeed, left the house early for the purpose of avoiding his
brother. He was in a condition of mind and nerve in which he did not
dare to meet him. At tea the brothers met for the first time since the
night previous. There was a constraint between them like that between
strangers, but stronger and more chilling far than ever that is. There
is no chill like that which comes between friends, and the nearer the
friends the more deathly the cold. Silas made a little effort to speak
of business-matters, but could not keep it up, and soon a silence
settled over the party, only broken by the words of table-service. Mrs.
Kilgore sat pale and frightened all through the meal without venturing a
single phrase, and scarcely looking up from her plate.

The silence was of that kind which all felt to be more expressive than
the loudest, most explicit language could be,--more merciless than any
form of verbal accusation. Such silence is a terribly perfect medium,
in which souls are compelled to touch each other, resent as they may
the contact. Several times Joseph was on the point of rising and rushing
from the table. How many more such meals could he stand or could they
stand? All of them recognized that the situation had become perceptibly
more serious and more pronounced on account of that silent tea-table.

There was in particular not the slightest allusion made by any one to
the murder, which, seeing that it had happened but yesterday, and
would naturally still have been an engrossing topic, was an omission
so pointed as to be an open charge of guilt. There is such a thing as
emphasizing a topic by suppressing it, as letters are sunk into stone.
The omission impressed Silas as it did Joseph, but, regarding it from
his point of view, it did not occur to him but that Joseph was the one
solely responsible for it. He, Silas, had refrained from reference to it
because his suspicions in regard to Joseph made the topic unendurable.
But he could not imagine that Joseph could have had any other motive
for his silence on the subject but a guilty conscience,--some secret
knowledge of the crime. Thus regarded, it was a terrible confirmation.
That a perception that he was suspected might cause an innocent man to
act very much as if he were conscious of guilt did not occur to Silas,
as, perhaps, it would have failed to occur to most persons in just his
position.

After leaving the tea-table the brothers went together into the parlor,
according to the family custom. They took their accustomed seats on
opposite sides of the fireplace, but there was no conversation. A veil
was between them. Both were thinking of the same thing,--thinking of
it intensely,--and each knew that the other was thinking of it, and
yet neither for worlds could have commanded the courage to speak of it.
The suspicion had grown definite in Silas's mind, and yet, whenever he
brought himself to the point of putting it in words, it suddenly seemed
impossible, cruel, and absurd. But if Silas found it impossible to
speak, far more so it seemed to Joseph.

To charge another with suspecting us is half to confess ourselves worthy
of suspicion. It is demoralizing,--it is to abandon the pride of
conscious rectitude. To deny an accusation is to concede to it a
possibility, a color of reason; and Joseph shrank with unutterable
repugnance from that. He felt that he could be torn limb from limb
sooner than betray by a word that he recognized the existence of
suspicion so abominable. Besides, of what avail would be a denial
without evidence to disprove a suspicion which had arisen without
evidence? It was a thing too impalpable to contend with. As well fight a
fog as seek to destroy by mere denial suspicion so vague, unsubstantial,
and subtile, as that which enveloped him. Silas would, of course,
eagerly accept his denial; he well knew how he would spring to his side,
how warm and firm would be his hand-clasp, and how great, perhaps,
his momentary relief. But he was, after all, but human, and no man can
control his doubts. Silas would still be unable, when he thought the
matter over, to help the feeling that there was, after all, something
very strange about his conduct from first to last. It is the subtiler
nature of doubt to penetrate the heart more profoundly than confidence,
and to underlie it. No generous St. George of faith can reach the nether
den where it lurks. Or, rather, is it like the ineradicable witch-grass
which, though it be hewed off at the surface, still lives at the root,
and springs forth luxuriantly again at the first favoring season?

Moreover, Joseph hoped that some circumstance, the detection of the
murderer, or a healthier moral tone, might dissipate the cloud of
suspicion between them, and then it would be far better not to have
spoken, for, once put in words, the hateful thing would ever remain
a mutual memory, never again to be denied, and which might come up to
their minds whenever they looked each other in the eye thereafter. And
so the brothers sat opposite each other in silence, their faces growing
grayer as the clock ticked.

"The weather is growing cooler again," said Joseph, at last, rising to
go to his room.

It was at least two hours before his usual bedtime, but he could sit
there no longer.

"Yes, I think we shall have a frost," replied Silas, and the brothers
parted.

After Joseph had gone, Mrs. Kilgore came into the parlor and sat down
with some sewing. She waited for her husband to speak and tell her if
Joseph had said anything. But he sat there staring at the wall, and took
no notice of her. Although she knew so well what had been preying upon
his mind since last evening, yet he had not once referred to the matter,
and she had not dared to do so. It was hard for a talkative little lady
like her to understand this reticence about a matter so deeply felt. She
could not comprehend that there may be griefs so ghastly that we dare
not lift from them the veil of silence. She wanted to "talk it over" a
little. She felt that would do Silas good, because she knew it would be
a relief to her. Nor was she insensible to the gratification it would
afford her vanity to discuss so serious a matter with her husband,
whose general tone with her was one of jest and pleasantry, to the
disparagement of her intellectual powers, as she thought. So, after
glancing up several times timidly at Silas's still set profile, she
said, in a weighty little voice:--

"Don't you think Joseph behaves very strangely about the murder?" Her
words seemed to be several seconds in making an impression on Silas's
mind, and then he slowly turned his face full upon her. It was a
terrible look. The squared jaw, the drawn lips, the dull, distant stare,
repulsed her as one might repulse a stranger intermeddling with a bitter
private grief. Who was she, to come between him and his brother? He did
not seem to think it worth while to say anything to explain so eloquent
a glance, but immediately faced about again, as if dismissing the
interruption from his mind. Mrs. Kilgore did not try to make any more
conversation, but went to her bedroom and cried herself to sleep.

But Silas sat in his chair in the parlor, and took no note of the hours
till the lamp spluttered and went out. All through the evening, in
Joseph's room, which was directly above, he had heard him walking to and
fro, to and fro, sitting down awhile, and then starting again; and if
the pacing had not finally come to an end, Silas could not have gone to
bed, for his heart went out to his brother wrestling there alone with
his dreadful secret, and he could not rest till he thought that he, too,
was at rest.

Indeed, for the very reason that Joseph was so dear to him, and he felt
nothing could change that, he actually hesitated the less to admit these
horrible suspicions. Love is impatient of uncertainly, and would rather
presume the guilt of a friend from its longing to pour itself out in
pity and tenderness, than restrain itself while judgment scrutinizes
evidence and decides by a straw's weight.

A practical reflection, moreover, had occurred to Silas.

If Joseph had really--he did not dare to say to himself what--then
it was of the utmost importance that they should quickly understand each
other, so as to take steps to place him in safety. His desire to share
Joseph's horrible secret was like the feeling with which one would fain
uncover a friend's loathsome disease in order to help him. Before he
went to sleep that night he resolved, therefore, that he would win his
confidence by letting him see in every possible way, short of actual
words, that he suspected the true state of things, and that Joseph might
still confide in him as a faithful brother who would stand by him in the
worst emergency.

On first meeting him the following morning he began to carry out this
project so worthy of fraternal devotion. He sought occasion to shake
hands with Joseph, and gave a meaning pressure to his clasp. At
breakfast he was the only one who talked, and endeavored by his manner
to let Joseph understand that he perfectly comprehended the situation,
and was talking to cover his embarrassment and prevent Mrs. Kilgore
from suspecting anything. Several times also he managed to catch his
brother's eye, and give him a glance implying sympathy and mutual
understanding. This demeanor added the last touch to Joseph's
exasperation.

Evading Silas's evident intention of walking down-street, he got away
alone, and took both dinner and tea at a restaurant, to put off meeting
his brother and sister-in-law as long as possible. He lingered long over
his tea in the darkest, loneliest corner of the eating-house, for the
prospect, no longer to be avoided, of returning home to confront his
sister-in-law's frightened face and Silas's pathetic glances appeared
intolerable. Wild ideas of flying from the city and returning never, or
not until the truth about the murder had come to light, occurred to him.
He even began to arrange what sort of a letter he should write to Silas.
But men of forty, especially of Joseph's temperament, who have moved in
the same business and domestic ruts all their lives, do not readily
make up their minds to bold steps of this sort. To endure suffering or
inconvenience is more natural than to change their settled habits. So
it all ended in his going home at about eight o'clock, and being greatly
relieved to find some callers there.

All three of this strangely stricken family, indeed, shared that
feeling. It was such a rest from the nervous strain whenever either
or both were left alone with Joseph! The earnestness with which Mrs.
Kilgore pressed her guests to stay a little longer was so unusual and
apparently uncalled for that I fancy Mr. and Mrs. Smith had a vague
suspicion that they were being made game of. But they would have been
disabused of that impression could they have appreciated the sinking
of heart with which their hosts heard the frontdoor close, and realized
that they were again left to themselves. Only one thing had occurred to
mar the relief which the call had afforded. The topic of the murder had
been exhausted before Joseph entered, but, just as she was leaving, Mrs.
Smith made a return to it, saying:--

"Mrs. Kilgore, I was telling my husband I should think you must be
scared to be in the house, for fear the murderer might still be hanging
around."

Mrs. Kilgore shuddered, and cast an instantaneous, wholly involuntary
glance at Joseph. Her husband intercepted it, and, catching his eye, she
saw an expression in it as if he could strangle her for what was really
only the fault of her nerves. She stammered something, and the bustle of
the retiring guests covered her confusion well enough.

Unfortunately, Joseph, too, had caught that sudden, terrified glance of
his sister-in-law's at him, and it affected him more than anything that
had occurred in either of the two days since the murder. As the guests
took their leave, his head dropped on his breast, and his arms fell by
the sides of his chair. Mr. Kilgore wanted to send his wife from the
room, but his voice stuck in his throat, his tongue refused to move.
They waited a moment, and then Joseph said:--

"Send for the police! For God's sake, take me out of this! I can't stand
it any longer!"

It was not yet nine o'clock, and a boy came by in the street crying:--

"Extra! The Kilgore barn murderer captured! Full confession!"

Although the words were perfectly audible through the lowered windows
to all in the room, Mrs. Kilgore was the only one who took any mental
cognizance of them. Nor did either of the men, who sat there like
stones, take note of her as she left the room. A minute later they heard
her scream, and she ran back with the open paper in her hands.

"He did not do it! He is crazy! They have found the murderer!"

Silas fixed an incredulous, questioning stare upon his wife, and then
turned quickly toward his brother. As for Joseph, at first and for
several moments, he gave no sign that he had heard at all. Then he
slowly raised his eyes to his brother's face with a deliberate, cruel
gaze of contemptuous sarcasm and cold aversion. The first effect of this
great relief was to flood his mind with bitter wrath at those who had
done him the great wrong from which, no thanks to them, he had been
rescued.

Mrs. Kilgore hastily read aloud, in a breathless voice, the newspaper
account It seemed that two tramps had taken refuge in the barn from
the storm that had raged the night of the murder, and getting into some
quarrel before morning, one had stabbed the other and fled, only to be
captured two days later and confess everything. When Mrs. Kilgore ceased
reading, Joseph said:--

"It must be a great disappointment for you that they are not going to
hang me for it. I sincerely condole with you."

Mrs. Kilgore cried, "Oh, don't!" and Silas made a gesture of
deprecation, but both felt that Joseph had a right to revile them as he
chose, and they had no right to complain. But he, even while he could
not deny himself the gratification of a little cruel reproach, knew that
they were not to be blamed, that they had been as much the victims of
a fatality as himself, and that this was one of those peculiarly
exasperating wrongs which do not leave the sufferer even the
satisfaction of being angry. Soon he got up and walked across the room,
stretched himself, drew his hand over his forehead, and said:--

"I feel as if I had just been dug up after being buried alive."

At this sign of returning equanimity, Silas took courage and ventured to
say:--

"I know we 've been a pair of crazy fools, Joe, but you 're a little
to blame. What's made you act so queerly? You won't deny that you have
acted so?"

Joseph smiled,--one does n't appreciate the pure luxury of a smile
until he has been deprived of it for a while,--lit a cigar, sat down
with his legs over the arm of his arm-chair,--he had not indulged in an
unconstrained posture for two days,--and told his side of the story.
He explained how, thanks to that tale he was reading, and the ghastly
reverie it suggested, his nerves were all on edge when Mrs. Kilgore
burst in with a piece of news whose extraordinary coincidence with his
train of thought had momentarily thrown him off his balance; and he
tried to make them see that, after that first scene, all the rest was a
logical sequence.

Mrs. Kilgore, by virtue of her finer feminine nervous organization,
understood him so readily that he saw he had made a mistake in not
unbosoming himself to her at first. But Silas evidently did not so
easily take his idea.

"But why did n't you just tell us that you had n't done it, and end the
misunderstanding at one blow?" he asked.

"Why, don't you see," replied Joseph, "that to deny a thing before you
are distinctly suspected of it is to suggest suspicion; while to deny it
afterward, unless you have proof to offer, is useless?"

"What should we have come to but for the capture of the real murderer?"
cried Mrs. Kilgore, with a shudder.






End of Project Gutenberg's Two Days' Solitary Imprisonment, by Edward Bellamy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TWO DAYS' SOLITARY IMPRISONMENT ***

***** This file should be named 22706.txt or 22706.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/7/0/22706/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
