The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Love Story Reversed, by Edward Bellamy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Love Story Reversed
       1898

Author: Edward Bellamy

Release Date: September 21, 2007 [EBook #22711]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LOVE STORY REVERSED ***




Produced by David Widger





A LOVE STORY REVERSED

By Edward Bellamy

1898




I

The golden hands of the parlor clock point glimmeringly to an hour
after midnight, and the house is still. The gas is turned almost out,
but the flickering of the dying sea-coal fire in the grate fitfully
illumines the forms and faces of two young women, who are seated before
it, talking earnestly in low tones. It is apparent from their costumes
that they have been spending the evening out.

The fair girl in the low chair, gazing pensively into the fire, is Maud
Elliott, the daughter of the house. Not generally called handsome, her
features are good and well balanced, and her face is altogether a sweet
and wholesome one. She is rather tall, and the most critical admit
that she has a fine figure. Her eyes are blue, and their clear, candid
expression indicates an unusually sincere and simple character. But,
unfortunately, it is only her friends who are fully conversant with the
expression of her eyes, for she is very shy. Shyness in little people
is frequently piquant, but its effect in girls of the Juno style is too
often that of awkwardness. Her friends call Maud Elliott stately; those
who do not like her call her stiff; while indifferent persons speak of
her as rather too reserved and dignified in manner to be pleasing. In
fact, her excess of dignity is merely the cloak of her shyness, and
nobody knows better than she that there is too much of it. Those
who know her at all well know that she is not dull, but with mere
acquaintances she often passes for that. Only her intimate friends are
aware what wit and intelligence, what warmth and strength of feeling,
her coldness when in company conceals.

No one better understands this, because no one knows her better or
has known her longer, than her present companion before the fire, Lucy
Mer-ritt. They were roommates and bosom friends at boarding-school; and
Lucy, who recently has been married, is now on her first visit to her
friend since that event. She is seated on a hassock, with her hands
clasped over her knees, looking up at Maud,--an attitude well suited
to her _petite_ figure. She is going home on the morrow, or rather on
the day already begun; and this fact, together with the absorbing nature
of the present conversation, accounts for the lateness of the session.

"And so, Maud," she is saying, while she regards her friend with an
expression at once sympathetic and amused,--"and so that is what has
been making your letters so dismal lately. I fancied that nothing less
could suggest such melancholy views of life. The truth is, I came
on this visit as much as anything to find out about him. He is a
good-looking fellow, certainly; and, from what little chance I had
to form an opinion to-night, seems sensible enough to make it quite
incredible that he should not be in love with such a girl in a thousand
as you. Are you quite sure he is n't?"

"You had a chance to judge to-night," replied Maud, with a hard little
laugh. "You overheard our conversation. 'Good-evening, Miss Elliott;
jolly party, is n't it?' That was all he had to say to me, and quite
as much as usual. Of course we are old acquaintances, and he 's always
pleasant and civil: he couldn't be anything else; but he wastes mighty
little time on me. I don't blame him for preferring other girls'
society. He would show very little taste if he did not enjoy Ella
Perry's company better than that of a tongue-tied thing like me. She is
a thousand times prettier and wittier and more graceful than I am."

"Nonsense," exclaimed Lucy. "She is a flirt and a conceited little minx.
She is not to be mentioned the same day with you; and he would think so,
if he could only get to know you. But how in the world is he ever going
to? Why, you seem to be shyer than ever, poor dear. You were actually
distant, almost chilling, in your manner towards him to-night, although
I know you didn't mean to be."

"I know it. Don't I know it!" groaned Maud. "I always am shyer and
stiffer with him than with any one else. O Lucy! you can't guess what
a dreadful thing it is to be shy. It is as if you were surrounded by a
fog, which benumbs you, and chills all who approach you. I dare say he
thinks that I actually dislike him. I could not blame him if he did. And
I can't help it. I could never make him understand anything else, unless
I told him in so many words."

The tears filled her eyes as she spoke, and hung heavy on the lashes.
Lucy took one of her hands in both of hers, and pressed and stroked it
caressingly.

"I know you could n't, poor dear, I know you could n't," she said; "and
you cannot tell him in so many words because, forsooth, you are a woman.
I often think, Maud, what a heap of trouble would be saved if women,
when they cannot make themselves understood in other ways, were allowed
to speak out as men do, without fear or reproach. Some day they will,
when the world gets wiser,--at least I think so. Why should a woman
have to hide her love, as if it were a disgraceful secret? Why is it any
more a disgrace to her than to a man?"

"I can't quite see what good it would do me," said Maud, "even if women
could 'speak out,' as you say. If a man did n't care for one already,
I can't see how it would make him know that one cared for him. I should
think she would prefer to keep her secret."

"That is n't what men do," replied Lucy. "If they have such a secret,
they tell it right away, and that is why they succeed. The way half the
women are induced to fall in love is by being told the men are in love
with them; you know that."

"But men are different," suggested Maud.

"Not a bit of it: they 're more so, if anything," was the oracular
response of the young wife. "Possibly there are men," she continued,--
"the story-tellers say so, anyhow,--who are attracted by repulsion and
warmed by coldness, who like resistance for the pleasure of overcoming
it. There must be a spice of the tyrant in such men. I wouldn't want to
marry one of them. Fortunately, they're not common. I've noticed that
love, like lightning, generally takes the path of least resistance with
men as well as women. Just suppose now, in your case, that Mr. Burton
had followed us home, and had overheard this conversation from behind
that door."

"No, no," she added laughing, as Maud looked around apprehensively; "he
is n't there. But if he had been there and had overheard you own that
you were pining for him, what a lucky chance it would have been! If he,
or any other man, once knew that a magnificent girl like you had done
him the honor to fall in love with him, half the battle would be won,
or I 'm no judge of men. But such lucky eavesdropping only happens in
stories and plays; and for lack of it this youth is in a fair way to
marry a chit of a girl who does not think half so much of him as you do,
and of whom he will never think a quarter what he would of you. He is
not, probably, entirely stupid either. All he wants, very likely, is
just a hint as to where his true happiness lies: but, being a woman, you
can't give it in words; and, being Maud Elliott, you can't give it in
any other way, if you died for it. Really, Maud, the canon which
makes it a woman's duty to be purely passive in love is exasperating,
especially as it does not represent what anybody really believes, but
only what they pretend to believe. Everybody knows that unrequited love
comes as often to women as to men. Why, then, should n't they have an
equal chance to seek requital? Why have not they the same right to look
out for the happiness of their lives by all honorable means that men
have? Surely it is far more to them to marry the men they love than to
a man to marry any particular woman. It seems to me that making suitable
matches is not such an easy matter that society can afford to leave the
chief part of it to the stupider sex, giving women merely the right of
veto. To be sure, even now women who are artful enough manage to evade
the prohibition laid on their lips and make their preference known. I am
proud to say that I have a royal husband, who would never have looked
my way if I had not set out to make him do so; and if I do say it, who
should n't, I flatter myself he has a better wife than he could have
picked out without my help. There are plenty of women who can say the
same thing; but, unluckily, it is the best sort of women, girls like
you,--simple, sincere, noble, without arts of any sort,--who can't
do this. On them the etiquette that forbids women to reveal their hearts
except by subterfuge operates as a total disability. They can only
sit with folded hands, looking on, pretending not to mind, while their
husbands are run away with by others."

Maud took up the poker and carefully arranged the coals under the grate
in a heap. Then she said: "Suppose a girl did what you 've been speaking
of. I mean, suppose she really said such a thing to a man,--said that
she cared for him, or anything like that,--what do you suppose he
would think of her? Don't you fancy she would be in danger of making him
think very cheaply of her?"

"If she thought he were that kind of a man," replied Lucy, "I can't
understand her ever falling in love with him. Of course, I 'm not saying
that he would necessarily respond by falling in love with her. She would
have to take her chance of that; but I 'm sure, if he were a gentleman,
she need have no fear of his thinking unworthily of her. If I had spoken
to Dick in that way, even if he had never wanted to marry me, I know he
would have had a soft spot for me in his heart all the rest of his life,
out of which even his wife would not have quite crowded me. Why, how do
we think of men whom we have refused? Do we despise them? Do we ridicule
them? Some girls may, but they are not ladies. A low fellow might laugh
at a woman who revealed a fondness for him which he did not return; but
a gentleman, never. Her secret would be safe with him."

"Girls!" It was the voice of Mrs. Elliott speaking from the upper hall.
"Do you know how late it is? It is after one o'clock."

"I suppose we might as well go to bed," said Lucy. "There's no use
sitting up to wait for women to get their rights. They won't get them
to-night, I dare say; though, mark my word, some day they will."

"This affair of yours may come out all right yet," she said hopefully,
as they went upstairs together. "If it does not, you can console
yourself with thinking that people in general, and especially girls,
never know what is good for them till afterward. Do you remember that
summer I was at the beach, what a ninny I made of myself over that
little Mr. Parker? How providential it was for me that he did not
reciprocate. It gives me the cold shivers when I think what might have
become of me if he' had proposed."

At the door of her room Lucy said again: "Remember, you are to come to
me in New York for a long visit soon. Perhaps you will find there are
other people in the world then."

Maud smiled absently, and kissed her good-night. She seemed preoccupied,
and did not appear to have closely followed what her lively friend was
saying.

The following afternoon, as she was walking home after seeing Lucy on
the cars, she met a gentleman who lifted his hat to her. It was Arthur
Burton. His office was on the one main street of the small New England
city which is the scene of these events, and when out walking or
shopping Maud often met him. There was therefore nothing at all
extraordinary in the fact of their meeting. What was extraordinary was
its discomposing effect upon her on this particular afternoon. She had
been absorbed a moment before in a particularly brown study, taking no
more notice of surrounding objects and persons than was necessary to
avoid accidents. On seeing him she started perceptibly, and forthwith
became a striking study in red. She continued to blush so intensely
after he had passed that, catching sight of her crimson cheeks in a shop
window, she turned down a side street and took a quieter way home.

There was nothing particularly remarkable about Arthur Burton.
Fortunately there does not need to be anything remarkable about young
men to induce very charming girls to fall in love with them. He was just
a good-looking fellow, with agreeable manners and average opinions. He
was regarded as a very promising young man, and was quite a favorite
among the young ladies. If he noticed Maud's confusion on meeting him,
he certainly did not think of associating it in any way with himself.
For although they had been acquaintances these many years, and belonged
to the same social set, he had never entertained the first sentimental
fancy concerning her. So far as she had impressed him at all, it was as
a thoroughly nice girl, of a good family, not bad-looking, but rather
dull in society, and with very little facility in conversation; at least
he had always found it hard to talk with her.

Ten days or a fortnight after Lucy Merritt's departure there was a
little party at Ella Perry's, and both Arthur Burton and Maud were
present. It was the custom of the place for the young men to escort
the girls home after evening entertainments, and when the couples were
rightly assorted, the walk home was often the most agreeable part of the
evening. Although they were not engaged, Arthur imagined that he was in
love with Ella Perry, and she had grown into the habit of looking
upon him as her particular knight. Towards the end of the evening he
jestingly asked her whom he should go home with, since he could not that
evening be her escort.

"Maud Elliott," promptly suggested Ella, selecting the girl of those
present in her opinion least likely to prove a diverting companion. So
it chanced that Arthur offered his company to Maud.

It struck him, as she came downstairs with her wraps on, that she
was looking remarkably pale. She had worn a becoming color during the
evening, but she seemed to have lost it in the dressing-room. As they
walked away from the house Arthur began, to the best of his ability, to
make himself agreeable, but with very poor success. Not only was Maud,
as usual, a feeble contributor of original matter, but her random
answers showed that she paid little attention to what he was saying.
He was mentally registering a vow never again to permit himself to be
committed to a tete-a-tete with her, when she abruptly broke the silence
which had succeeded his conversational efforts. Her voice was
curiously unsteady, and she seemed at first to have some difficulty in
articulating, and had to go back and repeat her first words. What she
said was:--

"It was very good in you to come home with me to-night. It is a great
pleasure to me."

"You 're ironical this evening, Miss Elliott," he replied, laughing, and
the least bit nettled.

It was bore enough doing the polite to a girl who had nothing on her
mind without being gibed by her to boot.

"I 'm not ironical," she answered. "I should make poor work at irony. I
meant just what I said."

"The goodness was on your part in letting me come," he said, mollified
by the unmistakable sincerity of her tone, but somewhat embarrassed
withal at the decidedly flat line of remark she had chosen.

"Oh, no," she replied; "the goodness was not on my side. I was only too
glad of your company, and might as well own it. Indeed, I will confess
to telling a fib to one young man who offered to see me home, merely
because I hoped the idea of doing so would occur to you."

This plump admission of partiality for his society fairly staggered
Arthur. Again he thought, "She must be quizzing me;" and, to make sure,
stole a sidelong glance at her. Her eyes were fixed straight ahead, and
the pallor and the tense expression of her face indicated that she was
laboring under strong excitement. She certainly did not look like one in
a quizzing mood.

"I am very much flattered," he managed to say.

"I don't know whether you feel so or not," she replied. "I'm afraid you
don't feel flattered at all, but I--I wanted to--tell you."

The pathetic tremor of her voice lent even greater significance to her
words than in themselves they would have conveyed.

She was making a dead set at him. There was not a shadow of doubt any
longer about that. As the full realization of his condition flashed upon
him, entirely alone with her and a long walk before them, the strength
suddenly oozed out of his legs, he felt distinctly cold about the spine,
and the perspiration started out on his forehead. His tongue clung to
the roof of his mouth, and he could only abjectly wonder what was coming
next. It appeared that nothing more was coming. A dead silence lasted
for several blocks. Every block seemed to Arthur a mile long, as if he
were walking in a hasheesh dream. He felt that she was expecting him to
say something, to make some sort of response to her advances; but what
response, in Heaven's name, could he make! He really could not make
love. He had none to make; and had never dreamed of making any to Maud
Elliott, of all girls. Yet the idea of letting her suppose him such an
oaf as not to understand her, or not to appreciate the honor a lady's
preference did him, was intolerable. He could not leave it so.

Finally, with a vague idea of a compromise between the impossible
alternative of making love to her, which he could n't, and seeming an
insensible boor, which he wouldn't, he laid his disengaged hand upon
hers as it rested on his arm. It was his intention to apply to it a
gentle pressure, which, while committing him to nothing, might tend to
calm her feelings and by its vaguely reassuring influence help to stave
off a crisis for the remainder of their walk. He did not, however,
succeed in carrying out the scheme; for at the moment of contact her
hand eluded his, as quicksilver glides from the grasp. There was no hint
of coquettish hesitation in its withdrawal. She snatched it away as
if his touch had burned her; and although she did not at the same
time wholly relinquish his arm, that was doubtless to avoid making the
situation, on the street as they were, too awkward.

A moment before only concerned to evade her apparent advances, Arthur
found himself in the position of one under rebuke for offering an
unwarranted familiarity to a lady. There was no question that he had
utterly misconstrued her previous conduct. It was very strange that he
could have been such a fool; but he was quite too dazed to disentangle
the evidence just then, and there was no doubt about the fact.

"Pardon me," he stammered, too much overcome with confusion and chagrin
to be able to judge whether it would have been better to be silent.

The quickness with which the reply came showed that she had been on the
point of speaking herself.

"You need not ask my pardon," she said. Her tones quivered with
excitement and her utterance was low and swift. "I don't blame you in
the least, after the way I have talked to you to-night. But I did not
mean that you should think lightly of me. I have said nothing right,
nothing that I meant to. What I wanted to have you understand was that I
care for you very much." Her voice broke here, but she caught her breath
and went right on. "I wanted you to know it somehow, and since I could
not make you know it by ways clever girls might, I thought I would tell
you plainly. It really amounts to the same thing; don't you think so?
and I know you 'll keep my secret. You need n't say anything. I know you
've nothing to say and may never have. That makes no difference. You owe
me nothing merely because I care for you. Don't pity me. I'm not so much
ashamed as you 'd suppose. It all seems so natural when it's once said.
You need n't be afraid of me. I shall never say this again or trouble
you at all. Only be a little good to me; that's all."

She delivered this little speech almost in one breath, with headlong,
explosive utterance, as if it were something she had to go through
with, cost what it might, and only wanted somehow to get out the words,
regardless, for the time, of their manner or effect. She ended with
an hysterical sob, and Arthur felt her hand tremble on his arm as she
struggled with an emotion that threatened to overcome her. But it was
over almost instantly; and without giving him a chance to speak, she
exclaimed, with an entire alteration of tone and manner:--

"Did you see that article in the 'Gazette' this morning about the craze
for collecting pottery which has broken out in the big cities? Do you
suppose it will reach here? What do you think of it?"

Now it was perfectly true, as she had told him, that Arthur had nothing
whatever to say in response to the declaration she had made; but all
the same it is possible, if she had not just so abruptly diverted the
conversation, that he would then and there have placed himself and all
his worldly goods at her disposal. He would have done this, although
five minutes before he had had no more notion of marrying her than the
Emperor of China's daughter, merely because every manly instinct cried
out against permitting a nice girl to protest her partiality for him
without meeting her half-way. Afterward, when he realized how near
he had come to going over the verge of matrimony, it was with such
reminiscent terror as chills the blood of the awakened sleep-walker
looking up at the dizzy ridge-pole he has trodden with but a hair's
breadth between him and eternity.

During the remainder of the way to Maud's door the conversation upon
pottery, the weather, and miscellaneous topics was incessant,--almost
breathless, in fact. Arthur did not know what he was talking about,
and Maud probably no better what she was saying, but there was not a
moment's silence. A stranger meeting them would have thought, "What a
remarkably jolly couple!"

"I 'm much obliged for your escort," said Maud, as she stood upon her
doorstep.

"Not at all. Great pleasure, I 'm sure."

"Good-evening."

"Good-evening." And she disappeared within the door.

Arthur walked away with a slow, mechanical step. His fallen jaw, open
mouth, and generally idiotic expression of countenance would have
justified his detention by any policeman who might have met him, on
suspicion of being a feeble-minded person escaped from custody. Turning
the first corner, he kept on with the same dragging step till he came
to a vacant lot. Then, as if he were too feeble to get any farther, he
stopped and leaned his back against the fence. Bracing his legs before
him so as to serve as props, he thrust his hands deep in his pockets,
and raising his eyes appealingly to the stars, ejaculated, "Proposed to,
by Jove!" A period of profound introspection followed, and then he broke
forth: "Well, I 'll be hanged!" emphasizing each word with a slow nod.
Then he began to laugh,--not noisily; scarcely audibly, indeed; but
with the deep, unctuous chuckle of one who gloats over some exquisitely
absurd situation, some jest of many facets, each contributing its ray of
humor.

Yet, if this young man had tremblingly confessed his love to a lady, he
would have expected her to take it seriously.

Nevertheless, let us not be too severe with him for laughing. It was
what the average young man probably would have done under similar
circumstances, and it was particularly stated at the outset that there
was nothing at all extraordinary about Arthur Burton. For the rest, it
was not a wholly bad symptom. Had he been a conceited fellow, he very
likely would not have laughed. He would have stroked his mustache and
thought it quite natural that a woman should fall in love with him, and
even would have felt a pity for the poor thing. It was, in fact, because
he was not vain that he found the idea so greatly amusing.

On parting with Arthur, Maud rushed upstairs and locked herself in her
room. She threw herself into the first chair she stumbled over in the
dimly lighted apartment, and sat there motionless, her eyes fixed on
the empty air with an expression of desperation, her hands clinched so
tightly that the nails bit the palms. She breathed only at considerable
intervals, with short, quick inhalations.

Yet the act which caused this extraordinary revulsion of feeling had
not been the result of any sudden impulse. It was the execution of a
deliberate resolve which had originated in her mind on the night of Lucy
Merritt's departure, as she sat with her before the fire, listening to
her fanciful talk about the advantages which might be expected to attend
franker relations in love affairs between men and women. Deeply in love,
and at the same time feeling that in the ordinary course of events she
had nothing but disappointment to look forward to, she was in a state
of mind just desperate enough to catch at the idea that if Arthur Burton
knew of her love, there would be some chance of his returning it. It
seemed to her that if he did not, she could be no worse off than she
was already. She had brooded over the subject day and night ever since,
considering from every point of view of abstract right or true feminine
propriety the question whether a woman might, without real prejudice to
her maidenly modesty, tell a man that she cared for him, without waiting
for him to ask her to marry him. Her conclusion had been that there was
no reason, apart from her own feelings, why any woman, who dared do it,
should not; and if she thought her life's happiness dependent on her
doing it, that she would be a weak creature who did not dare.

Her resolve once taken, she had only waited an opportunity to carry it
out; and that evening, when Arthur offered to walk home with her,
she felt that the opportunity had come. Little wonder that she came
downstairs from the dressing-room looking remarkably pale, and that
after they had started, and she was trying to screw up her courage to
the speaking point, her responses to his conversational efforts should
have been at random. It was terribly hard work, this screwing up
her courage. All the fine arguments which had convinced her that her
intended course was justifiable and right had utterly collapsed. She
could not recall one of them. What she had undertaken to do seemed
shocking, hateful, immodest, scandalous, impossible. But there was a
bed-rock of determination to her character; and a fixed, dogged resolve
to do the thing she had once made up her mind to, come what might, had
not permitted her to draw back. Hardly knowing what she was about, or
the words she was saying, she had plunged blindly ahead. Somehow she had
got through with it, and now she seemed to herself to be sitting amidst
the ruins of her womanhood.

It was particularly remarked that Arthur Burton's laughter, as he
leaned against the fence a square away in convulsions of merriment,
was noiseless, but it was perfectly audible to Maud, as she sat in
the darkness of her chamber. Nay, more: although his thoughts were not
uttered at all, she overheard them, and among them some which the young
man, to do him justice, had the grace not to think.

The final touch to her humiliation was imparted by the reflection that
she had done the thing so stupidly,--so blunderingly. If she must
needs tell a man she loved him, could she not have told him in language
which at least would have been forcible and dignified? Instead of that,
she had begun with mawkish compliments, unable in her excitement to
think of anything else, and ended with an incoherent jumble that barely
escaped being hysterical He would think that she was as lacking in sense
as in womanly self-respect. At last she turned up the gas, for very
shame avoiding a glimpse of herself in the mirror as she did so, and
bathed her burning cheeks.




II

Meanwhile Arthur had reached home and was likewise sitting in his room,
thinking the matter over from his point of view, with the assistance of
a long-stemmed pipe. But instead of turning the gas down, as Maud had
done, he had turned it up, and, having lighted all the jets in the room,
had planted his chair directly in front of the big looking-glass, so
that he might enjoy the reflection of his own amusement and be doubly
entertained.

By this time, however, amazement and amusement had passed their acute
stages. He was considering somewhat more seriously, but still with
frequent attacks of mirth, the practical aspects of the predicament in
which Maud's declaration had placed him; and the more he considered it,
the more awkward as well as absurd that predicament appeared. They had
the same acquaintances, went to the same parties, and were very likely
to meet whenever they went out of an evening. What if she should
continue to pursue him? If she did, he either would have to cut society,
which had promised to be unusually lively that winter, or provide
himself with a chaperon for protection. For the first time in his life
he was in a position to appreciate the courage of American girls, who,
without a tremor, venture themselves, year in and year out, in the
company of gentlemen from whom they are exposed at any time to proposals
of a tender nature. It was a pity if he could not be as brave as girls
who are afraid of a mouse. Doubtless it was all in getting used to it.

On reflection, he should not need a chaperon. Had she not assured him
that he need not be afraid of her, that she would never repeat what she
had said, nor trouble him again? How her arm trembled on his as she was
saying that, and how near she came to breaking down! And this was Maud
Elliott, the girl with whom he had never ventured to flirt with as with
some of the others, because she was so reserved and distant. The
very last girl anybody would expect such a thing from! If it had been
embarrassing for him to hear it, what must it have cost such a girl as
Maud Elliott to say it! How did she ever muster the courage?

He took the pipe from his mouth, and the expression of his eyes became
fixed, while his cheeks reddened slowly and deeply. In putting himself
in Maud's place, he was realizing for the first time how strong must
have been the feeling which had nerved her to such a step. His heart
began to beat rather thickly. There was something decidedly intoxicating
in knowing that one was regarded in such a way by a nice girl, even if
it were impossible, as it certainly was in this case, to reciprocate the
feeling. He continued to put himself mentally in Maud's place. No doubt
she was also at that moment sitting alone in her chamber, thinking the
matter over as he was. She was not laughing, however, that was pretty
certain; and it required no clairvoyant's gift for him to be sensible
that her chief concern must be as to what he might be at that moment
thinking about her. And how had he been thinking about her?

As this question came up to his mind, he saw himself for a moment
through Maud's eyes, sitting there smoking, chuckling, mowing like an
idiot before the glass because, forsooth, a girl had put herself at his
mercy on the mistaken supposition that he was a gentleman. As he saw his
conduct in this new light, he had such an access of self-contempt that,
had it been physically convenient, it would have been a relief to kick
himself. What touching faith she had shown in his ability to take a
generous, high-minded view of what she had done, and here he had been
guffawing over it like a corner loafer. He would not, for anything in
the world, have her know how he had behaved. And she should not. She
should never know that he was less a gentleman than she believed him.

She had told him, to be sure, that he owed her nothing because she
loved him; but it had just struck him that he owed her at least, on that
account, a more solicitous respect and consideration than any one else
had the right to expect from him.

There were no precedents to guide him, no rules of etiquette prescribing
the proper thing for a young man to do under such circumstances as
these. It was a new problem he had to work out, directed only by such
generous and manly instincts as he might have. Plainly the first thing,
and in fact the only thing that he could do for her, seeing that he
really could not return her affection, was to show her that she had not
forfeited his esteem.

At first he thought of writing her a note and assuring her, in a few
gracefully turned sentences, of his high respect in spite of what she
had done. But somehow the gracefully turned sentences did not occur to
his mind when he took up his pen, and it did occur to him that to write
persons that you still respect them is equivalent to intimating that
their conduct justly might have forfeited your respect. Nor would it be
at all easier to give such an assurance by word of mouth. In fact, quite
the reverse. The meaning to be conveyed was too delicate for words. Only
the unspoken language of his manner and bearing could express it without
offense. It might, however, be some time before chance brought them
together in society, even if she did not, for a while at least,
purposely avoid him. Meantime, uncertain how her extraordinary action
had impressed him, how was she likely to enjoy her thoughts?

In the generous spirit bred of his new contrition, it seemed to him a
brutal thing to leave her weeks or even days in such a condition of mind
as must be hers. Inaction on his part was all that was required to make
her position intolerable. Inaction was not therefore permissible to him.
It was a matter in which he must take the initiative, and there seemed
to be just one thing he could do which would at all answer the purpose.
A brief formal call, with the conversation strictly limited to the
weather and similarly safe subjects, would make it possible for them to
meet thereafter in society without too acute embarrassment. Had he
the pluck for this, the nerve to carry it through? That was the only
question. There was no doubt as to what he ought to do. It would be an
awkward call, to put it mildly. It would be skating on terribly thin ice
--a little thinner, perhaps, than a man ever skated on before.

If he could but hit on some pretext, it scarcely mattered how thin,--
for of course it would not be intended to deceive her,--the interview
possibly could be managed. As he reflected, his eyes fell on a large
volume, purchased in a fit of extravagance, which lay on his table. It
was a profusely illustrated work on pottery, intended for the victims of
the fashionable craze on that subject, which at the date of these events
had but recently reached the United States. His face lighted up with
a sudden inspiration, and taking a pen he wrote the following note to
Maud, dating it the next day:--

     Miss Elliott:

     Our conversation last evening on the subject of old china
     has suggested to me that you might be interested in looking
     over the illustrations in the volume which I take the
     liberty of sending with this. If you will be at home this
     evening, I shall be pleased to call and learn your
     impression.

     Arthur Burton.

The next morning he sent this note and the book to Maud, and that
evening called upon her. To say that he did not twist his mustache
rather nervously as he stood upon the doorstep, waiting for the servant
to answer the bell, would be to give him credit for altogether more
nerve than he deserved. He was supported by the consciousness that he
was doing something rather heroic, but he very much wished it were done.
As he was shown into the parlor, Maud came forward to meet him. She wore
a costume which set off her fine figure to striking advantage, and he
was surprised to perceive that he had never before appreciated what
a handsome girl she was. It was strange that he should never have
particularly observed before what beautiful hands she had, and what
a dazzling fairness of complexion was the complement of her red-brown
hair. Could it be this stately maiden who had uttered those wild words
the night before? Could those breathless tones, that piteous
shame-facedness, have been hers? Surely he must be the victim of some
strange self-delusion. Only the deep blush that mantled her face as she
spoke his name, the quickness with which, after one swift glance, her
eyes avoided his, and the tremor of her hand as he touched it, fully
assured him that he had not dreamed the whole thing.

A shaded lamp was on the centre-table, where also Arthur's book on
pottery lay open. After thanking him for sending it and expressing the
pleasure she had taken in looking it over, Maud plunged at once into
a discussion of Sevres, and Cloisonne, and Palissy, and tiles, and all
that sort of thing, and Arthur bravely kept his end up. Any one who had
looked casually into the parlor would have thought that old crockery
was the most absorbing subject on earth to these young people, with
such eagerness did they compare opinions and debate doubtful points.
At length, however, even pottery gave out as a resource, especially
as Arthur ceased, after a while, to do his part, and silences began
to ensue, during which Maud rapidly turned the pages of the book or
pretended to be deeply impressed with the illustrations, while her
cheeks grew hotter and hotter under Arthur's gaze. He knew that he was
a detestable coward thus to revel in her confusion, when he ought to
be trying to cover it, but it was such a novel sensation to occupy this
masterful attitude towards a young lady that he yielded basely to the
temptation. After all, it was but fair. Had she not caused him a very
embarrassing quarter of an hour the night before?

"I suppose I shall see you at Miss Oswald's next Thursday," he said, as
he rose to take his leave.

She replied that she hoped to be there. She accompanied him to the door
of the parlor. There was less light there than immediately about
the table where they had been sitting. "Good-evening," he said.
"Good-evening," she replied; and then, in a lowered voice, hardly above
a whisper, she added, "I appreciate all that was noble and generous in
your coming to-night." He made no reply, but took her hand and, bending
low, pressed his lips to it as reverently as if she had been a queen.

Now Arthur's motive in making this call upon Maud, which has been
described, had been entirely unselfish. Furthest from his mind, of all
ideas, had been any notion of pursuing the conquest of her heart which
he had inadvertently made. Nevertheless, the effect of his call, and
that, too, even before it was made,--if this bull may be pardoned,--
had been to complete that conquest as no other device, however studied,
could have done.

The previous night Maud had been unable to sleep for shame. Her
cheeks scorched the pillows faster than her tears could cool them; and
altogether her estate was so wretched that Lucy Mer-ritt, could she have
looked in upon her, possibly might have been shaken in her opinion as
to the qualifications of women to play the part of men in love, even if
permitted by society.

It had been hard enough to nerve herself to the point of doing what she
had done in view of the embarrassments she had foreseen. An hour after
she uttered those fatal words, her whole thinking was summed up in the
cry, "If I only had not done it, then at least he would still respect
me." In the morning she looked like one in a fever. Her eyes were red
and swollen, her face was pallid but for a hard red spot in each
cheek, and her whole appearance was expressive of bodily and mental
prostration. She did not go down to breakfast, pleading a very genuine
headache, and Arthur's note and the book on pottery were brought up to
her. She guessed his motive in a moment. Her need gave her the due to
his meaning.

What was on Arthur's part merely a decent sort of thing to do, her
passionate gratitude instantly magnified into an act of chivalrous
generosity, proving him the noblest of men and the gentlest of
gentlemen. She exaggerated the abjectness of the position from which his
action had rescued her, in order to feel that she owed the more to his
nobility. At any time during the previous night she gladly would have
given ten years of her life to recall the confession that she had made
to him; now she told herself, with a burst of exultant tears, that she
would not recall it if she could. She had made no mistake. Her womanly
dignity was safe in his keeping. Whether he ever returned her love or
not, she was not ashamed, but was glad, and always should be glad, that
he knew she loved him.

As for Arthur, the reverence with which he bent over her hand on leaving
her was as heartfelt as it was graceful. In her very disregard of
conventional decorum she had impressed him the more strikingly with the
native delicacy and refinement of her character. It had been reserved
for her to show him how genuine a thing is womanly modesty, and how far
from being dependent on those conventional affectations with which it
is in the vulgar mind so often identified, with the effect of seeming as
artificial as they.

When, a few evenings later, he went to Miss Oswald's party, the leading
idea in his mind was that he should meet Maud there. His eyes sought
her out the moment he entered the Oswald parlors, but it was some time
before he approached her. For years he had been constantly meeting her,
but he had never before taken special note of her appearance in company.
He had a curiosity about her now as lively as it was wholly new. He took
a great interest in observing how she walked and talked and laughed, how
she sat down and rose up and demeaned herself. It gave him an odd but
marked gratification to note how favorably she compared in style and
appearance with the girls present. Even while he was talking with Ella
Perry, with whom he believed himself in love, he was so busy making
these observations that Ella dismissed him with the sarcastic advice to
follow his eyes, which he presently proceeded to do.

Maud greeted him with a very fair degree of self-possession, though her
cheeks were delightfully rosy. At first it was evidently difficult
for her to talk, and her embarrassment betrayed uncertainty as to
the stability of the conventional footing which his call of the other
evening had established between them. Gradually, however, the easy,
nonchalant tone which he affected seemed to give her confidence, and
she talked more easily. Her color continued to be unusually though not
unbecomingly high, and it took a great deal of skirmishing for him
to get a glance from her eyes, but her embarrassment was no longer
distressing. Arthur, indeed, was scarcely in a mood to notice that she
did not bear her full part in the conversation. The fact of conversing
on any terms with a young lady who had confessed to him what Maud
had was so piquant in itself that it would have made talk in the
deaf-and-dumb alphabet vivacious. All the while, as they laughed and
talked together quite as any other two young people might do, those
words of hers the other night: "I care for you very much," "Be a little
good to me," were ringing in his ears. The reflection that by virtue of
her confession of love she was his whenever he should wish to claim her,
even though he never should claim her, was constantly in his mind, and
gave him a sense of potential proprietorship which was decidedly heady.

"Arthur Burton seems to be quite fascinated. I never supposed that he
fancied Maud Elliott before, did you?" said one of the young ladies, a
little maliciously, to Ella Perry. Ella tossed her head and replied that
really she had never troubled herself about Mr. Burton's fancies, which
was not true. The fact is, she was completely puzzled as well as vexed
by Arthur's attentions to Maud. There was not a girl in her set of whom
she would not sooner have thought as a rival. Arthur had never, to her
knowledge, talked for five minutes together with Maud before, and here
he was spending half the evening in an engrossing tete-a-tete with her,
to the neglect of his other acquaintances and of herself in particular.
Maud was looking very well, to be sure, but no better than often before,
when he had not glanced at her a second time. What might be the clue to
this mystery? She remembered, upon reflection, that he had escorted Maud
home from the party at her own house the week before, but that explained
nothing. Ella was aware of no weapon in the armory of her sex capable of
effecting the subjugation of a previously quite indifferent young man
in the course of a ten-minutes' walk. If, indeed, such weapons there
had been, Maud Elliott, the most reserved and diffident girl of her
acquaintance,--"stiff and pokerish," Ella called her,---was the last
person likely to employ them. It must be, Ella was forced to conclude,
that Arthur was trying to punish her for snubbing him by devoting
himself to Maud; and, having adopted this conclusion, the misguided
damsel proceeded to flirt vigorously with a young man whom she detested.

In the latter part of the evening, when Arthur was looking again for
Maud, he learned that she had gone home, a servant having come to fetch
her. The result was that he went home alone, Ella Perry having informed
him rather crushingly that she had accorded the honor of escorting
herself to another. He was rather vexed at Ella's jilting him, though he
admitted that she might have fancied she had some excuse.

A few days later he called on her, expecting to patch up their little
misunderstanding, as on previous occasions. She was rather offish, but
really would have been glad to make up, had he shown the humility and
tractableness he usually manifested after their tiffs; but he was not in
a humble frame of mind, and, after a brief and unsatisfactory call,
took his leave. The poor girl was completely puzzled. What had come over
Arthur? She had snubbed him no more than usual that night, and generally
he took it very meekly. She would have opened her eyes very wide indeed
if she had guessed what there had been in his recent experience to spoil
his appetite for humble-pie.

It was not late when he left Ella, and as he passed Maud's house he
could not resist the temptation of going in. This time he did not
pretend to himself that he sought her from any but entirely selfish
motives. He wanted to remove the unpleasantly acid impression left by
his call on Ella by passing an hour with some one whom he knew would be
glad to see him and not be afraid to let him know it. In this aim he was
quite successful. Maud's face fairly glowed with glad surprise when he
entered the room. This was their second meeting since the evening Arthur
had called to talk pottery, and the tacit understanding that her tender
avowal was to be ignored between them had become so well established
that they could converse quite at their ease. But ignoring is not
forgetting. On the other hand, it implies a constant remembering; and
the mutual consciousness between these young people could scarcely fail
to give a peculiar piquancy to their intercourse.

That evening was the first of many which the young man passed in Maud's
parlor, and the beginning of an intimacy which caused no end of wonder
among their acquaintances. Had its real nature been suspected, that
wonder would have been vastly increased. For whereas they supposed it
to be an entirely ordinary love affair, except in the abruptness of its
development, it was, in fact, a quite extraordinary variation on the
usual social relations of young men and women.

Maud's society had in fact not been long in acquiring an attraction for
Arthur quite independent of the peculiar circumstances under which he
had first become interested in her. As soon as she began to feel at
ease with him, her shyness rapidly disappeared, and he was astonished
to discover that the stiff, silent girl whom he had thought rather dull
possessed cultore and originality such as few girls of his acquaintance
could lay claim to. His assurance beyond possibility of doubt that she
was as really glad to see him whenever he called as she said she was,
and that though his speech might be dull or his jests poor they were
sure of a friendly critic, made the air of her parlor wonderfully genial.
The result was that he fell into a habit whenever he wanted a little
social relaxation, but felt too tired, dispirited, or lazy for the
effort of a call on any of the other girls, of going to Maud. One
evening he said to her just as he was leaving, "If I come here too much,
you must send me home."

"I will when you do," she replied, with a bright smile.

"But really," he persisted, "I am afraid I bore you by coming so often."

"You know better than that," was her only reply, but the vivid blush
which accompanied the words was a sufficient enforcement of them; and he
was, at the bottom of his heart, very glad to think he did know better.

Without making any pretense of being in love with her, he had come to
depend on her being in love with him. It had grown so pleasing to count
on her loyalty to him that a change in her feelings would have been
a disagreeable surprise. Getting something for nothing is a mode of
acquisition particularly pleasing to mankind, and he was enjoying
in some respects the position of an engaged man without any of the
responsibilities.

But if in some respects he was in the position of an engaged man, in
others he was farther from it than the average unengaged man. For while
Maud and he talked of almost everything else under heaven, the subject
of love was tabooed between them. Once for all Maud had said her say on
that point, and Arthur could say nothing unless he said as much as she
had said. For the same reason, there was never any approach to flirting
between them. Any trifling of that sort would have been meaningless
in an intimacy begun, as theirs had been, at a point beyond where most
flirtations end.

Not only in this respect, but also in the singular frankness which
marked their interchange of thought and opinion, was there something in
their relation savoring of that of brother and sister. It was as if her
confession of love had swept away by one breath the whole lattice of
conventional affectations through which young men and women usually talk
with each other. Once for all she had dropped her guard with him, and
he could not do less with her. He found himself before long talking more
freely to her than to any others of his acquaintance, and about more
serious matters. They talked of their deepest beliefs and convictions,
and he told her things that he had never told any one before. Why
should he not tell her his secrets? Had she not told him hers? It was a
pleasure to reciprocate her confidence if he could not her love. He had
not supposed it to be possible for a man to become so closely acquainted
with a young lady not a relative. It came to the point finally that when
they met in company, the few words that he might chance to exchange with
her were pitched in a different key from that used with the others, such
as one drops into when greeting a relative or familiar friend met in a
throng of strangers.

Of course, all this had not come at once. It was in winter that the
events took place with which this narrative opened. Winter had meantime
glided into spring, and spring had become summer. In the early part of
June a report that Arthur Burton and Maud Elliott were engaged obtained
circulation, and, owing to the fact that he had so long been apparently
devoted to her, was generally believed. Whenever Maud went out she met
congratulations on every side, and had to reply a dozen times a day that
there was no truth in the story, and smilingly declare that she could
not imagine how it started. After doing which, she would go home and cry
all night, for Arthur was not only not engaged to her, but she had come
to know in her heart that he never would be.

At first, and indeed for a long time, she was so proud of the frank and
loyal friendship between them, such as she was sure had never before
existed between unplighted man and maid, that she would have been
content to wait half her lifetime for him to learn to love her, if only
she were sure that he would at last. But, after all, it was the hope of
his love, not his friendship, that had been the motive of her desperate
venture. As month after month passed, and he showed no symptoms of any
feeling warmer than esteem, but always in the midst of his cordiality
was so careful lest he should do or say anything to arouse unfounded
expectations in her mind, she lost heart and felt that what she had
hoped was not to be. She said to herself that the very fact that he was
so much her friend should have warned her that he would never be her
lover, for it is not often that lovers are made out of friends.

It is always embarrassing for a young lady to have to deny a report of
her engagement, especially when it is a report she would willingly have
true; but what made it particularly distressing for Maud that this
report should have got about was her belief that it would be the means
of bringing to an end the relations between them. It would undoubtedly
remind Arthur, by showing how the public interpreted their friendship,
that his own prospects in other quarters, and he might even think
justice to her future, demanded the discontinuance of attentions which
must necessarily be misconstrued by the world. The public had been quite
right in assuming that it was time for them to be engaged. Such an
intimacy as theirs between a young man and a young woman, unless it were
to end in an engagement, had no precedent and belonged to no known
social category. It was vain, in the long run, to try to live
differently from other people.

The pangs of an accusing conscience completed her wretchedness at this
time. The conventional proprieties are a law written on the hearts of
refined, delicately nurtured girls; and though, in the desperation of
unreciprocated and jealous love, she had dared to violate them, not the
less did they now thoroughly revenge themselves. If her revolt against
custom had resulted happily, it is not indeed likely that she would ever
have reproached herself very seriously; but now that it had issued
in failure, her self-confidence was gone and her conscience easily
convicted her of sin. The outraged Proprieties, with awful spectacles
and minatory, reproachful gestures, crowded nightly around her bed,
the Titanic shade of Mrs. Grundy looming above her satellite shams and
freezing her blood with a Gorgon gaze. The feeling that she had deserved
all that was to come upon her deprived her of moral support.

Arthur had never showed that he thought cheaply of her, but in his heart
of hearts how could he help doing so? Compared with the other
girls, serene and unapproachable in their virgin pride, must she not
necessarily seem bold, coarse, and common? That he took care never to
let her see it only proved his kindness of heart. Her sense of this
kindness was more and more touched with abjectness.

The pity of it was that she had come to love him so much more since she
had known him so well. It scarcely seemed to her now that she could have
truly cared for him at all in the old days, and she wondered, as
she looked back, that the shallow emotion she then experienced had
emboldened her to do what she had done. Ah, why had she done it? Why had
she not let him go his way? She might have suffered then, but not such
heart-breaking misery as was now in store for her.

Some weeks passed with no marked change in their relations, except that
a new and marked constraint which had come over Arthur's manner towards
her was additional evidence that the end was at hand. Would he think
it better to say nothing, but merely come to see her less and less
frequently and so desert her, without an explanation, which, after all,
was needless? Or would he tell her how the matter stood and say good-by?
She thought he would take the latter course, seeing that they had always
been so frank with each other. She tried to prepare herself for what she
knew was coming, and to get ready to bear it. The only result was that
she grew sick with apprehension whenever he did not call, and was only
at ease when he was with her, in the moment that he was saying good-by
without having uttered the dreaded words.

The end came during a call which he made on her in the last part of
June. He appeared preoccupied and moody, and said scarcely anything.
Several times she caught him furtively regarding her with a very strange
expression. She tried to talk, but she could not alone keep up the
conversation, and in time there came a silence. A hideous silence it
was to Maud, an abyss yawning to swallow up all that was left of her
happiness. She had no more power to speak, and when he spoke she knew it
would be to utter the words she had so long expected. Evidently it was
very hard for him to bring himself to utter them,--almost as hard as
it would be for her to hear them. He was very tender-hearted she had
learned already. Even in that moment she was very sorry for him. It was
all her fault that he had to say this to her.

Suddenly, just as she must have cried out, unable to bear the tension
of suspense any longer, he rose abruptly to his feet, uttering something
about going and an engagement which he had almost forgotten. Hastily
wishing her good-evening, with hurried steps he half crossed the room,
hesitated, stopped, looked back at her, seemed to waver a moment, and
then, as if moved by a sudden decision, returned to her and took her
gently by the hand. Then she knew it was coming.

For a long moment he stood looking at her. She knew just the pitifulness
that was in his expression, but she could not raise her eyes to his. She
tried to summon her pride, her dignity, to her support. But she had no
pride, no dignity, left. She had surrendered them long ago.

"I have something to say to you," he said, in a tone full of gentleness,
just as she had known he would speak. "It is something I have put off
saying as long as possible, and perhaps you have already guessed what it
is."

Maud felt the blood leaving her face; the room spun around; she was
afraid she should faint. It only remained that she should break down now
to complete her humiliation before him, and apparently she was going to
do just that.

"We have had a most delightful time the past year," he went on; "that
is, at least I have. I don't believe the friendship of a girl was ever
so much to a man as yours has been to me. I doubt if there ever was just
such a friendship as ours has been, anyway. I shall always look back on
it as the rarest and most charming passage in my life. But I have
seen for some time that we could not go on much longer on the present
footing, and tonight it has come over me that we can't go on even
another day. Maud, I can't play at being friends with you one hour more.
I love you. Do you care for me still? Will you be my wife?"

When it is remembered that up to his last words she had been desperately
bracing herself against an announcement of a most opposite nature, it
will not seem strange that for a moment Maud had difficulty in realizing
just what had happened. She looked at him as if dazed, and with an
instinct of bewilderment drew back a little as he would have clasped
her. "I thought," she stammered--"I thought--I"--

He misconstrued her hesitation. His eyes darkened and his voice was
sharpened with a sudden fear as he exclaimed, "I know it was a long time
ago you told me that. Perhaps you don't feel the same way now. Don't
tell me, Maud, that you don't care for me any longer, now that I have
learned I can't do without you."

A look of wondering happiness, scarcely able even yet to believe in its
own reality, had succeeded the bewildered incredulity in her face.

"O Arthur!" she cried. "Do you really mean it? Are you sure it is not
out of pity that you say this? Do you love me after all? Would you
really like me a little to be your wife?"

"If you are not my wife, I shall never have one," he replied. "You have
spoiled all other women for me."

Then she let him take her in his arms, and as his lips touched hers
for the first time he faintly wondered if it were possible he had ever
dreamed of any other woman but Maud Elliott as his wife. After she had
laughed and cried awhile, she said:

"How was it that you never let me see you cared for me? You never showed
it."

"I tried not to," he replied; "and I would not have shown it to-night,
if I could have helped it. I tried to get away without betraying my
secret, but I could not." Then he told her that when he found he had
fallen in love with her, he was almost angry with himself. He was so
proud of their friendship that a mere love affair seemed cheap and
common beside it. Any girl would do to fall in love with; but there was
not, he was sure, another in America capable of bearing her part in such
a rare and delicate companionship as theirs. He was determined to keep
up their noble game of friendship as long as might be.

Afterward, during the evening, he boasted himself to her not a little of
the self-control he had shown in hiding his passion so long, a feat the
merit of which perhaps she did not adequately appreciate.

"Many a time in the last month or two when you have been saying good-by
to me of an evening, with your hand in mine, the temptation has been
almost more than I could withstand to seize you in my arms. It was all
the harder, you see, because I fancied you would not be very angry if
I did. In fact, you once gave me to understand as much in pretty
plain language, if I remember rightly. Possibly you may recall the
conversation. You took the leading part in it, I believe."

Maud had bent her head so low that he could not see her face. It was
very cruel in him, but he deliberately took her chin in his hands, and
gently but firmly turned her face up to his. Then, as he kissed the
shamed eyes and furiously blushing cheeks, he dropped the tone of banter
and said, with moist eyes, in a voice of solemn tenderness:--

"My brave darling, with all my life I will thank you for the words you
spoke that night. But for them I might have missed the wife God meant
for me."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Love Story Reversed, by Edward Bellamy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LOVE STORY REVERSED ***

***** This file should be named 22711.txt or 22711.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/7/1/22711/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
