The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Staircase At The Hearts Delight, by
Anna Katharine Green (Mrs. Charles Rohlfs)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Staircase At The Hearts Delight
       1894

Author: Anna Katharine Green (Mrs. Charles Rohlfs)

Release Date: September 29, 2007 [EBook #22811]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STAIRCASE ***




Produced by David Widger





THE STAIRCASE AT THE HEARTS DELIGHT.

By Anna Katharine Green (Mrs. Charles Rohlfs)

Copyright, 1894, by Anna Katharine Green


AS TOLD BY MR. GRYCE.

"In the spring of 1840, the attention of the New York police was
attracted by the many cases of well-known men found drowned in the
various waters surrounding the lower portion of our great city. Among
these may be mentioned the name of Elwood Henderson, the noted tea
merchant, whose remains were washed ashore at Redhook Point; and of
Christopher Bigelow, who was picked up off Governor's Island after
having been in the water for five days, and of another well-known
millionaire whose name I cannot now recall, but who, I remember, was
seen to walk towards the East River one March evening, and was not met
with again till the 5th of April, when his body floated into one of the
docks near Peck Slip.

"As it seemed highly improbable that there should have been a concerted
action among so many wealthy and distinguished men to end their
lives within a few weeks of each other, and all by the same method of
drowning, we soon became suspicious that a more serious verdict than
that of suicide should have been rendered in the case of Henderson,
Bigelow and the other gentleman I have mentioned. Yet one fact, common
to all these cases, pointed so conclusively to deliberate intention on
the part of the sufferers that we hesitated to take action.

"This was, that upon the body of each of the above-mentioned persons
there were found, not only valuables in the shape of money and jewelry,
but papers and memoranda of a nature calculated to fix the identity
of the drowned man, in case the water should rob him of his personal
characteristics. Consequently, we could not ascribe these deaths to a
desire for plunder on the part of some unknown person.

"I was a young man in those days, and full of ambition. So, though I
said nothing, I did not let this matter drop when the others did, but
kept my mind persistently upon it and waited, with odd results as you
will hear, for another victim to be reported at police headquarters.

"Meantime I sought to discover some bond or connection between the
several men who had been found drowned, which would serve to explain
their similar fate. But all my efforts in this direction were fruitless.
There was no bond between them, and the matter remained for a while an
unsolved mystery.

"Suddenly one morning a clew was placed, not in my hands, but in those
of a superior official who at that time exerted a great influence over
the whole force. He was sitting in his private room, when there
was ushered into his presence a young man of a dissipated but not
unprepossessing appearance, who, after a pause of marked embarrassment,
entered upon the following story:

"I don't know whether or no, I should offer an excuse for the
communication I am about to make; but the matter I have to relate is
simply this: Being hard up last night (for though a rich man's son I
often lack money), I went to a certain pawn-shop in the Bowery where I
had been told I could raise money on my prospects. This place--you
may see it sometime, so I will not enlarge upon it--did not strike me
favorably; but, being very anxious for a certain definite sum of money,
I wrote my name in a book which was brought to me from some unknown
quarter, and proceeded to follow the young woman who attended me into
what she was pleased to call her good master's private office. He may
have been a good master, but he was anything but a good man, In short,
sir, when he found out who I was, and how much I needed money, he
suggested that I should make an appointment with my father at a place he
called Judah's in Grand Street, where, said he, 'your little affair will
be arranged, and you made a rich man within thirty days. That is,' he
slyly added, 'unless your father has already made a will, disinheriting
you.'

"I was shocked, sir, shocked beyond all my powers of concealment, not so
much at his words, which I hardly understood, as at his looks, which had
a world of evil suggestion in them; so I raised my fist and would have
knocked him down, only that I found two young fellows at my elbows, who
held me quiet for five minutes, while the old fellow talked to me. He
asked me if I came to him on a fool's errand or really to get money;
and when I admitted that I had cherished hopes of obtaining a clear two
thousand dollars from him, he coolly replied that he knew of but one
way in which I could hope to get such an amount, and that if I was too
squeamish to adopt it, I had made a mistake in coming to his shop, which
was no missionary institution, etc., etc. Not wishing to irritate him,
for there was menace in his eye, I asked, with a certain weak show of
being sorry for my former heat, whereabouts in Grand Street I should
find this Judah. The retort was quick, 'Judah is not his name,' said he,
'and Grand Street is not where you are to go to find him. I threw out a
bait to see if you would snap at it, but I find you timid, and therefore
advise you to drop the matter entirely.' I was quite willing to do so,
and answered him to this effect; whereupon, with a side glance I did
not understand but which made me more or less uneasy in regard to his
intentions towards me, he motioned to the men who held my arms to let go
their hold, which they at once did.

"'We have your signature,' growled the old man as I went out. 'If you
peach on us or trouble us in any way we will show it to your father and
that will put an end to all your hopes of future fortune.' Then raising
his voice he shouted to the girl in the outer office, 'Let the young man
see what he has signed.' She smiled and again brought forward the book
in which I had so recklessly placed my name, and there at the top of the
page I read these words: 'For moneys received, I agree to notify Levi
Solomon, within the month, of the death of my father, that he may
recover from me, without loss of time, the sum of ten thousand dollars
from the amount I am bound to receive as my father's heir.' The sight
of these lines knocked me hollow. But I am less of a coward morally than
physically, and I determined to acquaint my father at once with what I
had done, and get his advice as to whether or not I should inform the
police of my adventure. He heard me with more consideration than I
expected, but insisted that I should immediately make known to you my
experience in this Bowery pawnbroker's shop.

"The officer, highly interested, took down the young man's statement
in writing, and, after getting a more accurate description of the Jew's
house, allowed his visitor to go.

"Fortunately for me I was in the building at the time, and was able to
respond when a man was called up to investigate this matter. Thinking
that I saw a connection between it and the various mysterious deaths
of which I have previously spoken, I entered into the affair with much
spirit. But, wishing to be sure that my possibly unwarranted conclusions
were correct, I took pains to inquire, before proceeding upon my errand,
into the character of the heirs who had inherited the property of Elwood
Henderson and Christopher Bigelow, and found that in each case there was
one among the rest who was well known for his profligacy and reckless
expenditure. It was a significant discovery, and increased, if possible,
my interest in running down this nefarious trafficker in the lives of
wealthy men.

"Knowing that I could hope for no success in my character of detective,
I made an arrangement with the father of the young gentleman before
alluded to, by which I was to enter the pawn-shop as an emissary of the
latter. I accordingly appeared there, one dull November afternoon, in
the garb of a certain western sporting man, who, for a consideration,
allowed me the temporary use of his name and credentials.

"Entering beneath the three golden balls, with, the swagger and general
air of ownership I thought most likely to impose upon the self-satisfied
female who presided over the desk, I asked to see her boss.

"'On your own business?' she queried, glancing with suspicion at my
short coat, which was rather more showy than elegant.

"'No,' I returned, 'not on my own business, but on that of a young
gent----'

"'Anyone whose name is written here?' she interposed, reaching towards
me the famous book, over the top of which, however, she was careful to
lay her arm.

"I glanced down the page she had opened and instantly detected that
of the young gentleman on whose behalf I was supposed to be there, and
nodded 'Yes,' with all the assurance of which I was capable.

"'Very well, then,' said she, 'come!' and she ushered me without much
ado into a den of discomfort where sat a man, with a great beard and
such heavy overhanging eyebrows that I could hardly detect the twinkle
of his eyes, keen and incisive as they were.

"Smiling upon him, but not in the same way I had upon the girl, I
glanced behind me at the open door, and above me at the partitions,
which failed to reach the ceiling. Then I shook my head and drew a step
nearer.

"'I have come,' I insinuatingly whispered, 'on behalf of a certain party
who left this place in a huff a day or so ago, but who since then has
had time to think the matter over, and has sent me with an apology which
he hopes'--here I put on a diabolical smile, copied, I declare to you,
from the one I saw at that moment on his own lips--'you will accept.'

"The old wretch regarded me for full two minutes in a way to unmask
me had I possessed less confidence in my disguise and in my ability to
support it.

"'And what is this young gentleman's name?' he finally asked.

"For reply, I handed him a slip of paper. He took it and read the few
lines written on it, after which he began to rub his palms together with
a snaky unction eminently in keeping with the stray glints of light that
now and then found their way through his' bushy eyebrows.

"'And so the young gentleman had not the courage to come again himself?'
he softly suggested, with just the suspicion of an ironical laugh.
'Thought, perhaps, I would exact too much commission; or make him pay
too roundly for his impertinent assurance.'

"I shrugged my shoulders, but vouchsafed no immediate reply, and he saw
that he had to open the business himself. He did it warily and with many
an incisive question which would have tripped me up if I had not been
very much on my guard; but it all ended, as such matters usually do,
in mutual understanding, and a promise that if the young gentleman was
willing to sign a certain paper, which, by the way, was not shown me,
he would in exchange give him an address which, if made proper use of,
would lead to my patron finding himself an independent man within a very
few days.

"As this address was the thing above all others which I most desired, I
professed myself satisfied with the arrangement, and proceeded to hunt
up my patron, as he was called. Informing him of the result of my visit,
I asked if his interest in ferreting out these criminals was strong
enough to lead him to sign the vile document which the Jew would
probably have in readiness for him on the morrow; and being told it was,
we separated for that day, with the understanding that we were to meet
the next morning at the spot chosen by the Jew for the completion of his
nefarious bargain.

"Being certain that I was being followed in all my movements by the
agents of this adept in villainy, I took care, upon leaving Mr. L----,
to repair to the hotel of the sporting man I was personifying. Making
myself square with the proprietor, I took up my quarters in the room
of my sporting friend, and, the better to deceive any spy who might be
lurking about, I received his letters and sent out his telegrams, which,
if they did not create confusion in the affairs of 'The Plunger,' must
at least have occasioned him no little work the next day.

"Promptly at ten o'clock on the following morning I met my patron at the
place of rendezvous appointed by the old Jew; and when I tell you that
this was no other than the old cemetery of which a portion is still to
be seen off Chatham Square, you will understand the uncanny nature of
this whole adventure, and the lurking sense there was in it of brooding
death and horror. The scene, which in these days is disturbed by
elevated railroad trains and the flapping of long lines of parti-colored
clothes strung high up across the quiet tombstones, was at that time one
of peaceful rest, in the midst of a quarter devoted to everything for
which that rest is the fitting and desirable end; and as we paused among
the mossy stones, we found it hard to realize that in a few minutes
there would be standing beside us the concentrated essence of all that
was evil and despicable in human nature.

"He arrived with a smile on his countenance that completed his ugliness,
and would have frightened any honest man from his side at once. Merely
glancing my way, he shuffled up to my companion, and leading him aside,
drew out a paper which he laid on a flat tombstone with a gesture
significant of his desire that the other should affix to it the required
signature.

"Meantime I stood guard, and while attempting to whistle a light air,
was carelessly taking in the surroundings, and conjecturing, as best I
might, the reasons which had induced the old ghoul to make use of this
spot for his diabolical business, and had about decided that it was
because he was a ghoul, and thus felt at home among the symbols of
mortality, when I caught sight of two or three young fellows, who were
lounging on the other side of the fence.

"These were so evidently accomplices that I wondered if the two sly boys
I had engaged to stand by me through this affair had spotted them, and
would know enough to follow them back to their haunts.

"A few minutes later, the old rascal came sneaking towards me, with a
gleam of satisfaction in his half-closed eyes.

"'You are not wanted any longer,' he grunted. 'The young gentleman told
me to say that he could look out for himself now.'

"'The young gentleman had better pay me the round fifty he promised
me,' I grumbled in return, with that sudden change from indifference
to menace which I thought best calculated to further my plans; and
shouldering the miserable wretch aside, I stepped up to my companion,
who was still lingering in a state of hesitation among the gravestones.

"'Quick! Tell me the number and street which he has given you!
'I whispered, in a tone strangely in contrast with the angry and
reproachful air I had assumed.

"He was about to answer, when the old fellow came sidling up behind us.
Instantly the young man before me rose to the occasion, and putting on
an air of conciliation said in a soothing tone:

"'There, there, don't bluster. Do one thing more for me, and I will
add another fifty to those I promised you. Conjure up an anonymous
letter--you know how--and send it to my father, saying that if he wants
to know where his son loses his hundreds, he must go to the place on the
dock, opposite 5 South Street, some night shortly after nine. It would
not work with most men, but it will with my father, and when he has been
in and out of that place, and I succeed to the fortune he will leave me,
then I will remember you, and----'

"'Say, too,' a sinister voice here added in my ear, 'that if he wishes
to effect an entrance into the gambling den which his son haunts,
he must take the precaution of tying a bit of blue ribbon in his
button-hole. It is a signal meaning business, and must not be
forgotten,' chuckled the old fellow, evidently deceived at last into
thinking I was really one of his own kind.

"I answered by a wink, and taking care to attempt no further
communication with my patron, I left the two, as soon as possible,
and went back to the hotel, where I dropped 'the sport,' and assumed a
character and dress which enabled me to make my way undetected to the
house of my young patron, where for two days I lay low, waiting for
a suitable time in which to make my final attempt to penetrate this
mystery.

"I knew that for the adventure I was now contemplating considerable
courage was required. But I did not hesitate. The time had come for me
to show my mettle. In the few communications I was enabled to hold with
my superiors I told them of my progress and arranged with them my
plan of work. As we all agreed that I was about to encounter no common
villainy, these plans naturally partook of finesse, as you will see if
you will follow my narrative to the end.

"Early in the evening of a cool November night I sallied forth into the
streets, dressed in the habiliments and wearing the guise of the wealthy
old gentleman whose secret guest I had been for the last few days. As he
was old and portly, and I young and spare, this disguise had cost me no
little thought and labor. But assisted as I was by the darkness, I had
but little fear of betraying myself to any chance spy who might be upon
the watch, especially as Mr. L---- had a peculiar walk, which, in my
short stay with him, I had learned to imitate perfectly. In the lapel of
my overcoat I had tied a tag of blue ribbon, and, though for all I knew
this was a signal devoting me to a secret and mysterious death, I walked
along in a buoyant condition of mind, attributable, no doubt, to the
excitement of the venture and to my desire to test my powers, even at
the risk of my life.

"It was nine o'clock when I reached South Street. It was no new region
to me, nor was I ignorant of the specified drinking den on the dock to
which I had been directed. I remembered it as a bright spot in a mass
of ship-prows and bow-rigging, and was possessed, besides, of a vague
consciousness that there was something odd in connection with it which
had aroused my curiosity sufficiently in the past for me to have once
formed the resolution of seeing it again under circumstances which
would allow me to give, it some attention. But I never thought that
the circumstances would involve my own life, impossible as it is for a
detective to reckon upon the future or to foresee the events into which
he will be hurried by the next crime which may be reported at police
headquarters.

"There were but few persons in the street when I crossed to The Heart's
Delight,--so named from the heart-shaped opening in the framework of the
door, through which shone a light, inviting enough to one chilled by the
keen November air and oppressed by the desolate appearance of the almost
deserted street. But amongst those persons I thought I recognized more
than one familiar form, and felt reassured as to the watch which had
been set upon the house. The night was dark and the river especially so,
but in the gloomy space beyond the dock I detected a shadow blacker than
the rest, which I took for the police-boat they had promised to have
in readiness in case I needed rescue from the water-side. Otherwise the
surroundings were as usual, and saving the gruff singing of some drunken
sailor coming from a narrow side street near by, no sound disturbed the
somewhat lugubrious silence of this weird and forsaken spot.

"Pausing an instant before entering, I glanced up at the building, which
was about three stories high, and endeavored to see what there was about
it which had once arrested my attention, and came to the conclusion that
it was its exceptional situation on the dock, and the ghostly effect of
the hoisting-beam projecting from the upper story like a gibbet. And yet
this beam was common to many a warehouse in the vicinity, though in none
of them were there any such signs of life as proceeded from the curious
mixture of sail loft, boat shop and drinking saloon, now before me.
Could it be that the ban of criminality was upon the house, and that I
had been conscious of this without being able to realize the cause of my
interest?

"Not stopping to solve my sensations further, I tried the door, and,
finding it yield easily to my touch, turned the knob and entered. For
a moment I was blinded by the smoky glare of the heated atmosphere
into which I stepped, but presently I was able to distinguish the vague
outlines of an oyster bar in the distance, and the motionless figures
of some half dozen men, whose movements had been arrested by my sudden
entrance. For an instant this picture remained; then the drinking and
card-playing were resumed, and I stood, as it were, alone on the sanded
floor near the door. Improving the opportunity for a closer inspection
of the place, I was struck by its picturesqueness. It had evidently been
once used as a ship chandlery, and on the walls, which were but partly
plastered, there still hung old bits of marlin, rusty rings and such
other evidences of former traffic as did not interfere with the present
more lucrative business.

"Below were the two bars, one at the right of the door, and the other
at the lower end of the room near a window, through whose small, square
panes I caught a glimpse of the colored lights of a couple of ferry
boats, passing each other in midstream.

"At a table near me sat two men, grumbling at each other over a game of
cards. They were large and powerful figures in the contracted space
of this long and narrow room, and my heart gave a bound of joy as I
recognized on them certain marks by which I was to know friend from foe
in this possible den of thieves and murderers.

"Two sailors at the bar were bona fide habitues of the place, and so
I judged to be the one or two other specimens of water-side character
whose backs I could faintly discern in one of the dim corners. Meantime
a man was approaching me.

"Let me see if I can describe him. He was about thirty, and had the
complexion and figure of a consumptive, but his eye shone with the
yellow glare of a beast of prey, and in the cadaverous hollows of his
ashen cheeks and amid the lines about his thin drawn lips there lay for
all his conciliatory smile, an expression so cold and yet so ferocious
that I spotted him at once as the man to whose genius we were indebted
for the new scheme of murder which I was jeopardizing my life to
understand. But I allowed none of the repugnance with which he inspired
me to appear in my manner, and, greeting him with half a nod, waited
for him to speak. His voice had that smooth quality which betrays the
hypocrite.

"'Has the gentleman an appointment here?' he asked, letting his glance
fall for the merest instant on the lapel of my coat.

"I returned a decided affirmative. Or rather, I went on, with a meaning
look he evidently comprehended, 'my son has, and I have made up my mind
to know just what deviltry he is up to these days. You see I can make it
worth your while to give me the opportunity.'

"'O, I see,' he assented with a glance at the pocketbook I had just
drawn out. 'You want a private room from which you can watch the young
scapegrace. I understand, I understand. But the private rooms are above.
Gentlemen are not comfortable here.'

"'I should say not,' I murmured, and drew from the pocketbook a bill
which I slid quietly into his hand. 'Now take me where I shall be
safe,' I suggested, 'and yet in full sight of the room where the young
gentlemen play. I wish to catch him at his tricks. Afterwards----'

"'All will be well,' he finished smoothly, with another glance at my
blue ribbon. 'You see I do not ask you the young gentleman's name.
I take your money and leave all the rest to you. Only don't make a
scandal, I pray, for my house has the name of being quiet.'

"'Yes,' thought I, 'too quiet!' and for an instant felt my spirits fail
me. But it was only for an instant. I had friends about me and a
pistol at half cock in the pocket of my overcoat. Why should I fear any
surprise, prepared as I was for every emergency?

"'I will show you up in a moment,' said he; and left me to put up a
heavy board-shutter over the window opening on the river. Was this a
signal or a precaution? I glanced towards my two friends playing cards,
took another note of their broad shoulders and brawny arms, and prepared
to follow my host, who now stood bowing at the other end of the room,
before a covered staircase which was manifestly the sole means of
reaching the floor above.

"The staircase was quite a feature in the room. It ran from back to
front, and was boarded all the way up to the ceiling. On these boards
hung a few useless bits of chain, wire and knotted ends of tarred ropes,
which swung to and fro as the sharp November blast struck the building,
giving out a weird and strangely muffled sound. Why did this sound, so
easily to be accounted for, ring in my ears like a note of warning? I
understand now, but I did not then, full of expectation as I was for
developments out of the ordinary.

"Crossing the room, I entered upon the staircase, in the wake of my
companion. Though the two men at cards did not look up as I passed them,
I noticed that they were alert and ready for any signal I might choose
to give them. But I was not ready to give one yet. I must see danger
before I summoned help, and there was no token of danger yet.

"When we were about half-way up the stairs the faint light which had
illuminated us from below suddenly vanished, and we found ourselves in
total darkness. The door at the foot had been closed by a careful hand,
and I felt, rather than heard, the stealthy pushing of a bolt across it.

"My first impulse was to forsake my guide and rush back, but I
subdued the unworthy impulse and stood quite still, while my companion
exclaiming, 'Damn that fellow! What does he mean by shutting the door
before we're half-way up!' struck a match and lit a gas jet in the room
above, which poured a flood of light upon the staircase. Drawing my hand
from the pocket in which I had put my revolver, I hastened after him
into the small landing at the top of the stairs. An open door was before
me, in which he stood bowing, with the half-burnt match in his hand.
'This is the place, sir,' he announced, motioning me in.

"I entered and he remained by the door, while I passed quickly about the
room, which was bare of every article of furniture save a solitary table
and chair. There was not even a window in it, with the exception of one
small light situated so high up in the corner made by the jutting-up
staircase that I wondered at its use, and was only relieved of extreme
apprehension at the prison-like appearance of the place by the gleam
of light which came through this dusty pane, showing that I was not
entirely removed from the presence of my foes if I was from that of my
friends.

"'Ah, you have spied the window,' remarked my host, advancing toward me
with a countenance he vainly endeavored to make reassuring and friendly.
'That is your post of observation, sir,' he whispered, with a great show
of mystery. 'By mounting on the table you can peer into the room where
my young friends sit securely at play.'

"As it was not part of my scheme to show any special mistrust, I merely
smiled a little grimly, and cast a glance at the table on which stood a
bottle of brandy and one glass.

"'Very good brandy,' he whispered, 'Not such stuff as we give those
fellows down-stairs.'

"I shrugged my shoulders and he slowly backed towards the door.

"'The young men you bid me watch are very quiet,' I suggested, with a
careless wave of my hand towards the room he had mentioned.

"'Oh, there is no one there yet. They begin to straggle in about ten
o'clock.'

"'Ah,' was my quiet rejoinder, 'I am likely, then, to have use for your
brandy.'

"He smiled again and made a swift motion towards the door.

"'If you want anything,' said he, 'just step to the foot of the
staircase and let me know. The whole establishment is at your service.'
And with one final grin that remains in my mind as the most threatening
and diabolical I have ever witnessed, he laid his hand on the knob of
the door and slid quickly out.

"It was done with such an air of final farewell, that I felt my
apprehensions take a positive form. Rushing towards the door through
which he had just vanished, I listened and heard, as I thought, his
stealthy feet descend the stair. But when I sought to follow, I found
myself for the second time overwhelmed by darkness. The gas jet, which
had hitherto burned with great brightness in the small room, had been
turned off from below, and beyond the faint glimmer which found its way
through the small window of which I have spoken, not a ray of light now
disturbed the heavy gloom of this gruesome apartment.

"I had thought of every contingency but this, and for a few minutes
my spirits were dashed. But I soon recovered some remnants of
self-possession, and began feeling for the knob I could no longer see.
Finding it after a few futile attempts, I was relieved to discover that
this door at least was not locked; and, opening it with a careful hand,
I listened intently, but could hear nothing save the smothered sound of
men talking in the room below.

"Should I signal for my companions? No, for the secret was not yet mine
as to how men passed from this room into the watery grave which was the
evident goal for all wearers of the blue ribbon.

"Stepping back into the middle of the room, I carefully pondered my
situation, but could get no further than the fact that I was somehow,
and in some way, in mortal peril. Would it come in the form of a bullet,
or a deadly thrust from an unseen knife? I did not think so. For, to say
nothing of the darkness, there was one reassuring fact which recurred
constantly to my mind in connection with the murders I was endeavoring
to trace to this den of iniquity.

"None of the gentlemen who had been found drowned had shown any marks of
violence on their bodies, so it was not attack I was to fear, but some
mysterious, underhanded treachery which would rob me of consciousness
and make the precipitation of my body into the water both safe and easy.
Perhaps it was in the bottle of brandy that the peril lay; perhaps--but
why speculate further! I would watch till midnight and then, if nothing
happened, signal my companions to raid the house.

"Meantime a peep into the next room might help me towards solving the
mystery. Setting the bottle and glass aside, I dragged the table across
the floor, placed it under the lighted window, mounted, and was about to
peer through, when the light in that apartment was put out also. Angry
and overwhelmed, I leapt down, and, stretching out my hands till they
touched the wainscoting, I followed the wall around till I came to the
knob of the door, which I frantically clutched. But I did not turn it
immediately, I was too anxious to catch these villains at work. Would I
be conscious of the harm they meditated against me, or would I
imperceptibly yield to some influence of which I was not yet conscious,
and drop to the floor before I could draw my revolver or put to my mouth
the whistle upon which I de-pended for assistance and safety? It was
hard to tell, but I determined to cling to my first intention a little
longer, and so stood waiting and counting the minutes, while wondering
if the captain of the police boat was not getting impatient, and whether
I had not more to fear from the anxiety of my friends than the cupidity
of my foes.

"You see I had anticipated communicating with the men in this boat by
certain signals and tokens which had been arranged between us. But the
lack of windows in the room had made all such arrangements futile, so I
knew as little of their actions as they of my sufferings; all of which
did not tend to add to the cheerfulness of my position.

"I, however, held out for a half-hour, listening, waiting and watching
in a darkness which, like that of Egypt, could be felt, and when the
suspense grew intolerable I struck a match and let its blue flame
flicker for a moment over the face of my watch. But the matches soon
gave out and with them my patience, if not my courage, and I determined
to end the suspense by knocking at the door beneath.

"This resolution taken, I pulled open the door before me and stepped
out. Though I could see nothing, I remembered the narrow landing at the
top of the stairs, and, stretching out my arms, I felt for the boarding
on either hand, guilding myself by it, and began to descend, when
something rising, as it were, out of the cavernous darkness before me
made me halt and draw back in mingled dread and horror.

"But the impression, strong as it was, was only momentary, and, resolved
to be done with the matter, I precipitated myself downward, when
suddenly, at about the middle of the staircase, my feet slipped and I
slid forward, plunging and reaching out with hands whose frenzied grasp
found nothing to cling to, down a steep inclined plane--or what to my
bewildered senses appeared such,--till I struck a yielding surface and
passed with one sickening plunge into the icy waters of the river which
in another moment had closed dark and benumbing above my head.

"It was all so rapid I did not think of uttering a cry. But happily for
me the splash I made told the story, and I was rescued before I could
sink a second time.

"It was a full half hour before I had sufficiently recovered from the
shock to relate my story. But when once I had made it known, you can
imagine the gusto with which the police prepared to enter the house
and confound the obliging host with a sight of my dripping garments and
accusing face. And indeed in all my professional experience I have never
beheld a more sudden merging of the bully into a coward than was to be
seen in this slick villain's face, when I was suddenly pulled from the
crowd and placed before him, with the old man's wig gone from my head,
and the tag of blue ribbon still clinging to my wet coat.

"His game was up, and he saw it; and Ebenezer Gryce's career had begun.

"Like all destructive things the device by which I had been run into the
river was simple enough when understood. In the first place it had been
constructed to serve the purpose of a stairway and chute. The latter was
in plain sight when it was used by the sailmakers to run the finished
sails into the waiting yawls below. At the time of my adventure, and for
some time before, the possibilities of the place had been discovered by
mine host, who had ingeniously put a partition up the entire stairway,
dividing the steps from the smooth runway. At the upper part of the
runway he had built a few steps, wherewith to lure the unwary far enough
down to insure a fatal descent. To make sure of his game he had likewise
ceiled the upper room all around, including the enclosure of the stairs.
The door to the chute and the door to the stairs were side by side, and
being made of the same boards as the wainscoting, were scarcely visible
when closed, while the single knob that was used, being transferable
from one to the other, naturally gave the impression that there was but
one door. When this adroit villain called my attention to the little
window around the corner, he no doubt removed the knob from the stairs'
door and quickly placed it in the one opening upon the chute. Another
door, connecting the two similar landings without, explains how he got
from the chute staircase into which he passed, on leaving me, to the one
communicating with the room below.

"The mystery was solved, and my footing on the force secured; but to
this day--and I am an old man now--I have not forgotten the horror of
the moment when my feet slipped from under me, and I felt myself sliding
downward, without hope of rescue, into a pit of heaving waters, where so
many men of conspicuous virtue had already ended their valuable lives.

"Myriad thoughts flashed through my brain in that brief interval, and
among them the whole method of operating this death-trap, together with
every detail of evidence that would secure the conviction of the entire
gang."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Staircase At The Hearts Delight, by
Anna Katharine Green (Mrs. Charles Rohlfs)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STAIRCASE ***

***** This file should be named 22811.txt or 22811.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/8/1/22811/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
