The Project Gutenberg EBook of Alcyone, by Archibald Lampman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Alcyone

Author: Archibald Lampman

Release Date: October 2, 2007 [EBook #22833]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALCYONE ***




Produced by Thierry Alberto, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions
(www.canadiana.org))





     ALCYONE

       by

 ARCHIBALD LAMPMAN




    OTTAWA
 JAMES OGILVY
     1899




 Edinburgh: T. and A. CONSTABLE, Printers to Her Majesty




   TO THE MEMORY OF
      MY FATHER
    HIMSELF A POET
 WHO FIRST INSTRUCTED ME
      IN THE ART
       OF VERSE.




   CONTENTS


   ALCYONE                           1

   IN MARCH                          4

   THE CITY OF THE END OF THINGS     5

   THE SONG SPARROW                  9

   INTER VIAS                       10

   REFUGE                           12

   APRIL NIGHT                      13

   PERSONALITY                      14

   TO MY DAUGHTER                   15

   CHIONE                           17

   TO THE CRICKET                   24

   THE SONG OF PAN                  25

   THE ISLET AND THE PALM           27

   A VISION OF TWILIGHT             28

   EVENING                          33

   THE CLEARER SELF                 34

   TO THE PROPHETIC SOUL            36

   THE LAND OF PALLAS               38

   AMONG THE ORCHARDS               49

   THE POET'S SONG                  50

   A THUNDERSTORM                   56

   THE CITY                         57

   SAPPHICS                         60

   VOICES OF EARTH                  62

   PECCAVI, DOMINE                  63

   AN ODE TO THE HILLS              66

   INDIAN SUMMER                    71

   GOOD SPEECH                      72

   THE BETTER DAY                   73

   WHITE PANSIES                    75

   WE TOO SHALL SLEEP               77

   THE AUTUMN WASTE                 78

   VIVIA PERPETUA                   79

   THE MYSTERY OF A YEAR            96

   WINTER EVENING                   97

   WAR                              98

   THE WOODCUTTER'S HUT            103

   AMOR VITAE                       108

   WINTER-BREAK                    110




 ALCYONE


 In the silent depth of space,
 Immeasurably old, immeasurably far,
 Glittering with a silver flame
 Through eternity,
 Rolls a great and burning star,
 With a noble name,
     Alcyone!

 In the glorious chart of heaven
 It is marked the first of seven;
 'Tis a Pleiad:
 And a hundred years of earth
 With their long-forgotten deeds have come and gone,
 Since that tiny point of light,
 Once a splendour fierce and bright,
 Had its birth
 In the star we gaze upon.

 It has travelled all that time--
 Thought has not a swifter flight--
 Through a region where no faintest gust
 Of life comes ever, but the power of night
 Dwells stupendous and sublime,
 Limitless and void and lonely,
 A region mute with age, and peopled only
 With the dead and ruined dust
 Of worlds that lived eternities ago.

 Man! when thou dost think of this,
 And what our earth and its existence is,
 The half-blind toils since life began,
 The little aims, the little span,
 With what passion and what pride,
 And what hunger fierce and wide,
 Thou dost break beyond it all,
 Seeking for the spirit unconfined
 In the clear abyss of mind
 A shelter and a peace majestical.
 For what is life to thee,
 Turning toward the primal light,
 With that stern and silent face,
 If thou canst not be
 Something radiant and august as night,
 Something wide as space?

 Therefore with a love and gratitude divine
 Thou shalt cherish in thine heart for sign
 A vision of the great and burning star,
 Immeasurably old, immeasurably far,
 Surging forth its silver flame
 Through eternity;
 And thine inner heart shall ring and cry
 With the music strange and high,
 The grandeur of its name
     Alcyone!




 IN MARCH


 The sun falls warm: the southern winds awake:
 The air seethes upward with a steamy shiver:
 Each dip of the road is now a crystal lake,
 And every rut a little dancing river.
 Through great soft clouds that sunder overhead
 The deep sky breaks as pearly blue as summer:
 Out of a cleft beside the river's bed
 Flaps the black crow, the first demure newcomer.
 The last seared drifts are eating fast away
 With glassy tinkle into glittering laces:
 Dogs lie asleep, and little children play
 With tops and marbles in the sunbare places;
 And I that stroll with many a thoughtful pause
 Almost forget that winter ever was.




 THE CITY OF THE END OF THINGS


 Beside the pounding cataracts
 Of midnight streams unknown to us
 'Tis builded in the leafless tracts
 And valleys huge of Tartarus.
 Lurid and lofty and vast it seems;
 It hath no rounded name that rings,
 But I have heard it called in dreams
 The City of the End of Things.

 Its roofs and iron towers have grown
 None knoweth how high within the night,
 But in its murky streets far down
 A flaming terrible and bright
 Shakes all the stalking shadows there,
 Across the walls, across the floors,
 And shifts upon the upper air
 From out a thousand furnace doors;

 And all the while an awful sound
 Keeps roaring on continually,
 And crashes in the ceaseless round
 Of a gigantic harmony.
 Through its grim depths re-echoing
 And all its weary height of walls,
 With measured roar and iron ring,
 The inhuman music lifts and falls.
 Where no thing rests and no man is,
 And only fire and night hold sway;
 The beat, the thunder and the hiss
 Cease not, and change not, night nor day.

 And moving at unheard commands,
 The abysses and vast fires between,
 Flit figures that with clanking hands
 Obey a hideous routine;
 They are not flesh, they are not bone,
 They see not with the human eye,
 And from their iron lips is blown
 A dreadful and monotonous cry;
 And whoso of our mortal race
 Should find that city unaware,
 Lean Death would smite him face to face,
 And blanch him with its venomed air:
 Or caught by the terrific spell,
 Each thread of memory snapt and cut,
 His soul would shrivel and its shell
 Go rattling like an empty nut.

 It was not always so, but once,
 In days that no man thinks upon,
 Fair voices echoed from its stones,
 The light above it leaped and shone:
 Once there were multitudes of men,
 That built that city in their pride,
 Until its might was made, and then
 They withered age by age and died.
 But now of that prodigious race,
 Three only in an iron tower,
 Set like carved idols face to face,
 Remain the masters of its power;
 And at the city gate a fourth,
 Gigantic and with dreadful eyes,
 Sits looking toward the lightless north,
 Beyond the reach of memories;
 Fast rooted to the lurid floor,
 A bulk that never moves a jot,
 In his pale body dwells no more,
 Or mind, or soul,--an idiot!

 But sometime in the end those three
 Shall perish and their hands be still,
 And with the master's touch shall flee
 Their incommunicable skill.
 A stillness absolute as death
 Along the slacking wheels shall lie,
 And, flagging at a single breath,
 The fires shall moulder out and die.
 The roar shall vanish at its height,
 And over that tremendous town
 The silence of eternal night
 Shall gather close and settle down.
 All its grim grandeur, tower and hall,
 Shall be abandoned utterly,
 And into rust and dust shall fall
 From century to century;
 Nor ever living thing shall grow,
 Or trunk of tree, or blade of grass;
 No drop shall fall, no wind shall blow,
 Nor sound of any foot shall pass:
 Alone of its accursed state,
 One thing the hand of Time shall spare,
 For the grim Idiot at the gate
 Is deathless and eternal there.




 THE SONG SPARROW


 Fair little scout, that when the iron year
   Changes, and the first fleecy clouds deploy,
   Comest with such a sudden burst of joy,
 Lifting on winter's doomed and broken rear
 That song of silvery triumph blithe and clear;
   Not yet quite conscious of the happy glow,
   We hungered for some surer touch, and lo!
 One morning we awake, and thou art here.
 And thousands of frail-stemmed hepaticas,
   With their crisp leaves and pure and perfect hues,
   Light sleepers, ready for the golden news,
 Spring at thy note beside the forest ways--
   Next to thy song, the first to deck the hour--
   The classic lyrist and the classic flower.




 INTER VIAS


 'Tis a land where no hurricane falls,
 But the infinite azure regards
 Its waters for ever, its walls
 Of granite, its limitless swards;
 Where the fens to their innermost pool
 With the chorus of May are aring,
 And the glades are wind-winnowed and cool
     With perpetual spring;

 Where folded and half withdrawn
 The delicate wind-flowers blow,
 And the bloodroot kindles at dawn
 Her spiritual taper of snow;
 Where the limits are met and spanned
 By a waste that no husbandman tills,
 And the earth-old pine forests stand
     In the hollows of hills.

 'Tis the land that our babies behold,
 Deep gazing when none are aware;
 And the great-hearted seers of old
 And the poets have known it, and there
 Made halt by the well-heads of truth
 On their difficult pilgrimage
 From the rose-ruddy gardens of youth
     To the summits of age.

 Now too, as of old, it is sweet
 With a presence remote and serene;
 Still its byways are pressed by the feet
 Of the mother immortal, its queen:
 The huntress whose tresses, flung free,
 And her fillets of gold, upon earth,
 They only have honour to see
     Who are dreamers from birth.

 In her calm and her beauty supreme,
 They have found her at dawn or at eve,
 By the marge of some motionless stream,
 Or where shadows rebuild or unweave
 In a murmurous alley of pine,
 Looking upward in silent surprise,
 A figure, slow-moving, divine,
     With inscrutable eyes.




 REFUGE


 Where swallows and wheatfields are,
   O hamlet brown and still,
 O river that shineth far,
   By meadow, pier, and mill:

 O endless sunsteeped plain,
   With forests in dim blue shrouds,
 And little wisps of rain,
   Falling from far-off clouds:

 I come from the choking air
   Of passion, doubt, and strife,
 With a spirit and mind laid bare
   To your healing breadth of life:

 O fruitful and sacred ground,
   O sunlight and summer sky,
 Absorb me and fold me round,
   For broken and tired am I.




 APRIL NIGHT


 How deep the April night is in its noon,
 The hopeful, solemn, many-murmured night!
 The earth lies hushed with expectation; bright
 Above the world's dark border burns the moon,
 Yellow and large; from forest floorways, strewn
 With flowers, and fields that tingle with new birth,
 The moist smell of the unimprisoned earth
 Comes up, a sigh, a haunting promise. Soon,
 Ah, soon, the teeming triumph! At my feet
 The river with its stately sweep and wheel
 Moves on slow-motioned, luminous, grey like steel.
 From fields far off whose watery hollows gleam,
 Aye with blown throats that make the long hours sweet,
 The sleepless toads are murmuring in their dream.




 PERSONALITY


 O differing human heart,
 Why is it that I tremble when thine eyes,
 Thy human eyes and beautiful human speech,
 Draw me, and stir within my soul
 That subtle ineradicable longing
 For tender comradeship?
 It is because I cannot all at once,
 Through the half-lights and phantom-haunted mists
 That separate and enshroud us life from life,
 Discern the nearness or the strangeness of thy paths
 Nor plumb thy depths.
 I am like one that comes alone at night
 To a strange stream, and by an unknown ford
 Stands, and for a moment yearns and shrinks,
 Being ignorant of the water, though so quiet it is,
 So softly murmurous,
 So silvered by the familiar moon.




 TO MY DAUGHTER


 O little one, daughter, my dearest,
   With your smiles and your beautiful curls,
 And your laughter, the brightest and clearest,
   O gravest and gayest of girls;

 With your hands that are softer than roses,
   And your lips that are lighter than flowers,
 And that innocent brow that discloses
   A wisdom more lovely than ours;

 With your locks that encumber, or scatter
   In a thousand mercurial gleams,
 And those feet whose impetuous patter
   I hear and remember in dreams;

 With your manner of motherly duty,
   When you play with your dolls and are wise;
 With your wonders of speech, and the beauty
   In your little imperious eyes;

 When I hear you so silverly ringing
   Your welcome from chamber or stair.
 When you run to me, kissing and clinging,
   So radiant, so rosily fair;

 I bend like an ogre above you;
   I bury my face in your curls;
 I fold you, I clasp you, I love you.
   O baby, queen-blossom of girls!




 CHIONE


 Scarcely a breath about the rocky stair
 Moved, but the growing tide from verge to verge,
 Heaving salt fragrance on the midnight air,
 Climbed with a murmurous and fitful surge.
 A hoary mist rose up and slowly sheathed
 The dripping walls and portal granite-stepped,
 And sank into the inner court, and crept
 From column unto column thickly wreathed.

 In that dead hour of darkness before dawn,
 When hearts beat fainter, and the hands of death
 Are strengthened,--with lips white and drawn
 And feverish lids and scarcely moving breath,
 The hapless mother, tender Chione,
 Beside the earth-cold figure of her child,
 After long bursts of weeping sharp and wild
 Lay broken, silent in her agony.
 At first in waking horror racked and bound
 She lay, and then a gradual stupor grew
 About her soul and wrapped her round and round
 Like death, and then she sprang to life anew
 Out of a darkness clammy as the tomb;
 And, touched by memory or some spirit hand,
 She seemed to keep a pathway down a land
 Of monstrous shadow and Cimmerian gloom.

 A waste of cloudy and perpetual night--
 And yet there seemed a teeming presence there
 Of life that gathered onward in thick flight,
 Unseen, but multitudinous. Aware
 Of something also on her path she was
 That drew her heart forth with a tender cry.
 She hurried with drooped ear and eager eye,
 And called on the foul shapes to let her pass.

 For down the sloping darkness far ahead
 She saw a little figure slight and small,
 With yearning arms and shadowy curls outspread,
 Running at frightened speed; and it would fall
 And rise, sobbing; and through the ghostly sleet
 The cry came: 'Mother! Mother!' and she wist
 The tender eyes were blinded by the mist,
 And the rough stones were bruising the small feet.
 And when she lifted a keen cry and clave
 Forthright the gathering horror of the place,
 Mad with her love and pity, a dark wave
 Of clapping shadows swept about her face,
 And beat her back, and when she gained her breath,
 Athwart an awful vale a grizzled steam
 Was rising from a mute and murky stream,
 As cold and cavernous as the eye of death.

 And near the ripple stood the little shade,
 And many hovering ghosts drew near him, some
 That seemed to peer out of the mist and fade
 With eyes of soft and shadowing pity, dumb;
 But others closed him round with eager sighs
 And sweet insistence, striving to caress
 And comfort him; but grieving none the less,
 He reached her heartstrings with his tender cries.

 And silently across the horrid flow,
 The shapeless bark and pallid chalklike arms
 Of him that oared it, dumbly to and fro,
 Went gliding, and the struggling ghosts in swarms
 Leaped in and passed, but myriads more behind
 Crowded the dismal beaches. One might hear
 A tumult of entreaty thin and clear
 Rise like the whistle of a winter wind.

 And still the little figure stood beside
 The hideous stream, and toward the whispering prow
 Held forth his tender tremulous hands, and cried,
 Now to the awful ferryman, and now
 To her that battled with the shades in vain.
 Sometimes impending over all her sight
 The spongy dark and the phantasmal flight
 Of things half-shapen passed and hid the plain.

 And sometimes in a gust a sort of wind
 Drove by, and where its power was hurled,
 She saw across the twilight, jarred and thinned,
 Those gloomy meadows of the under world,
 Where never sunlight was, nor grass, nor trees,
 And the dim pathways from the Stygian shore,
 Sombre and swart and barren, wandered o'er
 By countless melancholy companies.

 And farther still upon the utmost rim
 Of the drear waste, whereto the roadways led,
 She saw in piling outline, huge and dim,
 The walled and towered dwellings of the dead
 And the grim house of Hades. Then she broke
 Once more fierce-footed through the noisome press;
 But ere she reached the goal of her distress,
 Her pierced heart seemed to shatter, and she woke.

 It seemed as she had been entombed for years,
 And came again to living with a start.
 There was an awful echoing in her ears
 And a great deadness pressing at her heart.
 She shuddered and with terror seemed to freeze,
 Lip-shrunken and wide-eyed a moment's space,
 And then she touched the little lifeless face,
 And kissed it, and rose up upon her knees.

 And round her still the silence seemed to teem
 With the foul shadows of her dream beguiled--
 No dream, she thought; it could not be a dream,
 But her child called for her; her child, her child!--
 She clasped her quivering fingers white and spare,
 And knelt low down, and bending her fair head
 Unto the lower gods who rule the dead,
 Touched them with tender homage and this prayer:

 O gloomy masters of the dark demesne,
 Hades, and thou whom the dread deity
 Bore once from earthly Enna for his queen,
 Beloved of Demeter, pale Persephone,
 Grant me one boon;
 'Tis not for life I pray,
 Not life, but quiet death; and that soon, soon!
 Loose from my soul this heavy weight of clay,
 This net of useless woe.
 O mournful mother, sad Persephone,
 Be mindful, let me go!

 How shall he journey to the dismal beach,
 Or win the ear of Charon, without one
 To keep him and stand by him, sure of speech?
 He is so little, and has just begun
 To use his feet
 And speak a few small words,
 And all his daily usage has been sweet
 As the soft nesting ways of tender birds.
 How shall he fare at all
 Across that grim inhospitable land,
 If I too be not by to hold his hand,
 And help him if he fall?

 And then before the gloomy judges set,
 How shall he answer? Oh, I cannot bear
 To see his tender cheeks with weeping wet,
 Or hear the sobbing cry of his despair!
 I could not rest,
 Nor live with patient mind,
 Though knowing what is fated must be best;
 But surely thou art more than mortal kind,
 And thou canst feel my woe,
 All-pitying, all-observant, all-divine;
 He is so little, mother Proserpine,
 He needs me, let me go!

 Thus far she prayed, and then she lost her way,
 And left the half of all her heart unsaid,
 And a great languor seized her, and she lay,
 Soft fallen, by the little silent head.
 Her numbed lips had passed beyond control,
 Her mind could neither plan nor reason more,
 She saw dark waters and an unknown shore,
 And the grey shadows crept about her soul.

 Again through darkness on an evil land
 She seemed to enter but without distress.
 A little spirit led her by the hand,
 And her wide heart was warm with tenderness.
 Her lips, still moving, conscious of one care,
 Murmured a moment in soft mother-tones,
 And so fell silent. From their sombre thrones
 Already the grim gods had heard her prayer.




 TO THE CRICKET


 Didst thou not tease and fret me to and fro,
 Sweet spirit of this summer-circled field,
 With that quiet voice of thine that would not yield
 Its meaning, though I mused and sought it so?
 But now I am content to let it go,
 To lie at length and watch the swallows pass,
 As blithe and restful as this quiet grass,
 Content only to listen and to know
 That years shall turn, and summers yet shall shine,
 And I shall lie beneath these swaying trees,
 Still listening thus; haply at last to seize,
 And render in some happier verse divine
 That friendly, homely, haunting speech of thine,
 That perfect utterance of content and ease.




 THE SONG OF PAN


 Mad with love and laden
   With immortal pain,
 Pan pursued a maiden--
   Pan, the god--in vain.

 For when Pan had nearly
   Touched her, wild to plead,
 She was gone--and clearly
   In her place a reed!

 Long the god, unwitting,
   Through the valley strayed;
 Then at last, submitting,
   Cut the reed, and made,

 Deftly fashioned, seven
   Pipes, and poured his pain
 Unto earth and heaven
   In a piercing strain.

 So with god and poet;
   Beauty lures them on,
 Flies, and ere they know it
   Like a wraith is gone.

 Then they seek to borrow
   Pleasure still from wrong,
 And with smiling sorrow
   Turn it to a song.




 THE ISLET AND THE PALM


 O gentle sister spirit, when you smile
 My soul is like a lonely coral isle,
 An islet shadowed by a single palm,
 Ringed round with reef and foam, but inly calm.

 And all day long I listen to the speech
 Of wind and water on my charmed beach:
 I see far off beyond mine outer shore
 The ocean flash, and hear his harmless roar.

 And in the night-time when the glorious sun,
 With all his life and all his light, is done,
 The wind still murmurs in my slender tree,
 And shakes the moonlight on the silver sea.




 A VISION OF TWILIGHT


 By a void and soundless river
   On the outer edge of space,
 Where the body comes not ever,
   But the absent dream hath place,
 Stands a city, tall and quiet,
   And its air is sweet and dim;
 Never sound of grief or riot
   Makes it mad, or makes it grim.

 And the tender skies thereover
   Neither sun, nor star, behold--
 Only dusk it hath for cover,--
   But a glamour soft with gold,
 Through a mist of dreamier essence
   Than the dew of twilight, smiles
 On strange shafts and domes and crescents,
   Lifting into eerie piles.

 In its courts and hallowed places
   Dreams of distant worlds arise,
 Shadows of transfigured faces,
   Glimpses of immortal eyes,
 Echoes of serenest pleasure,
   Notes of perfect speech that fall,
 Through an air of endless leisure,
   Marvellously musical.

 And I wander there at even,
   Sometimes when my heart is clear,
 When a wider round of heaven
   And a vaster world are near,
 When from many a shadow steeple
   Sounds of dreamy bells begin,
 And I love the gentle people
   That my spirit finds therein.

 Men of a diviner making
   Than the sons of pride and strife,
 Quick with love and pity, breaking
   From a knowledge old as life;
 Women of a spiritual rareness,
   Whom old passion and old woe
 Moulded to a slenderer fairness
   Than the dearest shapes we know.

 In its domed and towered centre
   Lies a garden wide and fair,
 Open for the soul to enter,
   And the watchful townsmen there
 Greet the stranger gloomed and fretting
   From this world of stormy hands,
 With a look that deals forgetting
   And a touch that understands.

 For they see with power, not borrowed
   From a record taught or told,
 But they loved and laughed and sorrowed
   In a thousand worlds of old;
 Now they rest and dream for ever,
   And with hearts serene and whole
 See the struggle, the old fever,
   Clear as on a painted scroll.

 Wandering by that grey and solemn
   Water, with its ghostly quays--
 Vistas of vast arch and column,
   Shadowed by unearthly trees--
 Biddings of sweet power compel me,
   And I go with bated breath,
 Listening to the tales they tell me,
   Parables of Life and Death.

 In a tongue that once was spoken,
   Ere the world was cooled by Time,
 When the spirit flowed unbroken
   Through the flesh, and the Sublime
 Made the eyes of men far-seeing,
   And their souls as pure as rain,
 They declare the ends of being,
   And the sacred need of pain.

 For they know the sweetest reasons
   For the products most malign--
 They can tell the paths and seasons
   Of the farthest suns that shine.
 How the moth-wing's iridescence
   By an inward plan was wrought,
 And they read me curious lessons
   In the secret ways of thought.

 When day turns, and over heaven
   To the balmy western verge
 Sail the victor fleets of even,
   And the pilot stars emerge,
 Then my city rounds and rises,
   Like a vapour formed afar,
 And its sudden girth surprises,
   And its shadowy gates unbar.

 Dreamy crowds are moving yonder
   In a faint and phantom blue;
 Through the dusk I lean, and wonder
   If their winsome shapes are true;
 But in veiling indecision
   Come my questions back again--
 Which is real? The fleeting vision?
   Or the fleeting world of men?




 EVENING


 From upland slopes I see the cows file by,
 Lowing, great-chested, down the homeward trail,
 By dusking fields and meadows shining pale
 With moon-tipped dandelions. Flickering high,
 A peevish night-hawk in the western sky
 Beats up into the lucent solitudes,
 Or drops with griding wing. The stilly woods
 Grow dark and deep and gloom mysteriously.
 Cool night-winds creep, and whisper in mine ear
 The homely cricket gossips at my feet.
 From far-off pools and wastes of reeds I hear,
 Clear and soft-piped, the chanting frogs break sweet
 In full Pandean chorus. One by one
 Shine out the stars, and the great night comes on.




 THE CLEARER SELF


 Before me grew the human soul,
   And after I am dead and gone,
 Through grades of effort and control
   The marvellous work shall still go on.

 Each mortal in his little span
   Hath only lived, if he have shown
 What greatness there can be in man
   Above the measured and the known;

 How through the ancient layers of night,
   In gradual victory secure,
 Grows ever with increasing light
   The Energy serene and pure:

 The Soul, that from a monstrous past,
   From age to age, from hour to hour,
 Feels upward to some height at last
   Of unimagined grace and power.

 Though yet the sacred fire be dull,
   In folds of thwarting matter furled,
 Ere death be nigh, while life is full,
   O Master Spirit of the world,

 Grant me to know, to seek, to find,
   In some small measure though it be,
 Emerging from the waste and blind,
   The clearer self, the grander me!




 TO THE PROPHETIC SOUL


 What are these bustlers at the gate
   Of now or yesterday,
 These playthings in the hand of Fate,
   That pass, and point no way;

 These clinging bubbles whose mock fires
   For ever dance and gleam,
 Vain foam that gathers and expires
   Upon the world's dark stream;

 These gropers betwixt right and wrong,
   That seek an unknown goal,
 Most ignorant, when they seem most strong;
   What are they, then, O Soul,

 That thou shouldst covet overmuch
   A tenderer range of heart,
 And yet at every dreamed-of touch
   So tremulously start?

 Thou with that hatred ever new
   Of the world's base control,
 That vision of the large and true,
   That quickness of the soul;

 Nay, for they are not of thy kind,
   But in a rarer clay
 God dowered thee with an alien mind;
   Thou canst not be as they.

 Be strong therefore; resume thy load,
   And forward stone by stone
 Go singing, though the glorious road
   Thou travellest alone.




 THE LAND OF PALLAS


 Methought I journeyed along ways that led for ever
   Throughout a happy land where strife and care were dead,
 And life went by me flowing like a placid river
   Past sandy eyots where the shifting shoals make head.

 A land where beauty dwelt supreme, and right, the donor
   Of peaceful days; a land of equal gifts and deeds,
 Of limitless fair fields and plenty had with honour;
   A land of kindly tillage and untroubled meads,

 Of gardens, and great fields, and dreaming rose-wreathed alleys,
   Wherein at dawn and dusk the vesper sparrows sang;
 Of cities set far off on hills down vista'd valleys,
   And floods so vast and old, men wist not whence they sprang,

 Of groves, and forest depths, and fountains softly welling,
   And roads that ran soft-shadowed past the open doors,
 Of mighty palaces and many a lofty dwelling,
   Where all men entered and no master trod their floors.

 A land of lovely speech, where every tone was fashioned
   By generations of emotion high and sweet,
 Of thought and deed and bearing lofty and impassioned;
   A land of golden calm, grave forms, and fretless feet.

 And every mode and saying of that land gave token
   Of limits where no death or evil fortune fell,
 And men lived out long lives in proud content unbroken,
   For there no man was rich, none poor, but all were well.

 And all the earth was common, and no base contriving
   Of money of coined gold was needed there or known,
 But all men wrought together without greed or striving,
   And all the store of all to each man was his own.

 From all that busy land, grey town, and peaceful village,
   Where never jar was heard, nor wail, nor cry of strife,
 From every laden stream and all the fields of tillage,
   Arose the murmur and the kindly hum of life.

 At morning to the fields came forth the men, each neighbour
   Hand linked to other, crowned, with wreaths upon their hair,
 And all day long with joy they gave their hands to labour,
   Moving at will, unhastened, each man to his share.

 At noon the women came, the tall fair women, bearing
   Baskets of wicker in their ample hands for each,
 And learned the day's brief tale, and how the fields were faring,
   And blessed them with their lofty beauty and blithe speech.

 And when the great day's toil was over, and the shadows
   Grew with the flocking stars, the sound of festival
 Rose in each city square, and all the country meadows,
   Palace, and paven court, and every rustic hall.

 Beside smooth streams, where alleys and green gardens meeting
   Ran downward to the flood with marble steps, a throng
 Came forth of all the folk, at even, gaily greeting,
   With echo of sweet converse, jest, and stately song.

 In all their great fair cities there was neither seeking
   For power of gold, nor greed of lust, nor desperate pain
 Of multitudes that starve, or, in hoarse anger breaking,
   Beat at the doors of princes, break and fall in vain.

 But all the children of that peaceful land, like brothers,
   Lofty of spirit, wise, and ever set to learn
 The chart of neighbouring souls, the bent and need of others,
   Thought only of good deeds, sweet speech, and just return.

 And there there was no prison, power of arms, nor palace,
   Where prince or judge held sway, for none was needed there;
 Long ages since the very names of fraud and malice
   Had vanished from men's tongues, and died from all men's care.

 And there there were no bonds of contract, deed, or marriage,
   No oath, nor any form, to make the word more sure,
 For no man dreamed of hurt, dishonour, or miscarriage,
   Where every thought was truth, and every heart was pure.

 There were no castes of rich or poor, of slave or master,
   Where all were brothers, and the curse of gold was dead,
 But all that wise fair race to kindlier ends and vaster
   Moved on together with the same majestic tread.

 And all the men and women of that land were fairer
   Than even the mightiest of our meaner race can be;
 The men like gentle children, great of limb, yet rarer
   For wisdom and high thought, like kings for majesty.

 And all the women through great ages of bright living,
   Grown goodlier of stature, strong, and subtly wise,
 Stood equal with the men, calm counsellors, ever giving
   The fire and succour of proud faith and dauntless eyes.

 And as I journeyed in that land I reached a ruin,
   The gateway of a lonely and secluded waste,
 A phantom of forgotten time and ancient doing,
   Eaten by age and violence, crumbled and defaced.

 On its grim outer walls the ancient world's sad glories
   Were recorded in fire; upon its inner stone,
 Drawn by dead hands, I saw, in tales and tragic stories,
   The woe and sickness of an age of fear made known.

 And lo, in that grey storehouse, fallen to dust and rotten,
   Lay piled the traps and engines of forgotten greed,
 The tomes of codes and canons, long disused, forgotten,
   The robes and sacred books of many a vanished creed.

 An old grave man I found, white-haired and gently spoken,
   Who, as I questioned, answered with a smile benign,
 'Long years have come and gone since these poor gauds were broken,
   Broken and banished from a life made more divine.

 'But still we keep them stored as once our sires deemed fitting,
   The symbol of dark days and lives remote and strange,
 Lest o'er the minds of any there should come unwitting
   The thought of some new order and the lust of change.

 'If any grow disturbed, we bring them gently hither,
   To read the world's grim record and the sombre lore
 Massed in these pitiless vaults, and they returning thither,
   Bear with them quieter thoughts, and make for change no more.'

 And thence I journeyed on by one broad way that bore me
   Out of that waste, and as I passed by tower and town
 I saw amid the limitless plain far out before me
   A long low mountain, blue as beryl, and its crown

 Was capped by marble roofs that shone like snow for whiteness,
   Its foot was deep in gardens, and that blossoming plain
 Seemed in the radiant shower of its majestic brightness
   A land for gods to dwell in, free from care and pain.

 And to and forth from that fair mountain like a river
   Ran many a dim grey road, and on them I could see
 A multitude of stately forms that seemed for ever
   Going and coming in bright bands; and near to me

 Was one that in his journey seemed to dream and linger,
   Walking at whiles with kingly step, then standing still,
 And him I met and asked him, pointing with my finger,
   The meaning of the palace and the lofty hill.

 Whereto the dreamer: 'Art thou of this land, my brother,
   And knowest not the mountain and its crest of walls,
 Where dwells the priestless worship of the all-wise mother?
   That is the hill of Pallas; those her marble halls!

 'There dwell the lords of knowledge and of thought increasing,
   And they whom insight and the gleams of song uplift;
 And thence as by a hundred conduits flows unceasing
   The spring of power and beauty, an eternal gift.'

 Still I passed on until I reached at length, not knowing
   Whither the tangled and diverging paths might lead,
 A land of baser men, whose coming and whose going
   Were urged by fear, and hunger, and the curse of greed.

 I saw the proud and fortunate go by me, faring
   In fatness and fine robes, the poor oppressed and slow,
 The faces of bowed men, and piteous women bearing
   The burden of perpetual sorrow and the stamp of woe.

 And tides of deep solicitude and wondering pity
   Possessed me, and with eager and uplifted hands
 I drew the crowd about me in a mighty city,
   And taught the message of those other kindlier lands.

 I preached the rule of Faith and brotherly Communion,
   The law of Peace and Beauty and the death of Strife,
 And painted in great words the horror of disunion,
   The vainness of self-worship, and the waste of life.

 I preached, but fruitlessly; the powerful from their stations
   Rebuked me as an anarch, envious and bad,
 And they that served them with lean hands and bitter patience
   Smiled only out of hollow orbs, and deemed me mad.

 And still I preached, and wrought, and still I bore my message,
   For well I knew that on and upward without cease
 The spirit works for ever, and by Faith and Presage
   That somehow yet the end of human life is Peace.




 AMONG THE ORCHARDS


 Already in the dew-wrapped vineyards dry
 Dense weights of heat press down. The large bright drops
 Shrink in the leaves. From dark acacia tops
 The nuthatch flings his short reiterate cry;
 And ever as the sun mounts hot and high
 Thin voices crowd the grass. In soft long strokes
 The wind goes murmuring through the mountain oaks.
 Faint wefts creep out along the blue and die.
 I hear far in among the motionless trees--
 Shadows that sleep upon the shaven sod--
 The thud of dropping apples. Reach on reach
 Stretch plots of perfumed orchard, where the bees
 Murmur among the full-fringed golden-rod,
 Or cling half-drunken to the rotting peach.




 THE POET'S SONG

 I


 There came no change from week to week
   On all the land, but all one way,
 Like ghosts that cannot touch nor speak,
       Day followed day.

 Within the palace court the rounds
   Of glare and shadow, day and night,
 Went ever with the same dull sounds,
       The same dull flight:

 The motion of slow forms of state,
   The far-off murmur of the street,
 The din of couriers at the gate,
       Half-mad with heat;

 Sometimes a distant shout of boys
   At play upon the terrace walk,
 The shutting of great doors, and noise
       Of muttered talk.

 In one red corner of the wall,
   That fronted with its granite stain
 The town, the palms, and, beyond all,
       The burning plain,

 As listless as the hour, alone,
   The poet by his broken lute
 Sat like a figure in the stone,
       Dark-browed and mute.

 He saw the heat on the thin grass
   Fall till it withered joint by joint,
 The shadow on the dial pass
       From point to point.

 He saw the midnight bright and bare
   Fill with its quietude of stars
 The silence that no human prayer
       Attains or mars.

 He heard the hours divide, and still
   The sentry on the outer wall
 Make the night wearier with his shrill
       Monotonous call.

 He watched the lizard where it lay,
   Impassive as the watcher's face;
 And only once in the long day
       It changed its place.

 Sometimes with clank of hoofs and cries
   The noon through all its trance was stirred;
 The poet sat with half-shut eyes,
       Nor saw, nor heard.

 And once across the heated close
   Light laughter in a silver shower
 Fell from fair lips: the poet rose
       And cursed the hour.

 Men paled and sickened; half in fear,
   There came to him at dusk of eve
 One who but murmured in his ear
       And plucked his sleeve:

 'The king is filled with irks, distressed,
   And bids thee hasten to his side;
 For thou alone canst give him rest.'
       The poet cried:

 'Go, show the king this broken lute!
   Even as it is, so am I!
 The tree is perished to its root,
       The fountain dry.

 'What seeks he of the leafless tree,
   The broken lute, the empty spring?
 Yea, tho' he give his crown to me,
       I cannot sing!'


 II


 That night there came from either hand
 A sense of change upon the land;
 A brooding stillness rustled through
 With creeping winds that hardly blew;
 A shadow from the looming west,
 A stir of leaves, a dim unrest;
 It seemed as if a spell had broke.

 And then the poet turned and woke
 As from the darkness of a dream,
 And with a smile divine supreme
 Drew up his mantle fold on fold,
 And strung his lute with strings of gold,
 And bound the sandals to his feet,
 And strode into the darkling street.

 Through crowds of murmuring men he hied,
 With working lips and swinging stride,
 And gleaming eyes and brow bent down;
 Out of the great gate of the town
 He hastened ever and passed on,
 And ere the darkness came, was gone,
 A mote beyond the western swell.

 And then the storm arose and fell
 From wheeling shadows black with rain
 That drowned the hills and strode the plain;
 Round the grim mountain-heads it passed,
 Down whistling valleys blast on blast,
 Surged in upon the snapping trees,
 And swept the shuddering villages.

 That night, when the fierce hours grew long,
 Once more the monarch, old and grey,
 Called for the poet and his song,
 And called in vain. But far away,
 By the wild mountain-gorges, stirred,
 The shepherds in their watches heard,
 Above the torrent's charge and clang,
 The cleaving chant of one that sang.




 A THUNDERSTORM


 A moment the wild swallows like a flight
 Of withered gust-caught leaves, serenely high,
 Toss in the windrack up the muttering sky.
 The leaves hang still. Above the weird twilight,
 The hurrying centres of the storm unite
 And spreading with huge trunk and rolling fringe,
 Each wheeled upon its own tremendous hinge
 Tower darkening on. And now from heaven's height
 With the long roar of elm-trees swept and swayed,
 And pelted waters, on the vanished plain
 Plunges the blast. Behind the wild white flash
 That splits abroad the pealing thunder-crash,
 Over bleared fields and gardens disarrayed,
 Column on column comes the drenching rain.




 THE CITY


 Canst thou not rest, O city,
   That liest so wide and fair;
 Shall never an hour bring pity,
   Nor end be found for care?

 Thy walls are high in heaven,
   Thy streets are gay and wide,
 Beneath thy towers at even
   The dreamy waters glide.

 Thou art fair as the hills at morning,
   And the sunshine loveth thee,
 But its light is a gloom of warning
   On a soul no longer free.

 The curses of gold are about thee,
   And thy sorrow deepeneth still;
 One madness within and without thee,
   One battle blind and shrill.

 I see the crowds for ever
   Go by with hurrying feet;
 Through doors that darken never
   I hear the engines beat.

 Through days and nights that follow
   The hidden mill-wheel strains;
 In the midnight's windy hollow
   I hear the roar of trains.

 And still the day fulfilleth,
   And still the night goes round,
 And the guest-hall boometh and shrilleth,
   With the dance's mocking sound.

 In chambers of gold elysian,
   The cymbals clash and clang,
 But the days are gone like a vision
   When the people wrought and sang.

 And toil hath fear for neighbour,
   Where singing lips are dumb,
 And life is one long labour,
   Till death or freedom come.

 Ah! the crowds that for ever are flowing--
   They neither laugh nor weep--
 I see them coming and going,
   Like things that move in sleep:

 Grey sires and burdened brothers,
   The old, the young, the fair,
 Wan cheeks of pallid mothers,
   And the girls with golden hair.

 Care sits in many a fashion,
   Grown grey on many a head,
 And lips are turned to ashen
   Whose years have right to red.

 Canst thou not rest, O city,
   That liest so wide, so fair;
 Shalt never an hour bring pity,
   Nor end be found for care?




 SAPPHICS


 Clothed in splendour, beautifully sad and silent,
 Comes the autumn over the woods and highlands,
 Golden, rose-red, full of divine remembrance,
         Full of foreboding.

 Soon the maples, soon will the glowing birches,
 Stripped of all that summer and love had dowered them,
 Dream, sad-limbed, beholding their pomp and treasure
         Ruthlessly scattered:

 Yet they quail not: Winter with wind and iron
 Comes and finds them silent and uncomplaining,
 Finds them tameless, beautiful still and gracious,
         Gravely enduring.

 Me too changes, bitter and full of evil,
 Dream by dream have plundered and left me naked,
 Grey with sorrow. Even the days before me
         Fade into twilight,

 Mute and barren. Yet will I keep my spirit
 Clear and valiant, brother to these my noble
 Elms and maples, utterly grave and fearless,
         Grandly ungrieving.

 Brief the span is, counting the years of mortals,
 Strange and sad; it passes, and then the bright earth,
 Careless mother, gleaming with gold and azure,
         Lovely with blossoms--

 Shining white anemones, mixed with roses,
 Daisies mild-eyed, grasses and honeyed clover--
 You, and me, and all of us, met and equal,
         Softly shall cover.




 VOICES OF EARTH


 We have not heard the music of the spheres,
 The song of star to star, but there are sounds
 More deep than human joy and human tears,
 That Nature uses in her common rounds;
 The fall of streams, the cry of winds that strain
 The oak, the roaring of the sea's surge, might
 Of thunder breaking afar off, or rain
 That falls by minutes in the summer night.
 These are the voices of earth's secret soul,
 Uttering the mystery from which she came.
 To him who hears them grief beyond control,
 Or joy inscrutable without a name,
 Wakes in his heart thoughts bedded there, impearled,
 Before the birth and making of the world.




 PECCAVI, DOMINE


 O Power to whom this earthly clime
   Is but an atom in the whole,
 O Poet-heart of Space and Time,
   O Maker and Immortal Soul,
 Within whose glowing rings are bound,
   Out of whose sleepless heart had birth
 The cloudy blue, the starry round,
   And this small miracle of earth:

 Who liv'st in every living thing,
   And all things are thy script and chart,
 Who rid'st upon the eagle's wing,
   And yearnest in the human heart;
 O Riddle with a single clue,
   Love, deathless, protean, secure,
 The ever old, the ever new,
   O Energy, serene and pure.

 Thou, who art also part of me,
   Whose glory I have sometime seen,
 O Vision of the Ought-to-be,
   O Memory of the Might-have-been,
 I have had glimpses of thy way,
   And moved with winds and walked with stars,
 But, weary, I have fallen astray,
   And, wounded, who shall count my scars?

 O Master, all my strength is gone;
   Unto the very earth I bow;
 I have no light to lead me on;
   With aching heart and burning brow,
 I lie as one that travaileth
   In sorrow more than he can bear;
 I sit in darkness as of death,
   And scatter dust upon my hair.

 The God within my soul hath slept,
   And I have shamed the nobler rule;
 O Master, I have whined and crept;
   O Spirit, I have played the fool.
 Like him of old upon whose head
   His follies hung in dark arrears,
 I groan and travail in my bed,
   And water it with bitter tears.

 I stand upon thy mountain-heads,
   And gaze until mine eyes are dim;
 The golden morning glows and spreads;
   The hoary vapours break and swim.
 I see thy blossoming fields, divine,
   Thy shining clouds, thy blessed trees--
 And then that broken soul of mine--
   How much less beautiful than these!

 O Spirit, passionless, but kind,
   Is there in all the world, I cry,
 Another one so base and blind,
   Another one so weak as I?
 O Power, unchangeable, but just,
   Impute this one good thing to me,
 I sink my spirit to the dust
   In utter dumb humility.




 AN ODE TO THE HILLS

     'I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence
     cometh my help.'--PSALM CXXI. 1.


 AEons ago ye were,
 Before the struggling changeful race of man
 Wrought into being, ere the tragic stir
 Of human toil and deep desire began:
 So shall ye still remain,
 Lords of an elder and immutable race,
 When many a broad metropolis of the plain,
 Or thronging port by some renowned shore,
 Is sunk in nameless ruin, and its place
 Recalled no more.

 Empires have come and gone,
 And glorious cities fallen in their prime;
 Divine, far-echoing, names once writ in stone
 Have vanished in the dust and void of time;
 But ye, firm-set, secure,
 Like Treasure in the hardness of God's palm,
 Are yet the same for ever; ye endure
 By virtue of an old slow-ripening word,
 In your grey majesty and sovereign calm,
 Untouched, unstirred.

 Tempest and thunderstroke,
 With whirlwinds dipped in midnight at the core,
 Have torn strange furrows through your forest cloak,
 And made your hollow gorges clash and roar,
 And scarred your brows in vain.
 Around your barren heads and granite steeps
 Tempestuous grey battalions of the rain
 Charge and recharge, across the plateaued floors,
 Drenching the serried pines; and the hail sweeps
 Your pitiless scaurs.

 The long midsummer heat
 Chars the thin leafage of your rocks in fire:
 Autumn with windy robe and ruinous feet
 On your wide forests wreaks his fell desire,
 Heaping in barbarous wreck
 The treasure of your sweet and prosperous days;
 And lastly the grim tyrant, at whose beck
 Channels are turned to stone and tempests wheel,
 On brow and breast and shining shoulder lays
 His hand of steel.

 And yet not harsh alone,
 Nor wild, nor bitter are your destinies,
 O fair and sweet, for all your heart of stone,
 Who gather beauty round your Titan knees,
 As the lens gathers light.
 The dawn gleams rosy on your splendid brows,
 The sun at noonday folds you in his might,
 And swathes your forehead at his going down,
 Last leaving, where he first in pride bestows,
 His golden crown.

 In unregarded glooms,
 Where hardly shall a human footstep pass,
 Myriads of ferns and soft maianthemums,
 Or lily-breathing slender pyrolas
 Distil their hearts for you.
 Far in your pine-clad fastnesses ye keep
 Coverts the lonely thrush shall wander through,
 With echoes that seem ever to recede,
 Touching from pine to pine, from steep to steep,
 His ghostly reed.

 The fierce things of the wild
 Find food and shelter in your tenantless rocks,
 The eagle on whose wings the dawn hath smiled,
 The loon, the wild-cat, and the bright-eyed fox;
 For far away indeed
 Are all the ominous noises of mankind,
 The slaughterer's malice and the trader's greed:
 Your rugged haunts endure no slavery:
 No treacherous hand is there to crush or bind,
 But all are free.

 Therefore out of the stir
 Of cities and the ever-thickening press
 The poet and the worn philosopher
 To your bare peaks and radiant loneliness
 Escape, and breathe once more
 The wind of the Eternal: that clear mood,
 Which Nature and the elder ages bore,
 Lends them new courage and a second prime,
 At rest upon the cool infinitude
 Of Space and Time.

 The mists of troublous days,
 The horror of fierce hands and fraudful lips,
 The blindness gathered in Life's aimless ways
 Fade from them, and the kind Earth-spirit strips
 The bandage from their eyes,
 Touches their hearts and bids them feel and see;
 Beauty and Knowledge with that rare apprise
 Pour over them from some divine abode,
 Falling as in a flood of memory,
 The bliss of God.

 I too perchance some day,
 When Love and Life have fallen far apart,
 Shall slip the yoke and seek your upward way
 And make my dwelling in your changeless heart;
 And there in some quiet glade,
 Some virgin plot of turf, some innermost dell,
 Pure with cool water and inviolate shade,
 I'll build a blameless altar to the dear
 And kindly gods who guard your haunts so well
 From hurt or fear.

 There I will dream day-long,
 And honour them in many sacred ways,
 With hushed melody and uttered song,
 And golden meditation and with praise.
 I'll touch them with a prayer,
 To clothe my spirit as your might is clad
 With all things bountiful, divine, and fair,
 Yet inwardly to make me hard and true,
 Wide-seeing, passionless, immutably glad,
 And strong like you.




 INDIAN SUMMER


 The old grey year is near his term in sooth,
 And now with backward eye and soft-laid palm
 Awakens to a golden dream of youth,
 A second childhood lovely and most calm,
 And the smooth hour about his misty head
 An awning of enchanted splendour weaves,
 Of maples, amber, purple and rose-red,
 And droop-limbed elms down-dropping golden leaves.
 With still half-fallen lids he sits and dreams
 Far in a hollow of the sunlit wood,
 Lulled by the murmur of thin-threading streams,
 Nor sees the polar armies overflood
 The darkening barriers of the hills, nor hears
 The north-wind ringing with a thousand spears.




 GOOD SPEECH


 Think not, because thine inmost heart means well,
 Thou hast the freedom of rude speech: sweet words
 Are like the voices of returning birds
 Filling the soul with summer, or a bell
 That calls the weary and the sick to prayer.
 Even as thy thought, so let thy speech be fair.




 THE BETTER DAY


 Harsh thoughts, blind angers, and fierce hands,
   That keep this restless world at strife,
 Mean passions that, like choking sands,
   Perplex the stream of life,

 Pride and hot envy and cold greed,
   The cankers of the loftier will,
 What if ye triumph, and yet bleed?
   Ah, can ye not be still?

 Oh, shall there be no space, no time,
   No century of weal in store,
 No freehold in a nobler clime,
   Where men shall strive no more?

 Where every motion of the heart
   Shall serve the spirit's master-call,
 Where self shall be the unseen part,
   And human kindness all?

 Or shall we but by fits and gleams
   Sink satisfied, and cease to rave,
 Find love but in the rest of dreams,
   And peace but in the grave?




 WHITE PANSIES


 Day and night pass over, rounding,
   Star and cloud and sun,
 Things of drift and shadow, empty
   Of my dearest one.

 Soft as slumber was my baby,
   Beaming bright and sweet;
 Daintier than bloom or jewel
   Were his hands and feet.

 He was mine, mine all, mine only,
   Mine and his the debt;
 Earth and Life and Time are changers;
   I shall not forget.

 Pansies for my dear one--heartsease--
   Set them gently so;
 For his stainless lips and forehead,
   Pansies white as snow.

 Would that in the flower-grown little
   Grave they dug so deep,
 I might rest beside him, dreamless,
   Smile no more, nor weep.




 WE TOO SHALL SLEEP


 Not, not for thee,
 Beloved child, the burning grasp of life
 Shall bruise the tender soul. The noise, and strife,
 And clamour of midday thou shall not see;
 But wrapt for ever in thy quiet grave,
 Too little to have known the earthly lot,
 Time's clashing hosts above thine innocent head,
 Wave upon wave,
 Shall break, or pass as with an army's tread,
 And harm thee not.

 A few short years
 We of the living flesh and restless brain
 Shall plumb the deeps of life and know the strain,
 The fleeting gleams of joy, the fruitless tears;
 And then at last when all is touched and tried,
 Our own immutable night shall fall, and deep
 In the same silent plot, O little friend,
 Side by thy side,
 In peace that changeth not, nor knoweth end,
 We too shall sleep.




 THE AUTUMN WASTE


 There is no break in all the wide grey sky,
 Nor light on any field, and the wind grieves,
 And talks of death. Where cold grey waters lie
 Round greyer stones, and the new-fallen leaves
 Heap the chill hollows of the naked woods,
 A lisping moan, an inarticulate cry,
 Creeps far among the charnel solitudes,
 Numbing the waste with mindless misery.
 In these bare paths, these melancholy lands,
 What dream, or flesh, could ever have been young?
 What lovers have gone forth with linked hands?
 What flowers could ever have bloomed, what birds have sung?
 Life, hopes, and human things seem wrapped away,
 With shrouds and spectres, in one long decay.




 VIVIA PERPETUA


 Now being on the eve of death, discharged
 From every mortal hope and earthly care,
 I questioned how my soul might best employ
 This hand, and this still wakeful flame of mind,
 In the brief hours yet left me for their use;
 Wherefore have I bethought me of my friend,
 Of you, Philarchus, and your company,
 Yet wavering in the faith and unconfirmed;
 Perchance that I may break into thine heart
 Some sorrowful channel for the love divine,
 I make this simple record of our proof
 In diverse sufferings for the name of Christ,
 Whereof the end already for the most
 Is death this day with steadfast faith endured.

 We were in prison many days, close-pent
 In the black lower dungeon, housed with thieves
 And murderers and divers evil men;
 So foul a pressure, we had almost died,
 Even there, in struggle for the breath of life
 Amid the stench and unendurable heat;
 Nor could we find each other save by voice
 Or touch, to know that we were yet alive,
 So terrible was the darkness. Yea, 'twas hard
 To keep the sacred courage in our hearts,
 When all was blind with that unchanging night,
 And foul with death, and on our ears the taunts
 And ribald curses of the soldiery
 Fell mingled with the prisoners' cries, a load
 Sharper to bear, more bitter than their blows.
 At first, what with that dread of our abode,
 Our sudden apprehension, and the threats
 Ringing perpetually in our ears, we lost
 The living fire of faith, and like poor hinds
 Would have denied our Lord and fallen away.
 Even Perpetua, whose joyous faith
 Was in the later holier days to be
 The stay and comfort of our weaker ones,
 Was silent for long whiles. Perchance she shrank
 In the mere sickness of the flesh, confused
 And shaken by our new and horrible plight--
 The tender flesh, untempered and untried,
 Not quickened yet nor mastered by the soul;
 For she was of a fair and delicate make,
 Most gently nurtured, to whom stripes and threats
 And our foul prison-house were things undreamed.
 But little by little as our spirits grew
 Inured to suffering, with clasped hands, and tongues
 That cheered each other to incessant prayer,
 We rose and faced our trouble: we recalled
 Our Master's sacred agony and death,
 Setting before our eyes the high reward
 Of steadfast faith, the martyr's deathless crown.

 So passed some days whose length and count we lost,
 Our bitterest trial. Then a respite came.
 One who had interest with the governor
 Wrought our removal daily for some hours
 Into an upper chamber, where we sat
 And held each other's hands in childish joy,
 Receiving the sweet gift of light and air
 With wonder and exceeding thankfulness.
 And then began that life of daily growth
 In mutual exaltation and sweet help
 That bore us as a gently widening stream
 Unto the ocean of our martyrdom.
 Uniting all our feebler souls in one--
 A mightier--we reached forth with this to God.

 Perpetua had been troubled for her babe,
 Robbed of the breast and now these many days
 Wasting for want of food; but when that change
 Whereof I spake, of light and liberty
 Relieved the horror of our prison gloom,
 They brought it to her, and she sat apart,
 And nursed and tended it, and soon the child
 Would not be parted from her arms, but throve
 And fattened, and she kept it night and day.
 And always at her side with sleepless care
 Hovered the young Felicitas--a slight
 And spiritual figure--every touch and tone
 Charged with premonitory tenderness,
 Herself so near to her own motherhood.
 Thus lightened and relieved, Perpetua
 Recovered from her silent fit. Her eyes
 Regained their former deep serenity,
 Her tongue its gentle daring; for she knew
 Her life should not be taken till her babe
 Had strengthened and outgrown the need of her.
 Daily we were amazed at her soft strength,
 Her pliant and untroubled constancy,
 Her smiling, soldierly contempt of death,
 Her beauty and the sweetness of her voice.

 Her father, when our first few bitterest days
 Were over, like a gust of grief and rage,
 Came to her in the prison with wild eyes,
 And cried: 'How mean you, daughter, when you say
 You are a Christian? How can any one
 Of honoured blood, the child of such as me,
 Be Christian? 'Tis an odious name, the badge
 Only of outcasts and rebellious slaves!'
 And she, grief-touched, but with unyielding gaze,
 Showing the fulness of her slender height:
 'This vessel, father, being what it is,
 An earthen pitcher, would you call it thus?
 Or would you name it by some other name?'
 'Nay, surely,' said the old man, catching breath,
 And pausing, and she answered: 'Nor can I
 Call myself aught but what I surely am--
 A Christian!' and her father, flashing back
 In silent anger, left her for that time.

 A special favour to Perpetua
 Seemed daily to be given, and her soul
 Was made the frequent vessel of God's grace,
 Wherefrom we all, less gifted, sore athirst,
 Drank courage and fresh joy; for glowing dreams
 Were sent her, full of forms august, and fraught
 With signs and symbols of the glorious end
 Whereto God's love hath aimed us for Christ's sake.
 Once--at what hour I know not, for we lay
 In that foul dungeon, where all hours were lost,
 And day and night were indistinguishable--
 We had been sitting a long silent while,
 Some lightly sleeping, others bowed in prayer,
 When on a sudden, like a voice from God,
 Perpetua spake to us and all were roused.
 Her voice was rapt and solemn: 'Friends,' she said,
 'Some word hath come to me in a dream. I saw
 A ladder leading to heaven, all of gold,
 Hung up with lances, swords, and hooks. A land
 Of darkness and exceeding peril lay
 Around it, and a dragon fierce as hell
 Guarded its foot. We doubted who should first
 Essay it, but you, Saturus, at last--
 So God hath marked you for especial grace--
 Advancing and against the cruel beast
 Aiming the potent weapon of Christ's name--
 Mounted, and took me by the hand, and I
 The next one following, and so the rest
 In order, and we entered with great joy
 Into a spacious garden filled with light
 And balmy presences of love and rest;
 And there an old man sat, smooth-browed, white-haired,
 Surrounded by unnumbered myriads
 Of spiritual shapes and faces angel-eyed,
 Milking his sheep; and lifting up his eyes
 He welcomed us in strange and beautiful speech,
 Unknown yet comprehended, for it flowed
 Not through the ears, but forth-right to the soul,
 God's language of pure love. Between the lips
 Of each he placed a morsel of sweet curd;
 And while the curd was yet within my mouth,
 I woke, and still the taste of it remains,
 Through all my body flowing like white flame,
 Sweet as of some immaculate spiritual thing.'
 And when Perpetua had spoken, all
 Were silent in the darkness, pondering,
 But Saturus spake gently for the rest:
 'How perfect and acceptable must be
 Your soul to God, Perpetua, that thus
 He bends to you, and through you speaks his will.
 We know now that our martyrdom is fixed,
 Nor need we vex us further for this life.'

 While yet these thoughts were bright upon our souls,
 There came the rumour that a day was set
 To hear us. Many of our former friends,
 Some with entreaties, some with taunts and threats,
 Came to us to pervert us; with the rest
 Again Perpetua's father, worn with care;
 Nor could we choose but pity his distress,
 So miserably, with abject cries and tears,
 He fondled her and called her 'Domina,'
 And bowed his aged body at her feet,
 Beseeching her by all the names she loved
 To think of him, his fostering care, his years,
 And also of her babe, whose life, he said,
 Would fail without her; but Perpetua,
 Sustaining by a gift of strength divine
 The fulness of her noble fortitude,
 Answered him tenderly: 'Both you and I,
 And all of us, my father, at this hour
 Are equally in God's hands, and what he wills
 Must be'; but when the poor old man was gone
 She wept, and knelt for many hours in prayer,
 Sore tried and troubled by her tender heart.

 One day, while we were at our midday meal,
 Our cell was entered by the soldiery,
 And we were seized and borne away for trial.
 A surging crowd had gathered, and we passed
 From street to street, hemmed in by tossing heads
 And faces cold or cruel; yet we caught
 At moments from masked lips and furtive eyes
 Of friends--some known to as and some unknown--
 Many veiled messages of love and praise.
 The floorways of the long basilica
 Fronted us with an angry multitude;
 And scornful eyes and threatening foreheads frowned
 In hundreds from the columned galleries.
 We were placed all together at the bar,
 And though at first unsteadied and confused
 By the imperial presence of the law,
 The pomp of judgment and the staring crowd,
 None failed or faltered; with unshaken tongue
 Each met the stern Proconsul's brief demand
 In clear profession. Rapt as in a dream,
 Scarce conscious of my turn, nor how I spake,
 I watched with wondering eyes the delicate face
 And figure of Perpetua; for her
 We that were youngest of our company
 Loved with a sacred and absorbing love,
 A passion that our martyr's brotherly vow
 Had purified and made divine. She stood
 In dreamy contemplation, slightly bowed,
 A glowing stillness that was near a smile
 Upon her soft closed lips. Her turn had come,
 When, like a puppet struggling up the steps,
 Her father from the pierced and swaying crowd
 Appeared, unveiling in his aged arms
 The smiling visage of her babe. He grasped
 Her robe, and strove to draw her down. All eyes
 Were bent upon her. With a softening glance,
 And voice less cold and heavy with death's doom,
 The old Proconsul turned to her and said:
 'Lady, have pity on your father's age;
 Be mindful of your tender babe; this grain
 Of harmless incense offer for the peace
 And welfare of the Emperor'; but she,
 Lifting far forth her large and noteless eyes,
 As one that saw a vision, only said:
 'I cannot sacrifice'; and he, harsh tongued,
 Bending a brow upon her rough as rock,
 With eyes that struck like steel, seeking to break
 Or snare her with a sudden stroke of fear:
 'Art thou a Christian?' and she answered, 'Yea,
 I am a Christian!' In brow-blackening wrath
 He motioned a contemptuous hand and bade
 The lictors scourge the old man down and forth
 With rods, and as the cruel deed was done,
 Perpetua stood white with quivering lips,
 And her eyes filled with tears. While yet his cries
 Were mingling with the curses of the crowd,
 Hilarianus, calling name by name,
 Gave sentence, and in cold and formal phrase
 Condemned us to the beasts, and we returned
 Rejoicing to our prison. Then we wished
 Our martyrdom could soon have followed, not
 As doubting for our constancy, but some
 Grew sick under the anxious long suspense.
 Perpetua again was weighed upon
 By grief and trouble for her babe, whom now
 Her father, seeking to depress her will,
 Withheld and would not send it; but at length
 Word being brought her that the child indeed
 No longer suffered, nor desired the breast,
 Her peace returned, and, giving thanks to God,
 All were united in new bonds of hope.
 Now being fixed in certitude of death,
 We stripped our souls of all their earthly gear,
 The useless raiment of this world; and thus,
 Striving together with a single will,
 In daily increment of faith and power,
 We were much comforted by heavenly dreams,
 And waking visitations of God's grace.
 Visions of light and glory infinite
 Were frequent with us, and by night or day
 Woke at the very name of Christ the Lord,
 Taken at any moment on our lips;
 So that we had no longer thought or care
 Of life or of the living, but became
 As spirits from this earth already freed,
 Scarce conscious of the dwindling weight of flesh.
 To Saturus appeared in dreams the space
 And splendour of the heavenly house of God,
 The glowing gardens of eternal joy,
 The halls and chambers of the cherubim,
 In wreaths of endless myriads involved
 The blinding glory of the angel choir,
 Rolling through deeps of wheeling cloud and light
 The thunder of their vast antiphonies.
 The visions of Perpetua not less
 Possessed us with their homely tenderness--
 As one, wherein she saw a rock-set pool
 And weeping o'er its rim a little child,
 Her brother, long since dead, Dinocrates:
 Though sore athirst, he could not reach the stream,
 Being so small, and her heart grieved thereat.
 She looked again, and lo! the pool had risen,
 And the child filled his goblet, and drank deep,
 And prattling in a tender childish joy
 Ran gaily off, as infants do, to play.
 By this she knew his soul had found release
 From torment, and had entered into bliss.

 Quickly as by a merciful gift of God,
 Our vigil passed unbroken. Yesternight
 They moved us to the amphitheatre,
 Our final lodging-place on earth, and there
 We sat together at our agape
 For the last time. In silence, rapt and pale,
 We hearkened to the aged Saturus,
 Whose speech, touched with a ghostly eloquence,
 Canvassed the fraud and littleness of life,
 God's goodness and the solemn joy of death.
 Perpetua was silent, but her eyes
 Fell gently upon each of us, suffused
 With inward and eradiant light; a smile
 Played often upon her lips.

                 While yet we sat,
 A tribune with a band of soldiery
 Entered our cell, and would have had us bound
 In harsher durance, fearing our escape
 By fraud or witchcraft; but Perpetua,
 Facing him gently with a noble note
 Of wonder in her voice, and on her lips
 A lingering smile of mournful irony:
 'Sir, are ye not unwise to harass us,
 And rob us of our natural food and rest?
 Should ye not rather tend us with soft care,
 And so provide a comely spectacle?
 We shall not honour Caesar's birthday well,
 If we be waste and weak, a piteous crew,
 Poor playthings for your proud and pampered beasts.'
 The noisy tribune, whether touched indeed,
 Or by her grave and tender grace abashed,
 Muttered and stormed a while, and then withdrew.
 The short night passed in wakeful prayer for some,
 For others in brief sleep, broken by dreams
 And spiritual visitations. Earliest dawn
 Found us arisen, and Perpetua,
 Moving about with smiling lips, soft-tongued,
 Besought us to take food; lest so, she said,
 For all the strength and courage of our hearts,
 Our bodies should fall faint. We heard without,
 Already ere the morning light was full,
 The din of preparation, and the hum
 Of voices gathering in the upper tiers;
 Yet had we seen so often in our thoughts
 The picture of this strange and cruel death,
 Its festal horror, and its bloody pomp,
 The nearness scarcely moved us, and our hands
 Met in a steadfast and unshaken clasp.

 The day is over. Ah, my friend, how long
 With its wild sounds and bloody sights it seemed!
 Night comes, and I am still alive--even I,
 The least and last--with other two, reserved
 To grace to-morrow's second day. The rest
 Have suffered and with holy rapture passed
 Into their glory. Saturus and the men
 Were given to bears and leopards, but the crowd
 Feasted their eyes upon no cowering shape,
 Nor hue of fear, nor painful cry. They died
 Like armed men, face foremost to the beasts,
 With prayers and sacred songs upon their lips.
 Perpetua and the frail Felicitas
 Were seized before our eyes and roughly stripped,
 And shrinking and entreating, not for fear,
 Nor hurt, but bitter shame, were borne away
 Into the vast arena, and hung up
 In nets, naked before the multitude,
 For a fierce bull, maddened by goads, to toss.
 Some sudden tumult of compassion seized
 The crowd, and a great murmur like a wave
 Rose at the sight, and grew, and thundered up
 From tier to tier, deep and imperious:
 So white, so innocent they were, so pure:
 Their tender limbs so eloquent of shame;
 And so our loved ones were brought back, all faint,
 And covered with light raiment, and again
 Led forth, and now with smiling lips they passed
 Pale, but unbowed, into the awful ring,
 Holding each other proudly by the hand.

 Perpetua first was tossed, and her robe rent,
 But, conscious only of the glaring eyes,
 She strove to hide herself as best she could
 In the torn remnants of her flimsy robe,
 And putting up her hands clasped back her hair,
 So that she might not die as one in grief,
 Unseemly and dishevelled. Then she turned,
 And in her loving arms caressed and raised
 The dying, bruised Felicitas. Once more
 Gored by the cruel beast, they both were borne
 Swooning and mortally stricken from the field.
 Perpetua, pale and beautiful, her lips
 Parted as in a lingering ecstasy,
 Could not believe the end had come, but asked
 When they were to be given to the beasts.
 The keepers gathered round her--even they--
 In wondering pity--while with fearless hand,
 Bidding us all be faithful and stand firm,
 She bared her breast, and guided to its goal
 The gladiator's sword that pierced her heart.

 The night is passing. In a few short hours
 I too shall suffer for the name of Christ.
 A boundless exaltation lifts my soul!
 I know that they who left us, Saturus,
 Perpetua, and the other blessed ones,
 Await me at the opening gates of heaven.




 THE MYSTERY OF A YEAR


 A little while, a year agone,
   I knew her for a romping child,
 A dimple and a glance that shone
   With idle mischief when she smiled.

 To-day she passed me in the press,
   And turning with a quick surprise
 I wondered at her stateliness,
   I wondered at her altered eyes.

 To me the street was just the same,
   The people and the city's stir;
 But life had kindled into flame,
   And all the world was changed for her.

 I watched her in the crowded ways,
   A noble form, a queenly head,
 With all the woman in her gaze,
   The conscious woman in her tread.




 WINTER EVENING


 To-night the very horses springing by
 Toss gold from whitened nostrils. In a dream
 The streets that narrow to the westward gleam
 Like rows of golden palaces; and high
 From all the crowded chimneys tower and die
 A thousand aureoles. Down in the west
 The brimming plains beneath the sunset rest,
 One burning sea of gold. Soon, soon shall fly
 The glorious vision, and the hours shall feel
 A mightier master; soon from height to height,
 With silence and the sharp unpitying stars,
 Stern creeping frosts, and winds that touch like steel,
 Out of the depth beyond the eastern bars,
 Glittering and still shall come the awful night.




 WAR


 By the Nile, the sacred river,
   I can see the captive hordes
 Strain beneath the lash and quiver
   At the long papyrus cords,
 While in granite rapt and solemn,
 Rising over roof and column,
   Amen-hotep dreams, or Ramses,
       Lord of Lords.

 I can hear the trumpets waken
   For a victory old and far--
 Carchemish or Kadesh taken--
   I can see the conqueror's car
 Bearing down some Hittite valley,
 Where the bowmen break and sally,
   Sargina or Esarhaddon,
       Grim with war!

 From the mountain streams that sweeten
   Indus, to the Spanish foam,
 I can feel the broad earth beaten
   By the serried tramp of Rome;
 Through whatever foes environ
 Onward with the might of iron--
   Veni, vidi; veni, vici--
       Crashing home!

 I can see the kings grow pallid
   With astonished fear and hate,
 As the hosts of Amr or Khaled
   On their cities fall like fate;
 Like the heat-wind from its prison
 In the desert burst and risen--
   La ilaha illah 'llahu--
       God is great!

 I can hear the iron rattle,
   I can see the arrows sting
 In some far-off northern battle,
   Where the long swords sweep and swing;
 I can hear the scalds declaiming,
 I can see their eyeballs flaming,
   Gathered in a frenzied circle
       Round the king.

 I can hear the horn of Uri
   Roaring in the hills enorm;
 Kindled at its brazen fury,
   I can see the clansmen form;
 In the dawn in misty masses,
 Pouring from the silent passes
   Over Granson or Morgarten
       Like the storm.

 On the lurid anvil ringing
   To some slow fantastic plan,
 I can hear the sword-smith singing
   In the heart of old Japan--
 Till the cunning blade grows tragic
 With his malice and his magic--
   Tenka tairan! Tenka tairan!
       War to man!

 Where a northern river charges
   By a wild and moonlit glade,
 From the murky forest marges,
   Round a broken palisade,
 I can see the red men leaping,
 See the sword of Daulac sweeping,
   And the ghostly forms of heroes
       Fall and fade.

 I can feel the modern thunder
   Of the cannon beat and blaze,
 When the lines of men go under
   On your proudest battle-days;
 Through the roar I hear the lifting
 Of the bloody chorus drifting
   Round the burning mill at Valmy--
       Marseillaise!

 I can see the ocean rippled
   With the driving shot like rain,
 While the hulls are crushed and crippled,
   And the guns are piled with slain;
 O'er the blackened broad sea-meadow
 Drifts a tall and titan shadow,
   And the cannon of Trafalgar
       Startle Spain.

 Still the tides of fight are booming,
   And the barren blood is spilt;
 Still the banners are up-looming,
   And the hands are on the hilt;
 But the old world waxes wiser,
 From behind the bolted visor
   It descries at last the horror
       And the guilt.

 Yet the eyes are dim, nor wholly
   Open to the golden gleam,
 And the brute surrenders slowly
   To the godhead and the dream.
 From his cage of bar and girder,
 Still at moments mad with murder,
   Leaps the tiger, and his demon
       Rules supreme.

 One more war with fire and famine
   Gathers--I can hear its cries--
 And the years of might and Mammon
   Perish in a world's demise;
 When the strength of man is shattered,
 And the powers of earth are scattered,
   From beneath the ghastly ruin
       Peace shall rise!




 THE WOODCUTTER'S HUT


 Far up in the wild and wintery hills in the heart of the cliff-broken
     woods,
 Where the mounded drifts lie soft and deep in the noiseless solitudes,
 The hut of the lonely woodcutter stands, a few rough beams that show
 A blunted peak and a low black line, from the glittering waste of snow.
 In the frost-still dawn from his roof goes up in the windless,
     motionless air,
 The thin, pink curl of leisurely smoke; through the forest white and
     bare
 The woodcutter follows his narrow trail, and the morning rings and
     cracks
 With the rhythmic jet of his sharp-blown breath and the echoing shout of
     his axe.
 Only the waft of the wind besides, or the stir of some hardy bird--
 The call of the friendly chickadee, or the pat of the nuthatch--is
     heard;
 Or a rustle comes from a dusky clump, where the busy siskins feed,
 And scatter the dimpled sheet of the snow with the shells of the
     cedar-seed.
 Day after day the woodcutter toils untiring with axe and wedge,
 Till the jingling teams come up from the road that runs by the valley's
     edge,
 With plunging of horses, and hurling of snow, and many a shouted word,
 And carry away the keen-scented fruit of his cutting, cord upon cord.
 Not the sound of a living foot comes else, not a moving visitant there,
 Save the delicate step of some halting doe, or the sniff of a prowling
     bear.
 And only the stars are above him at night, and the trees that creak and
     groan,
 And the frozen, hard-swept mountain-crests with their silent fronts of
     stone,
 As he watches the sinking glow of his fire and the wavering flames
     upcaught,
 Cleaning his rifle or mending his moccasins, sleepy and slow of
     thought.
 Or when the fierce snow comes, with the rising wind, from the grey
     north-east,
 He lies through the leaguering hours in his bunk like a winter-hidden
     beast,
 Or sits on the hard-packed earth, and smokes by his draught-blown
     guttering fire,
 Without thought or remembrance, hardly awake, and waits for the storm
     to tire.
 Scarcely he hears from the rock-rimmed heights to the wild ravines
     below,
 Near and far-off, the limitless wings of the tempest hurl and go
 In roaring gusts that plunge through the cracking forest, and lull,
     and lift,
 All day without stint and all night long with the sweep of the hissing
     drift.
 But winter shall pass ere long with its hills of snow and its fettered
     dreams,
 And the forest shall glimmer with living gold, and chime with the
     gushing of streams;
 Millions of little points of plants shall prick through its matted
     floor,
 And the wind-flower lift and uncurl her silken buds by the woodman's
     door;
 The sparrow shall see and exult; but lo! as the spring draws gaily on,
 The woodcutter's hut is empty and bare, and the master that made it is
     gone.
 He is gone where the gathering of valley men another labour yields,
 To handle the plough, and the harrow, and scythe, in the heat of the
     summer fields.
 He is gone with his corded arms, and his ruddy face, and his moccasined
     feet,
 The animal man in his warmth and vigour, sound, and hard, and complete.
 And all summer long, round the lonely hut, the black earth burgeons and
     breeds,
 Till the spaces are filled with the tall-plumed ferns and the triumphing
     forest-weeds;
 The thick wild raspberries hem its walls, and, stretching on either
     hand,
 The red-ribbed stems and the giant-leaves of the sovereign spikenard
     stand.
 So lonely and silent it is, so withered and warped with the sun and
     snow,
 You would think it the fruit of some dead man's toil a hundred years
     ago;
 And he who finds it suddenly there, as he wanders far and alone,
 Is touched with a sweet and beautiful sense of something tender and
     gone,
 The sense of a struggling life in the waste, and the mark of a soul's
     command,
 The going and coming of vanished feet, the touch of a human hand.




 AMOR VITAE


 I love the warm bare earth and all
   That works and dreams thereon:
 I love the seasons yet to fall:
   I love the ages gone,

 The valleys with the sheeted grain,
   The river's smiling might,
 The merry wind, the rustling rain,
   The vastness of the night.

 I love the morning's flame, the steep
   Where down the vapour clings:
 I love the clouds that float and sleep,
   And every bird that sings.

 I love the purple shower that pours
   On far-off fields at even:
 I love the pine-wood dusk whose floors
   Are like the courts of heaven.

 I love the heaven's azure span,
   The grass beneath my feet:
 I love the face of every man
   Whose thought is swift and sweet.

 I let the wrangling world go by,
   And like an idle breath
 Its echoes and its phantoms fly:
   I care no jot for death.

 Time like a Titan bright and strong
   Spreads one enchanted gleam:
 Each hour is but a fluted song,
   And life a lofty dream.




 WINTER-BREAK


 All day between high-curded clouds the sun
 Shone down like summer on the steaming planks.
 The long, bright icicles in dwindling ranks
 Dripped from the murmuring eaves till one by one
 They fell. As if the spring had now begun,
 The quilted snow, sun-softened to the core,
 Loosened and shunted with a sudden roar
 From downward roofs. Not even with day done
 Had ceased the sound of waters, but all night
 I heard it. In my dreams forgetfully bright
 Methought I wandered in the April woods,
 Where many a silver-piping sparrow was,
 By gurgling brooks and spouting solitudes,
 And stooped, and laughed, and plucked hepaticas.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Alcyone, by Archibald Lampman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALCYONE ***

***** This file should be named 22833.txt or 22833.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/8/3/22833/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, V. L. Simpson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by the Canadian Institute for Historical Microreproductions
(www.canadiana.org))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
