The Project Gutenberg EBook of Eli, by Heman White Chaplin

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Eli
       First published in the "Century Magazine"

Author: Heman White Chaplin

Release Date: October 12, 2007 [EBook #23005]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELI ***




Produced by David Widger






ELI

By Heman White Chaplin

1887

First published in the "Century Magazine."





I.

Under a boat, high and dry at low tide, on the beach, John Wood was
seated in the sand, sheltered from the sun in the boat's shadow,
absorbed in the laying on of verdigris. The dull, worn color was rapidly
giving place to a brilliant, shining green. Occasionally a scraper,
which lay by, was taken up to remove the last trace of a barnacle.

It was Wood's boat, but he was not a boatman; he painted cleverly, but
he was not a painter. He kept the brown store under the elms of the main
street, now hot and still, where at this-moment his blushing sister was
captivating the heart of an awkward farmer's boy as she sold him a pair
of striped suspenders.

As the church clock struck the last of twelve decided blows, three
children came rushing out of the house on the bank above the beach. It
was one of those deceptive New England cottages, weather-worn without,
but bright and bountifully home-like within,--with its trim parlor,
proud of a cabinet organ; with its front hall, now cooled by the light
sea-breeze drifting through the blind-door, where a tall clock issued
its monotonous call to a siesta on the rattan lounge; with its spare
room, open now, opposite the parlor, and now, too, drawing in the salt
air through close-shut blinds, in anticipation of the joyful arrival
this evening of Sister Sarah, with her little brood, from the city.

The children scampered across the road, and then the eldest hushed the
others and sent a little brother ahead to steal, barefoot, along the
shining sea-weed to his father.

The plotted surprise appeared to succeed completely. The painter was
seized by the ears from behind, and captured.

"Guess who 's here, or you can't get up," said the infant captor.

"It 's Napoleon Bonaparte; don't joggle," said his father, running a
brush steadily along the water-line.

"No! no! no!" with shouts of laughter from the whole attacking party.

"Then it's Captain Ezekiel."

This excited great merriment: Captain Ezekiel was an aged, purblind man,
who leaned on a cane.

After attempts to identify the invader--with the tax-collector come for
taxes, then with the elderly minister making a pastoral call, with the
formal schoolmaster, and with Samuel J. Tilden--the victim reached over
his shoulder, and, seizing the assailant by a handful of calico jacket,
brought him around, squirming, before him.

"Now," he said, "I 'll give you a coat of verdigris. (Great applause
from the reserve force behind.)

"I suppose Mother sent you to say dinner's ready," said the father,
rising and surveying the green bottom of the boat. "I must eat quick, so
as to do the other side before half-flood."

And with a child on each shoulder, and the third pushing him from
behind with her head, he marched toward the vine-covered kitchen, where,
between two opposite netted doors, the table was trimly set.

"Father, you look like a mermaid, with your green hands," said his wife,
laughing, as she handed him the spirits of turpentine. "A woman could
paint that boat, in a light dress, and not get a spot on her."

He smiled good-naturedly: he never spoke much.

"I guess Louise won't have much trade today," said his wife, as they all
sat down; "it's so hot in the sun that everybody 'll wait till night.
But she has her tatting-work to do, and she 's got a book, too, that she
wanted to finish."

Her husband nodded, and ate away.

"Oh, can't we go up street and see her, this afternoon?" said one of the
children.

"Who can that be?" said the mother, as an elderly, half-official-looking
man stopped his horse at the front gate and alighted. The man left the
horse unchecked to browse by the roadside, and came to the door.

"Oh, it 's you, Captain Nourse," said Wood, rising to open the netting
door, and holding out his hand. "Come to summons me as a witness in
something about the bank case, I suppose. Let me introduce Captain
Nourse, Mary," he said, "deputy sheriff. Sit down, Captain, and have
some dinner with us."

"No, I guess I won't set," said the captain. "I cal'lated not to eat
till I got home, in the middle o' the afternoon. No, I 'll set down in
eye-shot of the mare, and read the paper while you eat."

"I hope they don't want me to testify anywhere to-day," said Wood;
"because my boat's half verdigris'd, and I want to finish her this
afternoon."

"No testimony to-day," said the captain. "Hi! hi! Kitty!" he called to
the mare, as she began to meander across the road; and he went out to
a tree by the front fence, and sat down on a green bench, beside a
work-basket and a half-finished child's dress, and read the country
paper which he had taken from the office as he came along.

After dinner Wood went out bareheaded, and leaned on the fence by the
captain. His wife stood just inside the door, looking out at them.

The "bank case" was the great sensation of the town, and Wood was one
of the main witnesses, for he had been taking the place of the absent
cashier when the safe was broken open and rifled to the widespread
distress of depositors and stockholders, and the ruin of Hon. Edward
Clark, the president. Wood had locked the safe on the afternoon before
the eventful night, and had carried home the key with him, and he was to
testify to the contents of the safe as he had left it.

"I guess they 're glad they 've got such a witness as John," said his
wife to herself, as she looked at him fondly, "and I guess they think
there won't be much doubt about what he says."

"Well, Captain," said Wood, jocosely, breaking a spear of grass to bits
in his fingers, "I did n't know but you 'd come to arrest me."

The captain calmly smiled as only a man can smile who has been accosted
with the same humorous remark a dozen times a day for twenty years.
He folded his paper carefully, put it in his pocket, took off
his spectacles and put them in their silver case, took a red silk
handkerchief from his hat, wiped his face, and put the handkerchief
back. Then he said shortly,--

"That's what I _have_ come for."

Wood, still leaning on the fence, looked at him, and said nothing.

"That's just what I 've come for," said Captain Nourse. "I 've got to
arrest you; here's the warrant." And he handed it to him.

"What does this mean?" said Wood. "I can't make head or tail of this."

"Well," said the captain, "the long and short is, these high-toned
detectives that they 've hed down from town, seein' as our own force
was n't good enough, allow that the safe was unlocked with a key, in due
form, and then the lock was broke afterward, to look as if it had been
forced open. They 've hed the foreman of the safe-men down, too, and he
says the same thing. Naturally, the argument is, there was only two keys
in existence,--one was safe with the president of the bank, and is about
all he 's got to show out of forty years' savings; the only other one
you hed: consequently, it heaves it onto you."

"I see," said Wood. "I will go with you. Do you want to come into the
house with me while I get my coat?"

"Well, I suppose I must keep you in sight,--now you know."

And they went into the house.

"Mary," said her husband, "the folks that lost by Clark when the bank
broke have been at him until he 's felt obliged to pitch on somebody,
and he's pitched on me; and Captain Nourse has come to arrest me. I
shall get bail before long."

She said nothing, and did not shed a tear till he was gone.

But then--




II.

Wide wastes of salt-marsh to the right, imprisoning the upland with a
vain promise of infinite liberty, and, between low, distant sandhills,
a rim of sea. Stretches of pine woods behind, shutting in from the great
outer world, and soon to darken into evening gloom. Ploughed fields and
elm-dotted pastures to the left, and birch-lined roads leading by white
farm-houses to the village, all speaking of cheer and freedom to the
prosperous and the happy, but to the unfortunate and the indebted, of
meshes invisible but strong as steel. But, before, no lonesome marshes,
no desolate forest, no farm or village street, but the free blue ocean,
rolling and tumbling still from the force of an expended gale.

In the open doorway of a little cottage, warmed by the soft slanting
rays of the September sun, a rough man, burnt and freckled, was sitting,
at his feet a net, engaged upon some handiwork which two little girls
were watching. Close by him lay a setter, his nose between his paws.
Occasionally the man raised his eyes to scan the sea.

"There's Joel," he said, "comin' in around the Bar. Not much air
stirrin' now!"

Then he turned to his work again.

"First, you go _so_ fash'," he said to the children, as he drew a
thread; "then you go _so_ fash'."

And as he worked he made a great show of labor, much to their diversion.

But the sight of Joel's broad white sail had not brought pleasant
thoughts to his mind; for Joel had hailed him, off the Shoal, the
afternoon before, and had obligingly offered to buy his fish right
there, and so let him go directly home, omitting to mention that sudden
jump of price due to an empty market.

"Wonder what poor man he 's took a dollar out of to-day! Well, I s'pose
it's all right: those that 's got money, want money."

"What be you, Eli--ganging on hooks?" said Aunt Patience, as she tiptoed
into the kitchen behind him, from his wife's sick-room, and softly
closed the door after her.

"No," said the elder of the children; "he 's mending our stockings, and
showing me how."

"Well, you do have a hard time, don't you?" said Aunt Patience, looking
down over his shoulder; "to slave and tug and scrape to get a house over
your head, and then to have to turn square 'round, and stay to home with
a sick woman, and eat all into it with mortgages!"

"Oh, well," he said, "we 'll fetch, somehow."

Aunt Patience went to the glass, and holding a black pin in her mouth,
carefully tied the strings of her sun-bonnet.

"Anyway," she says, "you take it good-natured. Though if there is one
thing that's harder than another, it is to be good-natured all the
time, without being aggravating. I have known men that was so awfully
good-natured that they was harder to live with than if they was cross!"

And without specifying further, she opened her plaid parasol and stepped
out at the porch.

Though, on this quiet afternoon of Saturday, the peace of the
approaching Sabbath seemed already brooding over the little dwelling,
peace had not lent her hand to the building of the home. Every foot of
land, every shingle, every nail, had been wrung from the reluctant sea.
Every voyage had contributed something. It was a great day when Eli was
able to buy the land. Then, between two voyages, he dug a cellar and
laid a foundation; then he saved enough to build the main part of the
cottage and to finish the front room, lending his own hand to the work.
Then he used to get letters at every port, telling of progress,--how
Lizzie, his wife, had adorned the front room with a bright ninepenny
paper, of which a little piece was enclosed,--which he kept as a sort
of charm about him and exhibited to his friends; how she and her little
brother had lathed the entry and the kitchen, and how they had set out
blackberry vines from the woods. Then another letter told of a surprise
awaiting him on his return; and, in due time, coming home as third mate
from Hong-Kong to a seaman's tumultuous welcome, he had found that a
great, good-natured mason, with whose sick child his wife had watched
night after night, had appeared one day with lime and hair and sand,
and in white raiment, and had plastered the entry and the kitchen, and
finished a room upstairs.

And so, for years, at home and on the sea, at New York and at Valparaiso
and in the Straits of Malacca, the little house and the little family
within it had grown into the fibre of Eli's heart. Nothing had given him
more delight than to meet, in the strange streets of Calcutta or before
the Mosque of Omar, some practical Yankee from Stonington or Machias,
and, whittling to discuss with him, among the turbans of the Orient,
the comparative value of shaved and of sawed shingles, or the economy
of "Swedes-iron" nails, and to go over with him the estimates and plans
which he had worked out in his head under all the constellations of the
skies.

The supper things were cleared away. The children had said good-night
and gone to bed, and Eli had been sitting for an hour by his wife's
bedside. He had had to tax his patience and ingenuity heavily during the
long months that she had lain there to entertain her for a little while
in the evening, after his hard, wet day's work. He had been talking now
of the coming week, when he was to serve upon the jury in the adjoining
county-town.

"I cal'late I can come home about every night," he said, "and it 'll be
quite a change, at any rate."

"But you don't seem so cheerful about it as I counted you would be,"
said his wife. "Are you afraid you'll have to be on the bank case?"

"Not much!" he answered. "No trouble 'n that case! Jury won't leave
their seats. These city fellers 'll find they 've bit off more 'n they
can chew when they try to figure out John Wood done that. I only hope
I 'll have the luck to be on that case--all hands on the jury whisper
together a minute, and then clear him, right on the spot, and then shake
hands with him all 'round!"

"But something is worrying you," she said. "What is it? You have looked
it since noon."

"Oh, nothin'," he replied--"only George Cahoon came up to-noon to say
that he was goin' West next week, and that he would have to have that
money he let me have awhile ago. And where to get it--I don't know."




III.

The court-room was packed. John Wood's trial was drawing to its close.
Eli was on the jury. Some one had advised the prosecuting attorney, in a
whisper, to challenge him, but he had shaken his head and said,--

"Oh, I could n't afford to challenge him for that; it would only leak
out, and set the jury against me. I 'll risk his standing out against
this evidence."

The trial had been short. It had been shown how the little building
of the bank had been entered. Skilled locksmiths from the city had
testified that the safe was opened with a key, and that the lock was
broken afterward, from the inside, plainly to raise the theory of a
forcible entry by strangers.

It had been proved that the only key in existence, not counting that
kept by the president, was in the possession of Wood, who was filling,
for a few days, the place of the cashier--the president's brother--in
his absence. It had been shown that Wood was met, at one o'clock of
the night in question, crossing the fields toward his home, from
the direction of the bank, with a large wicker basket slung over his
shoulders, returning, as he had said, from eel-spearing in Harlow's
Creek; and there was other circumstantial evidence.

Mr. Clark, the president of the bank, had won the sympathy of every one
by the modest way in which, with his eye-glasses in his hand, he had
testified to the particulars of the loss which had left him penniless,
and had ruined others whose little all was in his hands. And then in
reply to the formal question, he had testified, amid roars of laughter
from the court-room, that it was not he who robbed the safe. At this,
even the judge and Wood's lawyer had not restrained a smile.

This had left the guilt with Wood. His lawyer, an inexperienced young
attorney,--who had done more or less business for the bank and would
hardly have ventured to defend this case but that the president had
kindly expressed his entire willingness that he should do so,--had, of
course, not thought it worth while to cross-examine Mr. Clark, and had
directed his whole argument against the theory that the safe had been
opened with a key, and not by strangers. But he had felt all through
that, as a man politely remarked to him when he finished, he was only
butting his "head ag'in a stone wall."

And while he was arguing, a jolly-looking old lawyer had written, in
the fly-leaf of a law-book on his knee, and had passed with a wink to a
young man near him who had that very morning been admitted to the bar,
these lines:--

     "When callow Blackstones soar too high,
     Quit common-sense, and reckless fly,
     Soon, Icarus-like, they headlong fall,
     And down come client, case, and all."

The district-attorney had not thought it worth while to expend much
strength upon his closing argument; but being a jovial stump-speaker, of
a wide reputation within narrow limits, he had not been able to refrain
from making merry over Wood's statement that the basket which he had
been seen bearing home, on the eventful night, was a basket of eels.

"Fine eels those, gentlemen! We have seen gold-fish and silver-fish, but
golden eels are first discovered by this defendant The apostle, in Holy
Writ, caught a fish with a coin in its mouth; but this man leaves the
apostle in the dim distance when he finds eels that are all money. No
storied fisherman of Bagdad, catching enchanted princes disguised as
fishes in the sea, ever hooked such a treasure as this defendant hooked
when he hooked that basket of eels! [Rustling appreciation of the jest
among the jury.] If a squirming, twisting, winding, wriggling eel,
gentlemen, can be said at any given moment to have a back, we may
distinguish this new-found species as the greenback eel. It is a common
saying that no man can hold an eel and remain a Christian. I should like
to have viewed the pious equanimity of this good man when he laid his
hands on that whole bed of eels. In happy, barefoot boyhood, gentlemen,
we used to find mud-turtles marked with initials or devices cut in their
shells; but what must have been our friend's surprise to find, in the
muddy bed of Harlow's Creek, eels marked with a steel-engraving of the
landing of Columbus and the signature of the Register of the Treasury! I
hear that a corporation is now being formed by the title of The Harlow's
Creek Greenback National Bank-bill Eel-fishing Company, to follow up,
with seines and spears, our worthy friend's discovery! I learn that the
news of this rich placer has spread to the golden mountains of the West,
and that the exhausted intellects which have been reduced to such names
for their mines as 'The Tombstone,' 'The Red Dog,' the 'Mrs. E. J.
Parkhurst,' are likely now to flood us with prospectuses of the 'Eel
Mine,' 'The Flat Eel,' 'The Double Eel,' and then, when they get ready
to burst upon confiding friends, 'The Consolidated Eels.'"

It takes but little to make a school or a court-room laugh, and the
speech had appeared to give a good deal of amusement to the listeners.

To all?

Did it amuse that man who sat, with folded arms, harsh and rigid, at
the dock? Did it divert that white-faced woman, cowering in a corner,
listening as in a dream?

The judge now charged the jury briefly. It was unnecessary for him,
he said, to recapitulate evidence of so simple a character. The chief
question for the jury was as to the credibility of the witnesses. If the
witnesses for the prosecution were truthful and were not mistaken, the
inference of guilt seemed inevitable; this the defendant's counsel had
conceded. The defendant had proved a good reputation; upon that point
there was only this to be said: that, while such evidence was entitled
to weight, yet, on the other hand, crimes involving a breach of trust
could, from their very nature, be committed only by persons whose good
reputations secured them positions of trust.

The jury-room had evidently not been furnished by a ring. It had a long
table for debate, twelve hard chairs for repose, twelve spittoons for
luxury, and a clock.

The jury sat in silence for a few moments, as old Captain Nourse, who
had them in his keeping, and eyed them as if he was afraid that he might
lose one of them in a crack and be held accountable on his bond, rattled
away at the unruly lock. Looking at them then, you would have seen faces
all of a New England cast but one. There was a tall, powerful negro
called George Washington, a man well known in this county town, to which
he had come, as driftwood from the storm of war, in '65. Some of the
"boys" had heard him, in a great prayer-meeting in Washington--a city
which he always spoke of as his "namesake"--at the time of the great
review, say, in his strong voice, with that pathetic quaver in it: "Like
as de parched an' weary traveller hangs his harp upon de winder, an'
sighs for oysters in de desert, so I longs to res' my soul an' my
foot in Mass'-chusetts;" and they were so delighted with him that they
invited him on the spot to go home with them, and took up a collection
to pay his fare; and so he was a public character. As for his
occupation,--when the census-taker, with a wink to the boys in the
store, had asked him what it was, he had said, in that same odd tone:
"Putties up glass a little--whitewashes a little--" and, when the man
had made a show of writing all that down, "preaches a little." He might
have said, "preaches a big," for you could hear him half a mile away.

The foreman was a retired sea-captain. "Good cap'n--Cap'n Thomas," one
of his neighbors had said of him. "Allers gits good ships--never hez to
go huntin' 'round for a vessel. But it is astonishin' what differences
they is! Now there 's Cap'n A. K. P. Bassett, down to the West Harbor.
You let it git 'round that Cap'n A. K. P. is goin' off on a Chiny
voyage, and you 'll see half a dozen old shays to once-t, hitched all
along his fence of an arternoon, and wimmen inside the house, to git
Cap'n A. K. P. to take their boys. But you let Cap'n Thomas give out
that he wants boys, and he hez to glean 'em--from the poor-house, and
from step-mothers, and where he can: the women knows! Still," he added,
"Cap'n Thomas 's a good cap'n. I've nothin' to say ag'in him. He's
smart!"

"Gentlemen," said the foreman, when the officer, at last, had securely
locked them in, "shall we go through the formality of a ballot? If the
case were a less serious one, we might have rendered a verdict in our
seats."

"What's the use foolin' 'round ballotin'?" said a thick-set butcher.
"Ain't we all o' one mind?"

"It is for you to say, gentlemen," said the foreman. "I should n't want
to have it go abroad that we had not acted formally, if there was any
one disposed to cavil."

"Mr. Speaker," said George Washington, rising and standing in the
attitude of Webster, "I rises to appoint to order. We took ballast in de
prior cases, and why make flesh of one man an' a fowl of another?"

"Very well," said the foreman, a trifle sharply; "'the longest way round
is the shortest way home.'"

Twelve slips of paper were handed out, to be indorsed guilty,
"for form." They were collected in a hat and the foreman told them
over--"just for form." "'Guilty,' 'guilty,' 'guilty,' 'guilty,'--wait a
minute," he said, "here is a mistake. Here is one 'not guilty'--whose is
this?"

There was a pause.

"Whose is it?" said the foreman, sharply.

Eli turned a little red.

"It's mine," he said.

"Do you mean it?" said the foreman.

"Of course I mean it," he answered.

"Whew!" whistled the foreman. "Very well, sir; we'll have an
understanding, then. This case is proved to the satisfaction of every
man who heard it, I may safely say, but one. Will that one please state
the grounds of his opinion?"

"I ain't no talker," said Eli, "but I ain't satisfied he 's
guilty--that's all."

"Don't you believe the witnesses?"

"Mostly."

"Which one don't you believe?"

"I can't say. I don't believe he's guilty."

"Is there one that you think lied?"

No answer.

"Now it seems to me--" said a third juryman.

"One thing at a time, gentlemen," said the foreman. "Let us wait for
an answer from Mr. Smith. Is there any one that you think lied? We will
wait, gentlemen, for an answer."

There was a long pause. The trial seemed to Eli Smith to have shifted
from the court to this shabby room, and he was now the culprit.

All waited for him; all eyes were fixed upon him.

The clock ticked loud! Eli counted the seconds. He knew the
determination of the foreman.

The silence became intense.

"I want to say my say," said a short man in a pea-jacket,--a retired
San Francisco pilot, named Eldridge. "I entertain no doubt the man is
guilty. At the same time, I allow for differences of opinion. I
don't know this man that's voted 'not guilty,' but he seems to be a
well-meaning man. I don't know his reasons; probably he don't understand
the case. I should like to have the foreman tell the evidence over, so
as if he don't see it clear, he can ask questions, and we can explain."

"I second de motion," said George Washington.

There was a general rustle of approval.

"I move it," said the pilot, encouraged.

"Very well, Mr. Eldridge," said the foreman. "If there is no objection,
I will state the evidence, and if there is any loop-hole, I will trouble
Mr. Smith to suggest it as I go along;" and he proceeded to give a
summary of the testimony, with homely force.

"Now, sir?" he said, when he had finished.

"I move for another ballot," said Mr. Eldridge.

The result was the same. Eli had voted "not guilty."

"Mr. Smith," said the foreman, "this must be settled in some way. This
is no child's play. You can't keep eleven men here, trifling with them,
giving no pretence of a reason."

"I have n't no reasons, only that I don't believe he 's guilty," said
Eli. "I 'm not goin' to vote a man into State's-prison, when I don't
believe he done it," and he rose and walked to the window and looked
out. It was low tide. There was a broad stretch of mud in the distance,
covered with boats lying over disconsolate. A driving storm had emptied
the streets. He beat upon the rain-dashed glass a moment with his
fingers, and then he sat down again.

"Well, sir," said the foreman, "this is singular conduct. What do you
propose to do?"

Silence.

"I suppose you realize that the rest of us are pretty rapidly forming a
conclusion on this matter," said the foreman.

"Come! come!" said Mr. Eldridge; "don't be quite so hard on him,
Captain. Now, Mr. Smith," he said, standing up with his hands in his
coat-pockets and looking at Eli, "we know that there often is crooked
sticks on juries, that hold out alone--that's to be expected; but they
always argue, and stand to it the rest are fools, and all that. Now,
all is, we don't see why you don't sort of argue, if you 've got reasons
satisfactory to you. Come, now," he added, walking up to Eli, and
resting one foot on the seat of his chair, "why don't you tell it over?
and if we 're wrong, I 'm ready to join you."

Eli looked up at him.

"Did n't you ever know," he said, "of a man's takin' a cat off, to lose,
that his little girl did n't want drownded, and leavin' him ashore,
twenty or thirty miles, bee-line, from home, and that cat's bein' back
again the next day, purrin' 'round 's if nothin' had happened?"

"Yes," said Mr. Eldridge--"knew of just such a case."

"Very well," said Eli; "how does he find his way home?"

"Don't know," said Mr. Eldridge; "always has been a standing mystery to
me."

"Well," said Eli, "mark my words. There's such a thing as arguin', and
there 's such a thing as knowin' outright; and when you 'll tell me
how that cat inquires his way home, I '11 tell you how I know John Wood
ain't guilty."

This made a certain sensation, and Eli's stock went up.

An old, withered man rapped on the table.

"That's so!" he said; "and there's other sing'lar things! How is it that
a seafarin' man, that 's dyin' to home, will allers die on the ebbtide?
It never fails, but how does it happen? Tell me that! And there's more
ways than one of knowin' things, too!"

"I know that man ain't guilty," said Eli.

"Hark ye!" said a dark old man with a troubled face, rising and pointing
his finger toward Eli. "_Know_, you say? I _knew_, wunst. I _knew_ that
my girl, my only child, was good. One night she went off with a married
man that worked in my store, and stole my money--and where is she now?"
And then he added, "What I _know_ is, that every man hes his price. I
hev mine, and you hev yourn!"

"'Xcuse me, Mr. Speaker," said George Washington, rising with his hand
in his bosom; "as de question is befo' us, I wish to say that de las'
bro' mus' have spoken under 'xcitement. Every man _don_' have his price!
An' I hope de bro' will recant--like as de Psalmist goes out o' his way
to say '_In my haste_ I said, All men are liars.' He was a very
busy man, de Psalmist--writin' down hymns all day, sharpen'n' his
lead-pencil, bossin' 'roun' de choir--callin' Selah! Well, bro'n an'
sisters "--both arms going out, and his voice going up--" one day,
seems like, he was in gre't haste--got to finish a psalm for a monthly
concert, or such--and some man in-corrupted him, and lied; and bein' in
gre't haste--and a little old Adam in him--he says, right off, quick:
'_All_ men are liars!' But see! When he gits a little time to set back
and meditate, he says: 'Dis won' do--dere's Moses an' Job, an' Paul--dey
ain't liars!' An' den he don' sneak out, and 'low he said, 'All men is
lions,' or such. No! de Psalmist ain't no such man; but he owns up, 'an
'xplains. '_In my haste_,' he says, 'I said it.'"

The foreman rose and rapped.

"I await a motion," said he, "if our friend will allow me the privilege
of speaking."

Mr. Washington calmly bowed.

Then the foreman, when nobody seemed disposed to move, speaking slowly
at first, and piecemeal, alternating language with smoke, gradually
edged into the current of the evidence, and ended by going all over it
again, with fresh force and point. His cigar glowed and chilled in the
darkening room as he talked.

"Now," he said, when he had drawn all the threads together to the point
of guilt, "what are we going to do upon this evidence?"

"I 'll tell you something," said Eli. "I did n't want to say it because
I know what you 'll all think, but I 'll tell you, all the same."

"Ah!" said the foreman.

Eli stood up and faced the others.

"'Most all o' you know what our Bar is in a southeast gale. They ain't a
man here that would dare to try and cross it when the sea's breakin' on
it. The man that says he would, lies!" And he looked at the foreman, and
waited a moment.

"When my wife took sick, and I stopped goin' to sea, two year ago, and
took up boat-fishin', I did n't know half as much about the coast as the
young boys do, and one afternoon it was blowin' a gale, and we was all
hands comin' in, and passin' along the Bar to go sheer 'round it to the
west'ard, and Captain Fred Cook--he's short-sighted--got on to the Bar
before he knew it, and then he hed to go ahead, whether or no; and I was
right after him, and I s'posed he knew, and I followed him. Well, he was
floated over, as luck was, all right; but when I 'd just got on the Bar,
a roller dropped back and let my bowsprit down into the sand, and then
come up quicker'n lightnin' and shouldered the boat over, t' other end
first, and slung me into the water; and when I come up, I see somethin'
black, and there was John Wood's boat runnin' by me before the wind with
a rush--and 'fore I knew an'thing, he had me by the hair by one hand,
and in his boat, and we was over the Bar. Now, I tell you, a man that
looks the way I saw him look when I come over the gunwale, face up,
don't go 'round breakin' in and hookin' things. He hed n't one chance
in five, and he was a married man, too, with small children. And what's
more," he added incautiously, "he did n't stop there. When he found out,
this last spring, that I was goin' to lose my place, he lent me money
enough to pay the interest that was overdue on the mortgage, of his own
accord."

And he stopped suddenly.

"You have certainly explained yourself," said the foreman. "I think we
understand you distinctly."

"There is n't one word of truth in that idea," said Eli, flushing up,
"and you know it. I 've paid him back every cent. I know him better 'n
any of you, that's all, and when I know he ain't guilty, I won't say he
is; and I can set here as long as any other man."

"Lively times some folks 'll hev, when they go home," said a spare
tin-pedler, stroking his long yellow goatee. "Go into the store: nobody
speak to you; go to cattle-show: everybody follow you 'round; go to the
wharf: nobody weigh your fish; go to buy seed-cakes to the cart: baker
won't give no tick."

"How much does it cost, Mr. Foreman," said the butcher, "for a man 't
's obliged to leave town, to move a family out West? I only ask for
information. I have known a case where a man had to leave--could n't
live there no longer--wa' n't wanted."

There was a knock. An officer, sent by the judge, inquired whether the
jury were likely soon to agree.

"It rests with you, sir," said the foreman, looking at Eli.

But Eli sat doggedly with his hands in his pockets, and did not look up
or speak.

"Say to the judge that I cannot tell," said the foreman.

It was eight o'clock when the officer returned, with orders to take the
jury across the street to the hotel, to supper. They went out in pairs,
except that the juryman who was left to fall in with Eli made three
with the file ahead, and left Eli to walk alone. This was noticed by the
bystanders. At the hotel, Eli could not eat a mouthful. He was seated
at one end of the table, and was left entirely out of the conversation.
When the jury were escorted back to the courthouse, rumors had evidently
begun to arise from his having walked alone, for there was quite a
little crowd at the hotel door, to see them. They went as before: four
pairs, a file of three, and Eli alone. Then the spectators understood
it.

When the jury were locked into their room again for the night, Mr.
Eldridge sat down by Eli and lit his pipe.

"I understand," he said, "just how you feel. Now, between you and me,
there was a good-hearted fellow that kept me out of a bad mess once. I
've never told anybody just what it was, and I don't mean to tell you
now, but it brought my blood up standing, to find how near I 'd come to
putting a fine steamer and two hundred and forty passengers under water.
Well, one day, a year or so after that, this man had a chance to get a
good ship, only there was some talk against him, that he drank a little.
Well, the owners told him they wanted to see me, and he come to me, and
says he, 'Mr. Eldridge, I hope you 'll speak a good word for me; if
you do, I 'll get the ship, but if they refuse me this one, I 'm dished
everywhere.' Well, the owners put me the square question, and I had to
tell 'em. Well, I met him that afternoon on Sacramento Street, as white
as a sheet, and he would n't speak to me, but passed right by, and that
night he went and shipped before the mast. That's the last I ever heard
of him; but I had to do it. Now," he added, "this man 's been good to
you; but the case is proved, and you ought to vote with the rest of us."

"It ain't proved," said Eli. "The judge said that if any man had a
reasonable doubt, he ought to hold out. Now, I ain't convinced."

"Well, that 's easy said," replied Mr. Eldridge, a little hotly, and he
arose, and left him.

The jurymen broke up into little knots, tilted their chairs back, and
settled into the easiest positions that their cramped quarters allowed.
Most of them lit their pipes; the captain, and one or two whom he
honored, smoked fragrant cigars, and the room was soon filled with a
dense cloud.

Eli sat alone by the window.

"Sometimes sell two at one house," said a lank book-agent, arousing
himself from a reverie; "once sold three."

"I think the Early Rose is about as profitable as any," said a little
farmer, with a large circular beard. "I used to favor Jacobs's Seedling,
but they have n't done so well with me of late years."

"Sometimes," said the book-agent, picking his teeth with a quill, "you
'll go to a house, and they 'll say they can't be induced to buy a book
of any kind, historical, fictitious, or religious; but you just keep on
talking, and show the pictures--'Grant in Boyhood,' 'Grant a Tanner,'
Grant at Head-quarters,' 'Grant in the White House,' 'Grant before Queen
Victoria,' and they warm up, I tell you, and not infrequently buy."

"Do you sell de 'Illustrated Bible'," asked Washington, "wid de
Hypocrypha?"

"No; I have a more popular treatise--the 'Illustrated History of the
Bible.' Greater variety. Brings in the surrounding nations, in costume.
Cloth, three dollars; sheep, three-fifty; half calf, five-seventy-five;
full morocco, gilt edges, seven-fifty. Six hundred and seven
illustrations on wood and steel. Three different engravings of Abraham
alone. Four of Noah,--'Noah before the Flood,' 'Noah Building the
Ark,' 'Noah Welcoming the Dove,' 'Noah on Ararat,' Steel engraving of
Ezekiel's Wheel, explaining prophecy. Jonah under the gourd, Nineveh in
the distance."

Mr. Eldridge and Captain Thomas had drifted into a discussion of
harbors, and the captain had drawn his chair up to the table, and, with
a cigar in his mouth, was explaining an ingeniously constructed foreign
harbor. He was making a rough sketch, with a pen.

"Here is north," he said; "here is the coastline; here are the flats;
here are the sluicegates; they store the water here, in--"

Some of the younger men had their heads together, in a corner, about
the tin-pedler, who was telling stories of people he had met in his
journeys, which brought out repeated bursts of laughter.

In the corner farthest from Eli, a delicate-looking man began to tell
the butcher about Eli's wife.

"Twelve years ago this fall," he said, "I taught district-school in the
parish where she lived. She was about fourteen then. Her father was
a poor farmer, without any faculty. Her mother was dead, and she kept
house. I stayed there one week, boarding 'round."

"Prob'ly did n't git not much of any fresh meat that week," suggested
the butcher.

"She never said much, but it used to divert me to see her order around
her big brothers, just as if she was their mother. She and I got to be
great friends; but she was a queer piece. One day at school the girls in
her row were communicating, and annoying me, while the third class
was reciting in 'First Steps in Numbers,' and I was so incensed that
I called Lizzie--that's her name--right out, and had her stand up for
twenty minutes. She was a shy little thing, and set great store by
perfect marks. I saw that she was troubled a good deal, to have all of
them looking and laughing at her. But she stood there, with her hands
folded behind her, and not a smile or a word."

"Look out for a sullen cow," said the butcher.

"I felt afraid I had been too hasty with her, and I was rather sorry I
had been so decided--although, to be sure, she did n't pretend to deny
that she had been communicating."

"Of course," said the butcher: "no use lyin' when you 're caught in the
act."

"Well, after school, she stayed at her desk, fixing her dinner-pail, and
putting her books in a strap, and all that, till all the rest had gone,
and then she came up to my desk, where I was correcting compositions."

"Now for music!" said the butcher.

"She had been crying a little. Well, she looked straight in my face, and
said she, 'Mr. Pollard, I just wanted to say to you that I was n't doing
anything at all when you called me up;' and off she went. Now, that was
just like her,--too proud to say a word before the school."

But here his listener's attention was diverted by the voice of the
book-agent.

"The very best Bible for teachers, of course, is the limp-cover,
protected edges, full Levant morocco, Oxford, silk-sewed, kid-lined,
Bishop's Divinity Circuit, with concordance, maps of the Holy Land,
weights, measures, and money-tables of the Jews. Nothing like having a
really--"

"And so," said the captain, moving back his chair, "they let on the
whole head of water, and scour out the channel to a T."

And then he rapped upon the table.

"Gentlemen," he said, "please draw your chairs up, and let us take
another ballot."

The count resulted as before.

The foreman muttered something which had a scriptural sound. In a few
moments he drew Mr. Eldridge and two others aside. "Gentlemen," he
said to them, "I shall quietly divide the jury into watches, under your
charge: ten can sleep, while one wakes to keep Mr. Smith discussing the
question. I don't propose to have the night wasted."

And, by one man or another, Eli was kept awake.

"I don't see," said the book-agent, "why you should feel obliged to
stick it out any longer. Of course, you are under obligations. But you
've done more than enough already, so as that he can't complain of you,
and if you give in now, everybody 'll give you credit for trying to save
your friend, on the one hand, and, on the other hand, for giving in to
the evidence. So you 'll get credit both ways."

An hour later, the tin-pedler came on duty. He had not followed closely
the story about John Wood's loan, and had got it a little awry.

"Now, how foolish you be," he said, in a confidential tone. "Can't
you see that if you cave in now, after stan'n' out nine hours"--and
he looked at a silver watch with a brass chain, and stroked his
goatee--"nine hours and twenty-seven minutes--that you 've made jest
rumpus enough so as't he won't dare to foreclose on you, for fear they
'll say you went back on a trade. On t' other hand, if you hold clear
out, he'll turn you out-o'-doors to-morrow, for a blind, so 's to look
as if there wa' n't no trade between you. Once he gits off, he won't
know Joseph, you bet! That's what I 'd do," he added, with a sly laugh.
"Take your uncle's advice."

"The only trouble with that," said Eli, shortly, "is that I don't owe
him anything."

"Oh," said the pedler; "that makes a difference. I understood you did."

Three o'clock came, and brought Mr. El-dridge. He found Eli worn out
with excitement.

"Now, I don't judge you the way the others do," said Mr. Eldridge, in a
low tone, with his hand on Eli's knee. "I know, as I told you, just the
way you feel. But we can't help such things. Suppose, now, that I had
kept dark, and allowed to the owners that that man was always sober,
and I had heard, six months after, of thirty or forty men going to the
bottom because the captain was a little off his base; and then to think
of their wives and children at home. We have to do some hard things; but
I say, do the square thing, and let her slide."

"But I can't believe he 's guilty," said Eli.

"But don't you allow," said Mr. Eldridge, "that eleven men are more sure
to hit it right than one man?"

"Yes," said Eli, reluctantly, "as a general thing."

"Well, there's always got to be some give to a jury, just as in
everything else, and you ought to lay right down on the rest of us. It
is n't as if we were at all squirmish. Now, you know that if you hold
out, he 'll be tried again."

"Yes, I suppose so."

"Got to be--no other way," said Mr. Eldridge. "Now, the next time, there
won't be anybody like you to stand out, and the judge 'll know of this
scrape, and he'll just sock it to him."

Eli turned uneasily in his chair.

"And then it won't be understood in your place, and folks 'll turn
against you every way, and, what's worse, let you alone."

"I can stand it," said Eli, angrily. "Let 'em do as they like. They
can't kill me."

"They can kill your wife and break down your children," said Mr.
Eldridge. "Women and children can't stand it. Now, there's that man they
were speaking of; he lived down my way. He sued a poor, shiftless fellow
that had come from Pennsylvania to his daughter's funeral, and had him
arrested and taken off, crying, just before the funeral begun--after
they 'd even set the flowers on the coffin; and nobody'd speak to him
after that--they just let him alone; and after a while his wife took
sick of it--she was a nice, kindly woman--and she had sort of hysterics,
and finally he moved off West. And 't was n't long before the woman
died. Now, you can't undertake to do different from everybody else."

"Well," said Eli, "I know I wish it was done with."

Mr. Eldridge stretched his arms and yawned. Then he began to walk up and
down, and hum, out of tune. Then he stopped at Captain Thomas's chair.

"Suppose we try a ballot," he said. "He seems to give a little."

In a moment the foreman rapped.

"It is time we were taking another ballot, gentlemen," he said.

The sleepers rose, grumbling, from uneasy dreams.

"I will write 'guilty' on twelve ballots," said the foreman, "and if any
one desires to write in 'not,' of course he can."

When the hat came to Eli, he took one of the ballots and held it in his
hand a moment, and then he laid it on the table. There was a general
murmur. The picture which Mr. El-dridge had drawn loomed up before him.
But with a hasty hand he wrote in "not," dropped in the ballot, and
going back to his chair by the window, sat down.

There was a cold wave of silence.

Then Eli suddenly walked up to the foreman and faced him.

"Now," he said, "we 'll stop. The very next turn breaks ground. If you,
or any other man that you set on, tries to talk to me when I don't want
to hear, to worry me to death--look out!"

How the long hours wore on! How easy, sometimes, to resist an open
pressure, and how hard, with the resistance gone, to fight, as one that
beats the air! How the prospect of a whole hostile town loomed up, in
a mirage, before Eli! And then the picture rose before him of a long,
stately bark, now building, whose owner had asked him yesterday to be
first mate. And if his wife were only well, and he were only free from
this night's trouble, how soon, upon the long, green waves, he could
begin to redeem his little home!

And then came Mr. Eldridge, kind and friendly, to have another little
chat.

Morning came, cold and drizzly. An officer knocked at the door, and
called out, "Breakfast!" And in a moment, unwashed, and all uncombed,
except the tin-pedler, who always carried a beard-comb in his pocket,
they were marched across the street to the hotel.

There were a number of men on the piazza waiting to see them,--jurymen,
witnesses, and the accused himself, for he was on bail. He had seen the
procession the night before, and, like the others, had read its meaning.

"Eli knows I would n't do it," he had said to himself, "and he's going
to hang out, sure."

The jury began to turn from the court-house door. Everybody looked. A
file of two men, another file, another, another; would there come three
men, and then one? No; Eli no longer walked alone.

Everybody looked at Wood; he turned sharply away.

But this time the order of march in fact showed nothing, one way or the
other. It only meant that the judge, who had happened to see the jury
the night before returning from their supper, had sent for the high
sheriff in some temper,--for judges are human,--and had vigorously
intimated that if that statesman did not look after his fool of a
deputy, who let a jury parade secrets to the public view, he would!

The jury were in their room again. At nine o'clock came a rap, and a
summons from the court. The prosecuting attorney was speaking with the
judge when they went in. In a moment he took his seat.

"John Wood!" called out the clerk, and the defendant arose. His attorney
was not there.

"Mr. Foreman!" said the judge, rising. The jury arose. The silence of
the crowded courtroom was intense.

"Before the clerk asks you for a verdict, gentlemen," said the judge, "I
have something of the first importance to say to you, which has but this
moment come to my knowledge."

Eli changed color, and the whole court-room looked at him.

"There were some most singular rumors, after the case was given to you,
gentlemen, to the effect that there had been in this cause a criminal
abuse of justice. It is painful to suspect, and shocking to know,
that courts and juries are liable ever to suffer by such unprincipled
practices. After ten years upon the bench, I never witness a conviction
of crime without pain; but that pain is light, compared with the
distress of knowing of a wilful perversion of justice. It is a relief
to me to be able to say to you that such instances are, in my judgment,
exceedingly rare, and--so keen is the awful searching power of
truth--are almost invariably discovered."

The foreman touched his neighbor with his elbow. Eli folded his arms.

"As I said," continued the judge, "there were most singular rumors.
During the evening and the night, rumor, as is often the case, led to
evidence, and evidence has led to confession and to certainty. And the
district attorney now desires me to say to you that the chief officer of
the bank--who held the second key to the safe--is now under arrest for a
heavy defalcation, which a sham robbery was to conceal, and that you may
find the prisoner at the bar--not guilty. I congratulate you, gentlemen,
that you had not rendered an adverse verdict."

"Your Honor!" said Eli, and he cleared his throat, "I desire it to be
known that, even as the case stood last night, this jury had not agreed
to convict, and never would have!"

There was a hush, while a loud scratching pen indorsed the record of
acquittal. Then Wood walked down to the jury-box and took Eli's hand.

"Just what I told my wife all through," he said. "I knew you 'd hang
out!"

Eli's jury was excused for the rest the of day, and by noon he was in
his own village, relieved, too, of his most pressing burden: for George
Cahoon had met him on the road, and told him that he was not going to
the West, after all, for the present, and should not need his money.
But, as he turned the bend of the road and neared his house, he felt a
rising fear that some disturbing rumor might have reached his wife about
his action on the jury. And, to his distress and amazement, there she
was, sitting in a chair at the door.

"Lizzie!" he said, "what does this mean? Are you crazy?"

"I'll tell you what it means," she said, as she stood up with a little
smile and clasped her hands behind her. "This morning it got around and
came to me that you was standing out all alone for John Wood, and that
the talk was that they 'd be down on you, and drive you out of town,
and that everybody pitied _me_,--_pitied me!_ And when I heard that,
I thought I 'd see! And my strength seemed to come all back, and I got
right up and dressed myself. And what's more, I 'm going to get well
now!"

And she did.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Eli, by Heman White Chaplin

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELI ***

***** This file should be named 23005.txt or 23005.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/0/0/23005/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
