Project Gutenberg's The Man Who Stole A Meeting-House, by J. T. Trowbridge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Man Who Stole A Meeting-House
       1878, From "Coupon Bonds"

Author: J. T. Trowbridge

Release Date: October 24, 2007 [EBook #23165]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WHO STOLE A MEETING-HOUSE ***




Produced by David Widger






THE MAN WHO STOLE A MEETING-HOUSE

By J. T. Trowbridge

From "Coupon Bonds."

Copyright 1878, by James R. Osgood & Co


On a recent journey to the Pennsylvania oil regions, I stopped one
evening with a fellow-traveler at a village which had just been thrown
into a turmoil of excitement by the exploits of a horse-thief. As we sat
around the tavern hearth, after supper, we heard the particulars of the
rogue's capture and escape fully discussed; then followed many another
tale of theft and robbery, told amid curling puffs of tobacco-smoke;
until, at the close of an exciting story, one of the natives turned to
my traveling acquaintance, and, with a broad laugh, said, "Kin ye beat
that, stranger?"

"Well, I don't know--maybe I could if I should try. I never happened to
fall in with any such tall horse-stealing as you tell of, but I knew a
man who stole a meeting-house once."

"Stole a meetin'-house! That goes a little beyant anything yit,"
remarked another of the honest villagers. "Ye don't mean he stole it and
carried it away?"

"Stole it and carried it away," repeated my traveling companion,
seriously, crossing his legs, and resting his arm on the hack of his
chair. "And, more than all that, I helped him."

"How happened that?--for you don't look much like a thief yourself." All
eyes were now turned upon my friend, a plain New England farmer, whose
honest homespun appearance and candid speech commanded respect.

"I was his hired man, and I acted under orders. His name was
Jedwort--Old Jedwort, the boys called him, although he wasn't above
fifty when the crooked little circumstance happened which I'll make as
straight a story of as I can, if the company would like to hear it."

"Sartin, stranger! sartin! about stealin' the meetin'-house!" chimed in
two or three voices.

My friend cleared his throat, put his hair behind his ears, and with
a grave, smooth face, but with a merry twinkle in his shrewd gray eye,
began as follows:

"Jedwort I said his name was; and I shall never forget how he looked one
particular morning. He stood leaning on the front gate--or rather on the
post, for the gate itself was such a shackling concern a child couldn't
have leaned on't without breaking it down. And Jedwort was no child.
Think of a stoutish, stooping, duck-legged man, with a mountainous back,
strongly suggestive of a bag of grist under his shirt, and you have him.
That imaginary grist had been growing heavier and heavier, and he more
and more bent under it, for the last fifteen years and more, until his
head and neck just came forward out from between his shoulders like
a turtle's from its shell. His arms hung, as he walked, almost to the
ground. Being curved with the elbows outward, he looked for all the
world, in a front view, like a waddling interrogation-point inclosed
in a parenthesis. If man was ever a quadruped, as I've heard some folks
tell, and rose gradually from four legs to two, there must have been a
time, very early in his history, when he went about like Old Jedwort.

"The gate had been a very good gate in its day. It had even been a
genteel gate when Jedwort came into possession of the place by marrying
his wife, who inherited it from her uncle. That was some twenty years
before, and everything had been going to rack and ruin ever since.

"Jedwort himself had been going to rack and ruin, morally speaking. He
was a middling decent sort of man when I first knew him; and I judge
there must have been something about him more than common, or he
never could have got such a wife. But then women do marry, sometimes,
unaccountably. I've known downright ugly and disagreeable fellows to
work around, till by and by they would get a pretty girl fascinated by
something in them which nobody else could see, and then marry her in
spite of everything;--just as you may have seen a magnetizer on the
stage make his subjects do just what he pleased, or a black snake charm
a bird. Talk about women marrying with their eyes open, under such
circumstances! They don't marry with their eyes open: they are put to
sleep, in one sense, and a'n't more than half responsible for what they
do, if they are that. Then rises the question that has puzzled wiser
heads than any of ours here, and will puzzle more yet, till society is
different from what it is now--how much a refined and sensitive woman is
bound to suffer from a coarse and disgusting master, legally called her
husband, before she is entitled to break off a bad bargain she scarce
had a hand in making. I've sat here to-night and heard about men getting
goods under false pretences; you've told some astonishing big stories,
gentlemen, about rogues stealing horses and sleighs; and I'm going to
tell you about the man who stole a meeting-house; but, when all is said,
I guess it will be found that more extraordinary thieving than all that
often goes on under our own eyes, and nobody takes any notice of
it. There's such a thing, gentlemen, as getting hearts under false
pretences. There's such a thing as a man's stealing a wife.

"I speak with feeling on this subject, for I had an opportunity of
seeing what Mrs. Jedwort had to put up with from a man no woman of her
stamp could do anything but detest. She was the patientest creature you
ever saw. She was even too patient. If I had been tied to such a cub, I
think I should have cultivated the beautiful and benignant qualities
of a wildcat; there would have been one good fight, and one of us would
have been living, and the other would have been dead, and that would
have been the end of it. But Mrs. Jedwort bore and bore untold miseries
and a large number of children. She had had nine of these, and three
were under the sod and six above it when Jedwort ran off with the
meeting-house in the way I am going on to tell you. There was Maria, the
oldest girl, a perfect picture of what her mother had been at nineteen.
Then there were the two boys, Dave and Dan, fine young fellows, spite
of their father. Then came Lottie, and Susie, and then Willie, a little
four-year-old.

"It was amazing to see what the mother would do to keep her family
looking decent with the little means she had. For Jedwort was the
tightest screw ever you saw. It was avarice that had spoiled him, and
came so near turning him into a beast. The boys used to say he grew so
bent looking in the dirt for pennies. That was true of his mind, if not
of his body. He was a poor man, and a pretty respectable man, when he
married his wife; but he had no sooner come into possession of a little
property than he grew crazy for more.

"There are a good many men in the world, that nobody looks upon as
monomaniacs, who are crazy in just that sort of way. They are all for
laying up money, depriving themselves of comforts, and their families
of the advantages of society and education, just to add a few dollars to
their hoard every year; and so they keep on till they die and leave it
to their children, who would be much better off if a little more had
been invested in the cultivation of their minds and manners, and less in
stocks and bonds.

"Jedwort was just one of that class of men, although perhaps he carried
the fault I speak of a little to excess. A dollar looked so big to him,
and he held it so close, that at last he couldn't see much of anything
else. By degrees he lost all regard for decency and his neighbor's
opinions. His children went barefoot, even after they got to be great
boys and girls, because he was too mean to buy them shoes. It was
pitiful to see a nice, interesting girl, like Maria, go about looking as
she did, while her father was piling his money into the bank. She wanted
to go to school and learn music, and be somebody; but he wouldn't keep a
hired girl, and so she was obliged to stay at home and do housework; and
she could no more have got a dollar out of him to pay for clothes and
tuition than you could squeeze sap out of a hoe-handle.

"The only way his wife could ever get anything new for the family was by
stealing butter from her own dairy, and selling it behind his back.
'You needn't say anything to Mr. Jedwort about this batch of butter,'
she would hint to the storekeeper; 'but you may hand the money to me,
or I will take my pay in goods.' In this way a new gown, or a piece of
cloth for the boys' coats, or something else the family needed, would be
smuggled into the house, with fear and trembling lest old Jedwort should
make a row and find where the money came from.

"The house inside was kept neat as a pin; but everything around it
looked terribly shiftless. It was built originally in an ambitious
style, and painted white. It had four tall front pillars, supporting the
portion of the roof that came over the porch--lifting up the eyebrows of
the house, if I may so express myself, and making it look as if it was
going to sneeze. Half the blinds were off their hinges, and the rest
flapped in the wind. The front doorstep had rotted away. The porch had
once a good floor, but for years Jedwort had been in the habit of going
to it whenever he wanted a board for the pig-pen, until not a bit of
floor was left.

"But I began to tell about Jedwort leaning on the gate that morning. We
had all noticed him; and as Dave and I brought in the milk, his mother
asked, 'What is your father planning now? Half the time he stands there,
looking up the road; or else he's walking up that way in a brown study.'

"'He's got his eye on the old meeting-house,' says Dave, setting down
his pail. 'He has been watching it and walking round it, off and on, for
a week.'

"That was the first intimation I had of what the old fellow was up
to. But after breakfast he followed me out of the house, as if he had
something on his mind to say to me.

"'Stark,' says he, at last, 'you've always insisted on't that I wasn't
an enterprisin' man.'

"'I insist on't still,' says I; for I was in the habit of talking mighty
plain to him, and joking him pretty hard sometimes. 'If I had this farm,
I'd show you enterprise. You wouldn't see the hogs in the garden half
the time, just for want of a good fence to keep 'em out. You wouldn't
see the very best strip of land lying waste, just for want of a ditch.
You wouldn't see that stone wall by the road tumbling down year after
year, till by and by you won't be able to see it for the weeds and
thistles.'

"'Yes,' says he, sarcastically, 'ye'd lay-out ten times as much money
on the place as ye'd ever git back agin, I've no doubt. But I believe in
economy.'

"That provoked me a little, and I said, 'Economy! You're one of the kind
of men that'll skin a flint for sixpence and spoil a jack-knife worth a
shilling. You waste fodder and grain enough every three years to pay for
a bigger barn--to say nothing of the inconvenience.'

"'Wal, Stark,' says he, grinning and scratching his head, 'I've made up
my mind to have a bigger barn, if I have to steal one.'

"'That won't be the first thing you've stole, neither,' says I.

"He flared up at that. 'Stole?' says he. 'What did I ever steal?'

"'Well, for one thing, the rails the freshet last spring drifted off
from Talcott's land onto yours, and you grabbed: what was that but
stealing?'

"'That was luck. He couldn't swear to his rails. By the way, they'll
jest come in play now.'

"'They've come in play already,' says I. 'They've gone on to the old
fences all over the farm, and I could use a thousand more without making
much show.'

"'That's 'cause you're so dumbed extravagant with rails, as you are
with everything else. A few loads can be spared from the fences here
and there, as well as not. Harness up the team, boys, and git together
enough to make about ten rods o' zigzag, two rails high.'

"'Two rails?' says Dave, who had a healthy contempt for the old man's
narrow, contracted way of doing things. 'What's the good of such a fence
as that?'

"'It'll be,' says I, 'like the single bar in music. When our old singing
master asked his class once what a single bar was, Bill Wilkins spoke
up and said, "It's a bar that horses and cattle jump over, and pigs and
sheep run under."'

"'What do you expect to keep out with two rails?'

"'The _law_, boys, the _law_,' says Jedwort. 'I know what I'm about.
I'll make a fence the _law_ can't run under nor jump over; and I don't
care a cuss for the cattle and pigs. You git the rails, and I'll rip
some boards off'n the pig-pen to make stakes.'

"'Boards a'n't good for nothin' for stakes,' says Dave. 'Besides, none
can't be spared from the pig-pen.'

"'I'll have boards enough in a day or two for forty pig-pens,' says
Jedwort. 'Bring along the rails and dump 'em out in the road for the
present, and say nothin' to nobody.'

"We got the rails, and he made his stakes; and right away after dinner
he called us out. 'Come, boys,' says he, 'now we'll astonish the
natives.'

"The wagon stood in the road, with the last jag of rails still on it.
Jedwort piled on his stakes, and threw on the crowbar and axe, while we
were hitching up the team.

"'Now, drive on, Stark,' says he.

"'Yes; but where shall I drive to?'

"'To the old meetin'-house,' says Jedwort, trudging on ahead.

"The old meeting-house stood on an open common, at the northeast corner
of his farm. A couple of cross-roads bounded it on two sides; and it
was bounded on the other two by Jedwort's overgrown stone wall. It was
a square, old-fashioned building, with a low steeple, that had a
belfry, but no bell in it, and with a high, square pulpit and high,
straight-backed pews inside. It was now some time since meetings
had been held there; the old society that used to meet there having
separated, one division of it building a fashionable chapel in the North
Village, and the other a fine new church at the Centre.

"Now, the peculiarity about the old church property was, that nobody had
any legal title to it. A log meeting-house had been built there when the
country was first settled and the land was of no account. In the course
of time that was torn down, and a good frame house put up in its place.
As it belonged to the whole community, no title, either to the house or
land, was ever recorded; and it wasn't until after the society dissolved
that the question came up as to how the property was to be disposed of.
While the old deacons were carefully thinking it over, Jed-wort was on
hand, to settle it by putting in his claim.

"'Now, boys,' says he, 'ye see what I'm up to.'

"'Yes,' says I, provoked as I could be at the mean trick, 'and I knew it
was some such mischief all along. You never show any enterprise, as you
call it, unless it is to get the start of a neighbor. Then you are wide
awake; then you are busy as the Devil in a gale of wind.'

"'But what _are_ you up to, pa?' says Dan, who didn't see the trick yet.

"The old man says, 'I'm goin' to fence in the rest part of my farm.'

"'What rest part?'

"'This part that never was fenced; the old meetin'-house common.'

"'But, pa,' says Dave, disgusted as I was, 'you've no claim on that.'

"'Wal, if I ha'n't, I'll make a claim. Give me the crowbar. Now, here's
the corner, nigh as I can squint'; and he stuck the bar into the ground.
'Make a fence to here from the wall, both sides.'

"'Sho, pa!' says Dan, looking bewildered; 'ye a'n't goin' to fence in
the old meetin'-house, be ye?'

"'That's jest what I'm goin' to do. Go and git some big stuns from the
wall--the biggest ye can find, to rest the corners of the fence on.
String the rails along by the road, Stark, and go for another load.
Don't stand gawpin' there!'

"'_Gawpin'?_' says I; 'it's enough to make anybody _gawp_. You do beat
all the critters I ever had to deal with. Haven't ye disgraced your
family enough already, without stealing a meeting-house?'

"'How have I disgraced my family?' says he.

"Then I put it to him. 'Look at your children; it's all your wife can do
to prevent 'em from growing up in rags and dirt and ignorance, because
you are too close-fisted to clothe 'em decently or send 'em to school.
Look at your house and yard. To see an Irishman's shanty in such a
condition seems appropriate enough, but a genteel place, a house with
pillars, run down and gone to seed like that, is an eyesore to the
community. Then look at your wife. You never would have had any property
to mismanage if it hadn't been for her; and see the way you show your
gratitude for it. You won't let her go into company, nor have company at
home; you won't allow a hired girl in the house, but she and Maria have
to do all the drudgery. You make perfect slaves of 'em. I swear, if it
wa'n't for your wife, I wouldn't work for you an hour longer; but she's
the best woman in the world, after all you've done to break her spirit,
and I hate to leave her.'

"The old fellow squirmed, and wrenched the crowbar in the ground, then
snarled back: 'Yes! you're waitin' for me to die; then you mean to step
into my shoes.'

"'I hope you'll have a decenter pair than them you've got on, if I'm to
step into 'em,' says I.

"'One thing about it,' says he, 'she won't have ye.'

"'I should think,' says I, 'a woman that would marry you would have
'most anybody.'

"So we had it back and forth, till by and by he left me to throw off the
rails, and went to show the boys how to build the fence.

"'Look here,' says he; 'jest put a thunderin' big stun to each corner;
then lay your rail on; then drive your pair of stakes over it like a
letter X.' He drove a pair. 'Now put on your rider. There's your letter
X, ridin' one length of rails and carryin' another. That's what I call
puttin' yer alphabet to a practical use; and I say there a'n't no sense
in havin' any more education than ye _can_ put to a practical use. I've
larnin' enough to git along in the world; and if my boys have as much
as I've got, they'll git along. Now work spry, for there comes Deacon
Talcott.'

"'Wal, wall' says the Deacon, coming up, puffing with excitement; 'what
ye doin' to the old meetin'-house?'

"'Wal,' says Jedwort, driving away at his stakes, and never looking
up, 'I've been considerin' some time what I should do with't, and I've
concluded to make a barn on't.'

"'Make a barn! make a barn!' cries the Deacon. 'Who give ye liberty to
make a barn of the house of God?'

"'Nobody; I take the liberty. Why shouldn't I do what I please with my
own prop'ty?'

"'Your own property--what do you mean? 'Ta'n't your meetin'-house.'

"'Whose is't, if 'ta'n't mine?' says Jedwort, lifting his turtle's head
from between his horizontal shoulders, and grinning in the Deacon's
face.

"'It belongs to the society,' says the Deacon.'

"'But the s'ciety's pulled up stakes and gone off.'

"'It belongs to individooals of the society--to individooals.'

"'Wal, I'm an individooal,' says Jedwort.

"'You! you never went to meetin' here a dozen times in your life!'

"'I never did have my share of the old meet-in'-house, that's a fact,'
says Jedwort; 'but I'll make it up now.'

"'But what are ye fencin' up the common for?' says the Deacon.

"'It'll make a good calf-pastur'. I've never had my share o' the vally
o' that, either. I've let my neighbors' pigs and critters run on't long
enough; and now I'm jest goin' to take possession o' my own.'

"'Your own!' says the Deacon, in perfect consternation. 'You've no deed
on't.'

"'Wal, have you?'

"'No--but--the society--'

"'The s'ciety, I tell ye,' says Jedwort, holding his head up longer than
I ever knew him to hold it up at a time and grinning all the while in
Tal-cott's face--'the s'ciety is split to pieces. There a'n't no s'ciety
now--any more'n a pig's a pig arter you've butchered and e't it. You've
e't the pig amongst ye, and left me the pen. The s'ciety never had a
deed o' this 'ere prop'ty; and no man never had a deed o' this e're
prop'ty. My wife's gran'daddy, when he took up the land here, was a
good-natered sort of man, and he allowed a corner on't for his neighbors
to put up a temp'rary meetin'-house. That was finally used up--the kind
o' preachin' they had them days was enough to use up in a little time
any house that wa'n't fire-proof; and when that was preached to pieces,
they put up another shelter in its place. This is it. And now't the
land a'n't used no more for the puppose 'twas lent for, it goes back
nat'rally to the estate 'twas took from, and the buildin's along with
it.'

"'That's all a sheer fabrication,' says the Deacon. 'This land was never
a part of what's now your farm, any more than it was a part of mine.'

"'Wal,' says Jedwort, 'I look at it in my way, and you've a perfect
right to look at it in your way. But I'm goin' to make sure o' my way,
by puttin' a fence round the hull concern.'

"'And you're usin' some of my rails for to do it with!' says the Deacon.

"'Can you swear they're your rails?'

"'Yes, I can; they're the rails the freshet carried off from my farm
last spring, and landed on to yourn.'

"'So I've heard ye say. But can you swear to the partic'lar rails? Can
you swear, for instance, 't this 'ere is your rail? or this 'ere one?'

"'No; I can't swear to precisely them two--but--'

"'Can you swear to these two? or to any one or two?' says Jedwort. 'No,
ye can't. Ye can swear to the lot in general, but you can't swear to
any partic'lar rail, and that kind o' swearin' won't stand law, Deacon
Talcott. I don't boast of bein' an edicated man, but I know suthin' o'
what law is, and when I know it, I dror a line there, and I toe that
line, and I make my neighbors toe that line, Deacon Talcott. Nine p'ints
o' the law is possession, and I'll have possession o' this 'ere house
and land by fencin' on't in; and though every man't comes along should
say these 'ere rails belong to them, I'll fence it in with these 'ere
very rails.'

"Jedwort said this, wagging his obstinate old head, and grinning with
his face turned up pugnaciously at the Deacon; then went to work again
as if he had settled the question, and didn't wish to discuss it any
further.

"As for Talcott, he was too full of wrath and boiling indignation to
answer such a speech. He knew that Jedwort had managed to get the start
of him with regard to the rails, by mixing a few of his own with those
he had stolen, so that nobody could tell 'em apart; and he saw at once
that the meeting-house was in danger of going the same way, just for
want of an owner to swear out a clear title to the property. He did
just the wisest thing when he swallowed his vexation, and hurried off to
alarm the leading men of the two societies, and to consult a lawyer.

"'He'll stir up the old town like a bumblebee's nest,' says Jedwort.
'Hurry up, boys, or there'll be a buzzin' round our ears 'fore we git
through!'

"'I wish ye wouldn't, pa!' says Dave, 'Why don't we 'tend to our own
business, and be decent, like other folks? I'm sick of this kind of
life.'

"'Quit it, then,' says Jedwort.

"'Do you tell me to quit it?' says Dave, dropping the end of a rail he
was handling.

"'Yes, I do; and do it dumbed quick, if ye can't show a proper respect
to your father!"

"Dave turned white as a sheet, and he trembled as he answered back, 'I
should be glad to show you respect, if you was a man I could feel any
respect for.'

"At that Jedwort caught hold of the iron bar that was sticking in the
ground, where he had been making a hole for a stake, and pulled away
at it. 'I'll make a stake-hole in you!' says he. 'It's enough to have a
sassy hired man round, without bein' jawed by one's own children!'

"Dave was out of reach by the time the bar came out of the ground.

"'Come here, you villain!' says the old man.

"'I'd rather be excused,' says Dave, backing off. 'I don't want any
stake-holes made in me to-day. You told me to quit, and I'm going to,
You may steal your own meeting-houses in future; I won't help.'

"There was a short race. Dave's young legs proved altogether too smart
for the old waddler's, and he got off. Then Jedwort, coming back,
wheezing and sweating, with his iron bar, turned savagely on me.

"I've a good notion to tell you to go too!'

"'Very well, why don't ye?' says I. 'Im ready.'

"'There's no livin' with ye, ye're gettin' so dumbed sassy! What I keep
ye for is a mystery to me.'

"'No, it a'n't; you keep me because you can't get another man to fill my
place. You put up with my sass for the money I bring ye in.'

"'Hold your yawp,' says he, 'and go and git another load of rails. If ye
see Dave, tell him to come back to work.'

"I did see Dave, but, instead of telling him to go back, I advised him
to put out from the old home and get his living somewhere else. His
mother and Maria agreed with me; and when the old man came home that
night Dave was gone.

"When I got back with my second load, I found the neighbors assembling
to witness the stealing of the old meeting-house, and Jedwort was
answering their remonstrances.

"'A meetin'-house is a respectable kind o' prop'ty to have round,' says
he. 'The steeple'll make a good show behind my house. When folks ride
by, they'll stop and look, and say, "There's a man keeps a private
meetin'-house of his own." I can have preachin' in't, too, if I want. I'm
able to hire a preacher of my own, or I can preach myself and save the
expense.'

"Of course, neither sarcasm nor argument could have any effect on such a
man. As the neighbors were going away, Jedwort shouted after 'em: 'Call
agin. Glad to see ye. There'll be more sport in a few days, when I take
the dumbed thing away.' (The dumbed thing was the meeting-house.) 'I
invite ye all to see the show. Free gratis. It'll be good as a circus,
and a 'tarnal sight cheaper. The women can bring their knittin', and the
gals their everlastin' tattin'. As it'll be a pious kind o' show, bein'
it's a meetin'-house, guess I'll have notices gi'n out from the pulpits
the Sunday afore.'

"The common was fenced in by sundown; and the next day Jedwort had over
a house-mover from the North Village to look and see what could be done
with the building. 'Can ye snake it over, and drop it back of my house?'
says he.

"It'll be a hard job,' says old Bob, 'without you tear down the steeple
fust.'

"But Jedwort said, 'What's a meetin'-house 'thout a steeple? I've got my
heart kind o' set on that steeple, and I'm bound to go the hull hog on
this 'ere concern, now I've begun.'

"'I vow,' says Bob, examining the timbers, 'I won't warrant but the old
thing'll all tumble down.'

"'I'll resk it.'

"'Yes; but who'll resk the lives of me and my men?'

"'O, you'll see if it's re'ly goin' to tumble, and look out. I'll engage
't me and my boys'll do the most dangerous part of the work. Dumbed if
I wouldn't agree to ride in the steeple and ring the bell if there was
one.'

"I've never heard that the promised notices were read from the pulpits;
but it wasn't many days before Bob came over again, bringing with him
this time his screws and ropes and rollers, his men and timbers, horse
and capstan; and at last the old house might have been seen on its
travels.

"It was an exciting time all around. The societies found that Jedwort's
fence gave him the first claim to house and land unless a regular siege
of the law was gone through to beat him off--and then it might turn out
that he would beat them. Some said fight him; some said let him be--the
thing a'n't worth going to law for; and so, as the leading men couldn't
agree as to what should be done, nothing was done. That was just what
Jedwort had expected, and he laughed in his sleeve while Bob and his
boys screwed up the old meeting-house, and got their beams under it, and
set it on rollers, and slued it around, and slid it on the timbers laid
for it across into Jedwort's field, steeple foremost, like a locomotive
on a track.

"It was a trying time for the women folks at home. Maria had declared
that, if her father did persist in stealing the meeting-house, she would
not stay a single day after it, but would follow Dave.

"That touched me pretty close, for, to tell the truth, it was rather
more Maria than her mother that kept me at work for the old man. 'If you
go,' says I, 'then there is no object for me to stay; I shall go too.'

"'That's what I supposed,' says she; 'for there's no reason in the world
why you should stay. But then Dan will go; and who'll be left to take
sides with mother? That's what troubles me. Oh, if she could only
go too! But she won't; and she couldn't if she would, with the other
children depending on her. Dear, dear! what shall we do?'

"The poor girl put her head on my shoulder, and cried; and if I should
own up to the truth, I suppose I cried a little too. For where's the man
that can hold a sweet woman's head on his shoulder, while she sobs out
her trouble, and he hasn't any power to help her--who, I say, can do any
less, under such circumstances, than drop a tear or two for company?

"'Never mind; don't hurry,' says Mrs. Jed-wort. 'Be patient, and wait a
while, and it'll all turn out right, I'm sure.'

"'Yes, you always say, "Be patient, and wait!"' says Maria, brushing
back her hair. 'But, for my part, I'm tired of waiting, and my patience
has given out long ago. We can't always live in this way, and we may as
well make a change now as ever. But I can't bear the thought of going
and leaving you.'

"Here the two younger girls came in; and, seeing that crying was the
order of the day, they began to cry; and when they heard Maria talk
of going, they declared they would go; and even little Willie, the
four-year-old, began to howl.

"'There, there! Maria! Lottie! Susie! said Mrs. Jedwort, in her calm
way; 'Willie, hush up! I don't know what we are to do; but I feel that
something is going to happen that will show us the right way, and we are
to wait. Now go and wash the dishes, and set the cheese.'

"That was just after breakfast, the second day of the moving; and sure
enough, something like what she prophesied did happen before another
sun.

"The old frame held together pretty well till along toward night, when
the steeple showed signs of seceding. 'There she goes! She's falling
now!' sung out the boys, who had been hanging around all day in hopes of
seeing the thing tumble.

"The house was then within a few rods of where Jedwort wanted it; but
Bob stopped right there, and said it wasn't safe to haul it another
inch. 'That steeple's bound to come down, if we do,' says he.

"'Not by a dumbed sight, it a'n't,' says Jedwort, 'Them cracks a'n't
nothin'; the j'ints is all firm yit.' He wanted Bob to go up and
examine; but Bob shook his head--the concern looked too shaky. Then he
told me to go up; but I said I hadn't lived quite long enough, and had
a little rather be smoking my pipe on _terra firma_. Then the boys began
to hoot. 'Dumbed if ye a'n't all a set of cowards,' says he. 'I'll go up
myself.'

"We waited outside while he climbed up inside. The boys jumped on the
ground to jar the steeple, and make it fall. One of them blew a horn--as
he said, to bring down the old Jericho--and another thought he'd help
things along by starting up the horse, and giving the building a little
wrench. But Bob put a stop to that; and finally out came a head from the
belfry window; It was Jedwort, who shouted down to us: 'There ain't a
j'int or brace gi'n out. Start the hoss, and I'll ride. Pass me up that
'ere horn, and--'

"Just then there came a cracking and loosening of timbers; and we that
stood nearest had only time to jump out of the way, when down came the
steeple crashing to the ground, with Jedwort in it."

"I hope it killed the cuss," said one of the village story-tellers.

"Worse than that," replied my friend; "it just cracked his skull--not
enough to put an end to his miserable life, but only to take away what
little sense he had. We got the doctors to him, and they patched up his
broken head; and, by George, it made me mad to see the fuss the women
folks made over him. It would have been my way to let him die; but
they were as anxious and attentive to him as if he had been the kindest
husband and most indulgent father that ever lived; for that's women's
style: they're unreasoning creatures.

"Along toward morning, we persuaded Mrs. Jedwort, who had been up all
night, to lie down a spell and catch a little rest, while Maria and I
sat up and watched with the old man. All was still except our whispers
and his heavy breathing; there was a lamp burning in the next room; when
all of a sudden a light shone into the windows, and about the same time
we heard a roaring and crackling sound. We looked out, and saw the night
all lighted up, as if by some great fire. As it appeared to be on the
other side of the house, we ran to the door, and there what did we see
but the old meeting-house all in flames! Some fellows had set fire to it
to spite Jedwort. It must have been burning some time inside; for when
we looked out the flames had burst through the roof.

"As the night was perfectly still, except a light wind blowing away from
the other buildings on the place, we raised no alarm, but just stood
in the door and saw it burn. And a glad sight it was to us, you may
be sure. I just held Maria close to my side, and told her that all was
well--it was the best thing that could happen. 'O yes,' says she, 'it
seems to me as though a kind Providence was burning up his sin and home
out of our sight.

"I had never yet said anything to her about marriage--for the time to
come at that had never seemed to arrive; but there's nothing like a
little excitement to bring things to a focus. You've seen water in a
tumbler just at the freezing-point, but not exactly able to make up its
mind to freeze, when a little jar will set the crystals forming, and in
a minute what was liquid is ice. It was the shock of events that night
that touched my life into crystals--not of ice, gentlemen, by any manner
of means.

"After the fire had got along so far that the meeting-house was a gone
case, an alarm was given probably by the very fellows that set it, and a
hundred people were on the spot before the thing had done burning.

"Of course these circumstances put an end to the breaking up of the
family. Dave was sent for, and came home. Then, as soon as we saw that
the old man's brain was injured so that he wasn't likely to recover his
mind, the boys and I went to work and put that farm through a course of
improvement it would have done your eyes good to see. The children were
sent to school, and Mrs. Jedwort had all the money she wanted now to
clothe them, and to provide the house with comforts, without stealing
her own butter. Jedwort was a burden; but, in spite of him, that was
just about the happiest family, for the next four years, that ever lived
on this planet.

"Jedwort soon got his bodily health, but I don't think he knew one of
us again after his hurt. As near as I could get at his state of mind, he
thought he had been changed into some sort of animal. He seemed inclined
to take me for a master, and for four years he followed me around like a
dog. During that time he never spoke, but only whined and growled. When
I said, 'Lie down,' he'd lie down; and when I whistled he'd come.

"I used sometimes to make him work; and certain simple things he would
do very well, as long as I was by. One day I had a jag of hay to get in;
and, as the boys were away, I thought I'd have him load it. I pitched it
on to the wagon about where it ought to lie, and looked to him only to
pack it down. There turned out to be a bigger load than I had expected,
and the higher it got, the worse the shape of it, till finally, as I
was starting it toward the barn, off it rolled, and the old man with it,
head foremost.

"He struck a stone heap, and for a moment I thought he was killed. But
he jumped up and spoke for the first time. '_I'll blow it_,' says he,
finishing the sentence he had begun four years before, when he called
for the horn to be passed up to him.

"I couldn't have been much more astonished if one of the horses had
spoken. But I saw at once that there was an expression in Jedwort's face
that hadn't been there since his tumble in the belfry; and I knew that,
as his wits had been knocked out of him by one blow on the head, so
another blow had knocked 'em in again.

"'Where's Bob?' says he, looking all round.

"'Bob?' says I, not thinking at first who he meant. Oh, Bob is dead--he
has been dead these three years.'

"Without noticing my reply, he exclaimed: 'Where did all that hay come
from? Where's the old meetin'-house?'

"'Don't you know?' says I. 'Some rogues set fire to it the night after
you got hurt, and burnt it up.'

"He seemed then just beginning to realize that something extraordinary
had happened.

"'Stark,' says he, 'what's the matter with ye? You're changed.'

"'Yes,' say I, 'I wear my beard now, and I've grown older!'

"'Dumbed if 'ta'n't odd!' says he. 'Stark, what in thunder's the matter
with _me?_

"'You've had meeting-house on the brain for the past four years,' says
I; 'that's what's the matter.'

"It was some time before I could make him understand that he had been
out of his head, and that so long a time had been a blank to him.

"Then he said, 'Is this my farm?'

"'Don't you know it?' says I.

"'It looks more slicked up than ever it used to,' says he.

"'Yes,' says I; 'and you'll find everything else on the place slicked up
in about the same way.'

"'Where's Dave?' says he.

"'Dave has gone to town to see about selling the wool.'

"'Where's Dan?'

"'Dan's in college. He takes a great notion to medicine; and we're going
to make a doctor of him.'

"'Whose house is that?' says he, as I was taking him home.

"'No wonder you don't know it,' says I. 'It has been painted, and
shingled, and had new blinds put on; the gates and fences are all in
prime condition; and that's a new barn we put up a couple of years ago.'

"'Where does the money come from, to make all these improvements?'

"'It comes off the place,' says I. 'We haven't run in debt the first
cent for anything, but we've made the farm more profitable than it ever
was before.'

"'That _my_ house?' he repeated wonderingly, as we approached it. 'What
sound is that?'

"'That's Lottie practicing her lesson on the piano.'

"'A pianer in my house?' he muttered. 'I can't stand that!' He listened.
'It sounds pooty, though!'

"'Yes, it does sound pretty, and I guess you'll like it How does the
place suit you?'

"'It _looks_ pooty.' He started. 'What young lady is that?'

"It was Lottie, who had left her music and stood by the window.

"'My dahter! ye don't say! Dumbed if she a'n't a mighty nice gal.'

"'Yes,' says I; 'she takes after her mother.'

"Just then Susie, who heard talking, ran to the door.

"'Who's that agin?' says Jedwort.

"I told him.

"'Wal, _she's_ a mighty nice-lookin' gal!'

"'Yes,' says I, she takes after her mother.'

"Little Willie, now eight years old, came out of the woodshed with a
bow-and-arrow in his hand, and stared like an owl, hearing his father
talk.

"'What boy is that?' says Jedwort. And when I told him, he muttered,
'He's an ugly-looking brat!'

"'He's more like his father,' says I.

"The truth is, Willie was such a fine boy the old man was afraid to
praise him, for fear I'd say of him, as I'd said of the girls, that he
favored his mother.

"Susie ran back and gave the alarm; and then out came mother, and Maria
with her baby in her arms, for I forgot to tell you that we had been
married now nigh on to two years.

"Well, the women folks were as much astonished as I had been when
Jedwort first spoke, and a good deal more delighted. They drew him into
the house; and I am bound to say he behaved remarkably well. He kept
looking at his wife, and his children, and his grandchild, and the new
paper on the walls, and the new furniture, and now and then asking a
question or making a remark.

"'It all comes back to me now,' says he at last. 'I thought I was living
in the moon, with a superior race of human bein's; and this is the
place, and you are the people.'

"It wasn't more than a couple of days before he began to pry around, and
find fault, and grumble at the expense; and I saw there was danger of
things relapsing into something like their former condition. So I took
him one side, and talked to him.

"'Jedwort,' says I, 'you're like a man raised from the grave. You was
the same as buried to your neighbors, and now they come and look at you
as they would at a dead man come to life. To you, it's like coming into
a new world, and I'll leave it to you now, if you don't rather like the
change from the old state of things to what you see around you to-day.
You've seen how the family affairs go on--how pleasant everything is,
and how we all enjoy ourselves. You hear the piano, and like it; you see
your children sought after and respected, your wife in finer health and
spirits than you've ever known her since the day she was married; you
see industry and neatness everywhere on the premises; and you're a beast
if you don't like all that. In short, you see that our management is a
great deal better than yours; and that we beat you even in the matter of
economy. Now, what I want to know is this: whether you think you'd like
to fall into our way of living, or return like a hog to your wallow.'

"'I don't say but what I like your way of livin' very well,' he
grumbled.

"'Then,' says I, 'you must just let us go ahead, as we have been going
ahead. Now's the time for you to turn about and be a respectable man,
like your neighbors. Just own up, and say you've not only been out of
your head the past four years, but that you've been more or less out of
your head the last four-and-twenty years. But say you're in your right
mind now, and prove it by acting like a man in his right mind. Do that,
and I'm with you; we're all with you. But go back to your old dirty
ways, and you go alone. Now I sha'n't let you off till you tell me what
you mean to do.'

"He hesitated some time, then said, 'Maybe you're about right, Stark;
you and Dave and the old woman seem to be doin' pooty well, and I guess
I'll let you go on.'"

Here my friend paused, as if his story was done; when one of the
villagers asked, "About the land where the old meetin'-house stood--what
ever was done with that?"

"That was appropriated for a new school-house; and there my little
shavers go to school."

"And old Jedwort, is he alive yet?"

"Both Jedwort and his wife have gone to that country where meanness and
dishonesty have a mighty poor chance--where the only investments worth
much are those recorded in the Book of Life. Mrs. Jedwort was rich
in that kind of stock; and Jedwort's account, I guess, will compare
favorably with that of some respectable people, such as we all know. I
tell ye, my friends," continued my fellow-traveler, "there's many a man,
both in the higher and lower ranks of life, that 't would do a deal of
good, say nothing of the mercy 'twould be to their families, just to
knock 'em on the head, and make Nebu-chadnezzars of 'em--then, after
they'd been turned out to grass a few years, let 'em come back again,
and see how happy folks have been, and how well they have got along
without 'em.

"I carry on the old place now," he added. "The younger girls are married
off; Dan's a doctor in the North Village; and as for Dave, he and I have
struck ile. I'm going out to look at our property now."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Man Who Stole A Meeting-House, by 
J. T. Trowbridge

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MAN WHO STOLE A MEETING-HOUSE ***

***** This file should be named 23165.txt or 23165.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/1/6/23165/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
