The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mary Liddiard, by W.H.G. Kingston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mary Liddiard
       The Missionary's Daughter

Author: W.H.G. Kingston

Release Date: October 25, 2007 [EBook #23190]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARY LIDDIARD ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Mary Liddiard, by W.H.G. Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________
Mary is the daughter of a missionary somewhere in the Pacific Ocean.  It
is towards the end of the eighteenth century.  Some but not all of the
natives on the island have been converted.  The author expounds at great
length on the central truth of Christianity.

There is an attack by the natives of another island, which Mary and her
friends survive by hiding in a cave.  Later they are obliged to leave
the island by canoe.  There is a great storm, but they survive it, being
picked up by an English missionary vessel.  There is a happy ending,
with a great family reunion.

________________________________________________________________________
MARY LIDDIARD, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.


CHAPTER ONE.

A MISSIONARY STATION IN AN ISLAND OF THE PACIFIC DESCRIBED.--THE GIRLS'
SCHOOL SUPERINTENDED BY MRS LIDDIARD, HER DAUGHTER MARY, AND LITTLE
MAUD.--MARY LIDDIARD'S NARRATIVE.--INTRODUCE TO MY READERS LISELE, THE
CHIEF'S DAUGHTER, ONE OF OUR PUPILS.--MY MOTHER EXPLAINS THE GOSPEL TO
HER.

  "Praise God, from whom all blessings flow,
  Praise Him all creatures here below,
  Praise Him above ye heavenly host,
  Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost."

These words were ascending from the lips of a number of dark skinned
girls assembled round a fair haired English lady in a building thickly
thatched with the leaves of the sugar cane, beneath the shade of a grove
of tall cocoanut trees, in one of the many far off beautiful islands of
the wide Pacific.  The building, erected by the natives after their own
fashion, was the school-house of a missionary station lately established
by Mr Liddiard, and the lady was his devoted wife.  It stood upon a
platform of coral-stone, raised about two feet from the ground, while
the roof projected a considerable distance beyond the walls, and was
supported by stout posts formed of the bread-fruit tree, tightly bound
to the rafters by ropes of sinnet.

After the conclusion of the hymn of praise--a sound unwonted in that
long benighted region, whose groves had hitherto echoed only with the
shouts and wild laughter of the savage heathens, as they performed their
barbarous rites, and the shrieks and groans of their victims--the pupils
grouped themselves round Mrs Liddiard on the mats with which the floor
was spread.

They were of various ages; some were children, others full grown young
women.  All kept their eyes fixed on her attentively, as if anxious to
understand every word she said.  Some were clothed in light cotton
dresses, their black hair neatly braided and ornamented with a few sweet
scented wild flowers, while others were habited in garments of native
cloth, formed from the paper mulberry tree.

By the side of Mrs Liddiard sat, on low stools, two young girls, whose
light complexions contrasted with that of their dark skinned sisters.
Though she spoke in the native language, the two English girls
understood her perfectly, and appeared to be as attentive as their
companions, and anxious to set a good example to the rest.  One of them,
with black hair, called little Maud, who seemed to be about eleven years
old, had a grave expression of countenance; the other, Mrs Liddiard's
daughter Mary, was very like her mother, with light hair and blue eyes,
full of animation and intelligence.

On one side of the house the ground sloped away down to a beach seen
between the Pandanus and cocoanut trees, of fine white sand fringing a
calm lagoon of the deepest blue, beyond which appeared a long line of
foaming breakers, ever dashing against a coral reef, which extended
parallel with the coast as far as the eye could reach.  On the other
side rose the steep sides of a range of rocky and picturesque mountains,
clothed to their summits with the richest and densest foliage,
numberless creepers climbing up the trees, and hanging from branch to
branch, while here and there, amid openings of the forest, several
sparkling cascades came rushing down from the far off heights, now
falling in sheets of glittering foam, now dashing from ledge to ledge,
and at length making their way into the lagoon.

Near the girls' school-house was a building of considerably larger
dimensions, and of much greater height, with numerous windows and a
porch.  It was the mission chapel erected by the native Christians.  At
a short distance from it was Mr Liddiard's residence, a neat cottage
with a broad verandah in front, partaking more of the European style
than any of the other edifices.

Under the shade of the trees were numerous huts, inhabited by the
converts, who had left their former homes and gathered round their
pastor.  Among them was a hut somewhat larger than the rest, which had
been built by the zealous native teacher Nanari, who had come from a
distant island to bring the glad tidings of salvation to the people; and
undaunted by the opposition of the heathens, had long laboured alone,
until the arrival of Mr Liddiard, under whom he now acted as catechist
and assistant.

Notwithstanding the unceasing exertions and prayers of Nanari, aided by
his faithful wife, and of Mr and Mrs Liddiard, comparatively few of
the natives had as yet been gathered into Christ's fold.  The greater
part of the island was inhabited by fierce heathens, who still carried
on frequent wars against each other; and angry with their countrymen for
having abandoned the faith of their forefathers, constantly threatened
them and the missionaries with destruction.

In spite of the dangers which surrounded him, Mr Liddiard continued
dauntlessly to labour to win souls to Christ, knowing well in whom he
trusted; and that although it might not be allowed to him while on earth
to see the fruit of his toils, yet that a rich harvest would some day be
reaped.

The missionary's life was not an idle one.  When not engaged in
preaching the gospel or in giving instruction to his converts, he was
compelled to work with his hands to obtain his daily food, and he and
Nanari, with the young men who had become Christians, were engaged in
the taro grounds or in their gardens, attending to the cultivation of
the bread-fruit tree, yams, casavas, sweet potatoes, and other
vegetables.  He had also built his own house, and manufactured his
furniture, and had every day some manual work to perform besides being
engaged in studying the language and translating the Bible and other
works, for the instruction of the natives.  Thus, from morning till
night, he and his wife were actively employed.  Although Mary and little
Maud could now give them some assistance in household matters, the young
girls themselves required instruction, which also occupied a portion of
their time.  Maud was not their own child, though they had educated her,
for she was friendless and destitute, and they loved her as a daughter.

To return to the school-house I have described.  I should say that I was
the Mary I have mentioned, the missionary's daughter.  I will tell more
about little Maud by-and-by.  We used to act as assistant teachers to my
mother.  As soon as the address she had given was over we went among the
girls to answer any questions they might put to us, or to help in their
tasks.

"Malay," said a girl at the further end of the room, near whom I had
seated myself (`Malay' was the name the natives always called me).  "I
wish to know if your God always sees you."

"Yes, indeed, He does," I answered.  "He sees and knows everything I
think and say and do."

"Then I would rather not _lotu_," she said.  "Because I don't think that
the gods of my people know what they do, or what they think or say, and
I am very sure that I shall wish to do many things which might displease
them.  Not long ago I laughed and jeered at them, and I am sure that
they did not find me out."

The term "_lotu_," I should explain, is used by the natives to signify
changing their religion, or becoming Christians.

"But our God, Jehovah, is above all gods.  He made the world and all the
human race, and He therefore knows everything that you and all heathen
people do and say and think.  The darkness is no darkness with Him, and
the day and night to Him are both alike," I answered.  "But come to
mother, Lisele, and she will explain the matter to you more clearly than
I can do."

Lisele was the daughter of a heathen chief, who was very well disposed
towards the Christians; and although he would not _lotu_ himself, he
allowed Lisele, who was very intelligent, and possessed an inquiring
mind, to attend the school.  She was about two years older than I was,
and I think any one who had seen her dressed in her costume of native
cloth of the finest texture, with a wreath of white flowers in her raven
hair, would have thought her very pretty.  She was as yet imperfectly
instructed in Christian truth, and possessed of high spirits and an
independent will--a mere child of nature.  It was evidently necessary to
treat her with the greatest caution to prevent her running away from us
and rejoining her former heathen associates.

Lisele, taking my hand, came and sat down at my mother's feet, and I
then put the question that she had asked me.  "Yes, indeed, Lisele,"
said my mother.  "Jehovah not only sees all you do, and hears all you
say, but knows every thought which is passing through your mind, and if
you think anything that is wrong, and utter even a careless word, He is
grieved at it.  He is so pure and holy that even the bright heavens are
not clean in His sight; and were He to treat us as we deserve, when we
indulged for a moment in an evil thought, or departed in the slightest
degree from the truth, He might justly punish us; but He is merciful,
kind, and long-suffering, and thus He allows sinners to continue in
life, to give them an opportunity of repenting and turning to Him."

"Then there would be no use for my father and all the chiefs and people
whom I know to _lotu_, for they have done over and over again all sorts
of things which you have told me Jehovah hates," remarked Lisele.

"My dear Lisele," said my mother, taking her hand, "Jehovah has said in
His holy Book, that He will receive all who turn from their sins and
come to Him in the way He has appointed, through faith in His dear Son;
and He also tells us that the blood of Jesus His Son `cleanseth from all
sin.'  Likewise He says, `Though your sins be as scarlet they shall be
as white as snow; though they be red like crimson they shall be as
wool.'  Believe this blessed promise yourself, Lisele, and tell your
father that though Jehovah knows all the murders he has committed, and
every crime he has been guilty of, if he will but turn from them and
trust to the perfect sacrifice which Christ offered up on Calvary when
He was punished, by dying that cruel death on the cross instead of us,
then all will be forgiven and blotted out of God's remembrance.  `The
blood of Jesus Christ,' I repeat, `cleanseth from all sin.'"

The Indian girl stood with her eyes open, gazing at my mother, and lost
with astonishment at what she had heard.

"But surely we must do something to gain this great favour from God.  We
must labour and toil for Him.  We must pay Him all we have in recompense
for the bad things we have done, that have offended Him so much," she
exclaimed.

"No! we poor weak creatures have nothing to do.  We could do nothing to
make amends for the ill we have done, to blot out our sins; and all the
wealth we possess could not recompense God, for all things are His.  But
the debt has been paid for us by Jesus, he became our surety, and when
we go to Him, and trust to Him, and pray to Him, as He is now seated at
the right hand of God, He acts the part of our advocate, and pleads for
us with God, urging that He Himself paid the debt, and, therefore, that
we have nothing to pay and nothing to do.  God in His mercy has promised
a free and full pardon to all who trust to Him.  `Pardon for sin is the
gift of God,' and the King who makes the present requires nothing in
return but gratitude and love and obedience."

"I think I understand," said Lisele.  "If my father was to conquer
another tribe who had offended him, and, instead of putting them to
death, was to pardon them all, and to give them a country rich in
bread-fruit trees and taro grounds, they would be bound to love and
serve Him, and give Him the best produce of their lands."

"Exactly," said my mother.  "But Jehovah does not require the fruits of
the earth, for `all things are His.'  What He wants is the willing
obedience of His creatures.  He wishes them to obey His laws, to be
kind, and merciful, and courteous, and pitiful, to all their fellows,
not returning evil for evil, but good for evil, and endeavouring to make
known His name and His power and goodness to all those who do not know
it.  That we may know His will, when Jesus Christ came into the world to
die for man, He set us the example we are to follow.  Then as our hearts
are prone to evil, and Satan is ever going about seeking to mislead us,
He has sent His Holy Spirit to instruct our minds, to support us and
help us to withstand the deceits of Satan."

"Then I think it must be Satan who makes my people fight with each
other, and do all sorts of things that you tell me God's Book says are
so wrong," exclaimed Lisele.  "I must try and persuade my father to
worship Jehovah, and then, perhaps, the Holy Spirit you tell me of will
prevent him from spending his life in fighting and killing people.  It
has always seemed to me a very bad thing to do, and that it would be
much better if people would live together in peace, and dance and sing
and amuse themselves without the constant fear of being attacked by
their enemies and killed."

"Undoubtedly, my dear girl, if anyone turns to Jehovah, trusting to
Jesus Christ, and seeks the aid of the Holy Spirit whom He has promised
to send, he will be enabled to do His will.  God cannot lie.  Everything
He has promised He will fulfil," answered my mother.  "I pray that you
will be enabled to explain this matter to the chief, your father."

"Yes! yes! that I will," cried Lisele.  "Till this moment I did not
understand it.  I thought that it must be a very difficult thing to
serve Jehovah, and that those who had done anything to offend Him were
to toil and work to the end of their days, and even then have very
little chance of being received into favour."

"Satan tries to persuade man that such is the case, that he may turn his
eyes away from the all-sufficient atonement made by Christ on Calvary,
and prevent him from trusting to that, and that alone," said my mother.
"Satan hates the atonement, because it is that which destroys his power,
and he cares nothing when people try to be good, and try to please God,
trusting to themselves, provided they have no faith in the atoning
sacrifice of Christ, in the all-cleansing power of His blood," observed
my mother.  "If you will reflect, my dear girl, on the fact that God
made us and gives us all the blessings we enjoy, and that consequently
we owe Him everything, you will see that nothing we do can make amends
to Him for the sins we have committed, because if we were to devote
every moment of our lives to His service we should only be doing our
duty.  Then again, a sin which has been committed cannot be undone; so
it is written against us in the great book prepared for the day of
judgment.  God is so pure and holy that even the heavens are not clean
in His sight, and He is so just that He cannot forgive sin; we only mock
Him when we ask Him to forgive us our sins, if we plead our own merits,
because, as I have shown you, we cannot possibly have any merits to
plead--all our merits are but as filthy rags, they cannot cover up our
vileness and sinfulness.  But then Jehovah is all merciful as well as
just, and He has, therefore, formed that blessed plan of salvation, the
gospel plan, just suited to our wants, by which we can take advantage of
the all perfect merits of Jesus Christ, and make them our own--our
vileness being covered up by His righteousness, our nakedness clothed
with His pure and spotless robes, so that Jehovah does not see our sins;
they are put away as far as the east is from the west; they are blotted
out of the great book of remembrance.  This is done immediately the
sinner trusts in the Saviour.  It is not _to be done_.  All the work
_was_ done on Calvary, when Jesus cried, `It is finished!'  All that God
requires is that the sinner should take advantage of that work finished
by Jesus, by trusting to Him alone, thus becoming completely qualified
for heaven.  May God, the Holy Spirit, enable you to understand this
truth."

The Indian girl sat down, and for some time appeared lost in thought;
then starting up with the impetuous manner which her ardent disposition
made her assume, she asked, in her native tongue, "Then if I believe
that Jesus Christ, the sinless Son of Jehovah, left the glories of
heaven, and became man, and suffered a fearful death on the cross, His
precious blood being then shed, and that He suffered this punishment
instead of me, and that God's justice is thereby satisfied, am I no
longer to fear punishment?  Does God no more look at my sins?  Am I
received into His favour?  Oh then how grateful ought I to be to God,
how much ought I to love Jehovah's kind Son, how ought I to try to serve
and obey and please Him!"

"Yes, indeed, Lisele, if you thus trust in Christ, if you believe that
His blood was shed for you, that you are sprinkled with it, you may be
assured that God has taken you into favour, that He has blotted out all
your sins, and that when you leave this world you will be received into
that glorious heaven which He has prepared for all those who love Him."

"Oh, I am sure what you tell me is true," exclaimed the Indian girl,
clasping her hands, while a look of joy irradiated her countenance.  "I
long to know more of that kind and merciful Jesus, and love Him and
serve Him.  I must go and tell my father all you have said, and get him
to come and hear himself about Jehovah.  Your religion is just what we
want in this country, for nothing else will prevent the people from
fighting and murdering each other, which cannot be pleasing to a good
God, though our priests tell us that our gods delight in war and in the
human sacrifices offered to them, and encourage our warriors to kill and
burn their prisoners."

"Our religion is not only suited to the inhabitants of these islands,
but to people of all countries, and at all times," said my mother.  "It
is the only true religion, because it is the only one which God has
given to man, and He has sent us the Bible that we may learn what His
will is, and He pours out the Holy Spirit that we may understand and be
enabled to perform it.  And the time will come when `all kings shall
fall down before Him; all nations shall serve Him,'" (Psalm 72 verse
11.)

All the other girls had returned to their homes.  Lisele remained, eager
to gain more information about the wonderful things she had heard.  What
a happy thing it would be if boys and girls in Britain were as anxious
to obtain spiritual knowledge as was the young savage girl in that
Pacific island!



CHAPTER TWO.

OUR STATION THREATENED BY HEATHEN NATIVES.--LISELE, ACCEPTING THE TRUTH,
DESIRES THE CONVERSION OF HER FATHER, AND OBTAINS PERMISSION FROM HER
AUNT AND ABELA TO VISIT HIM.--I DESCRIBE OUR VOYAGE, WHEN LITTLE MAUD
WAS FOUND.--CONDITION OF THE STATION AT THE TIME WHEN MY NARRATIVE
COMMENCES.

Our little Christian settlement was truly an oasis in the wilderness.
We were closely beset by heathens, and frequently we could see them
assembling on the hill side, performing their savage dances, or
threatening our destruction with fierce gestures--shaking their clubs
and spears, and shrieking and hooting wildly.

Most of the converts settled round us belonged to the tribe of Masaugu,
Lisele's father; for although he himself still remained a heathen, he
did not oppose those of his people who wished to lotu, or become
Christians.

Among them was Lisele's aunt, the sister of her mother, with whom she
resided, and through her influence Lisele had first been induced to
attend the school.

On the day I have spoken of, when it was time for Lisele to return to
her aunt's house, she invited me to accompany her, which my mother gave
me permission to do.  She wanted me to assist her in persuading her aunt
to allow her to return to her father.

"I have been so long accustomed to speak falsehoods, that if I tell her
that I wish to go she will not believe my object," said Lisele.
"Besides, she will not think it possible that so fierce a warrior as my
father will consent to lotu; but I heard your mother say the other day,
that with Jehovah nothing is impossible, and therefore I believe that if
I pray that my father's heart may be changed, he will, notwithstanding
his fierceness, become a Christian."

"I am very sure that Jehovah will hear your prayers," I remarked, "if
you offer them up according to His own appointed way, through Jesus
Christ; but still He will take His own good time to bring about what you
desire.  My father often says we must not expect to have our prayers
answered exactly in the way we wish.  God knows what is best, and
oftentimes He does not accomplish that which we desire; and though we
cannot comprehend His reasons, still it is our duty to pray on in faith,
without ceasing.  Jehovah, too, often allows those He loves to suffer;
and though they may complain that the sufferings are very hard to bear,
He will assuredly lift them up and support them, for He has said, `My
strength is made perfect in weakness,'" (2 Corinthians 12 verse 9).
This conversation lasted till we reached the house of Abela, Lisele's
aunt.

Abela was a woman of about forty, her face, though not handsome, and
with a serious expression, was mild and pleasing.  She was dressed in an
ample petticoat, made from the fibres of the hibiscus, while over her
shoulders she wore a tippet somewhat resembling a small poncho, which
completely shrouded the upper part of her form.  Having finished the
labours of the day (for although of high rank, she was compelled, like
others, to work for her support), she was seated on a mat, with a book
open on her knees, from which she was endeavouring to read.  Not having
long been a convert, she had as yet made but little progress in her
studies.  She affectionately welcomed her niece and me as we took our
seats near her.  Lisele then eagerly poured forth what she had been
hearing, so rapidly, that I could scarcely follow her.

"It is all true," said Abela, when her niece at length ceased speaking.
"I praise Jehovah that you know it."

When, however, Lisele told her of her wish to go back to her father,
Abela hesitated.  "He will not understand you, my child," she exclaimed,
"and perhaps will not allow you to return to people whom he may think so
foolish."

"Oh, but I'll pray for him," answered Lisele.  "I'll ask Jehovah to help
me, and I know He will hear me, so I shall not have to trust to my own
strength."

Abela remained silent for some time, and I saw that she was engaged in
prayer.

"You shall go, my child," she said at length.  "Jehovah will take care
of you, and may He prosper your undertaking."

Delighted at having obtained this permission, Lisele returned to spend
the evening with us, for my father wished to have an opportunity of
speaking to her.  He warned her of the opposition she must expect to
meet with from her people, and of the dangers she would have to
encounter, especially as he knew that she had been sought in marriage by
a young heathen chief, who might wish to detain her.

"But now I know the truth.  I will never consent to marry one who is a
heathen," she answered.  "And I do not intend to remain.  I will only
try to persuade my father to visit you, and then I will return."

Lisele set off the next day, accompanied by two Christian people of her
tribe, who promised to protect her from the heathens, and aid her return
should it be opposed, even although they might risk their lives in so
doing.  We were very sorry to lose her, as we feared that efforts would
be made to prevent her returning among us.

Maud could not restrain her tears.  "I know too well how cruelly these
heathens can act," she said.  "They will not hesitate to carry her off
to some distant island, whence she cannot possibly escape; or, if she
offends them by what she says, they may even kill her."  Dear Maud had
indeed had bitter experience of the barbarities often committed by the
savage islanders.

My father had for some years been a missionary in another part of the
Pacific, when it was settled that he should occupy the Station where we
now were.  I was too young at the time to remember much about what
occurred, so I can describe only what I have heard.  As there was then
no missionary vessel to convey us, we embarked on board a whaler, the
Christian captain of which undertook to carry us to our destination.  He
was, however, unable to make a direct passage, as he had in the
prosecution of his business first to visit several other places, still,
as no other means of getting where we wished to go were likely to occur,
my father was glad to embrace the opportunity thus offered.  We had been
for some time at sea when a fearful storm arose, which compelled us to
run before it under bare poles, and carried us a long way out of our
course.  The vessel received also considerable damage, losing one of her
masts and several spars.  At length a beautiful island appeared in
sight, covered thickly with trees, and directly ahead was seen a
commodious harbour.  The captain therefore ran into it and came to an
anchor, that the damages which the vessel had received might be
repaired.  He soon found that it was inhabited by numerous savages, who
pushed off in their canoes to visit the strange ship.  He, however, had
so long been acquainted with the treacherous character of the natives of
most of the Pacific islands, that he would allow no one to come on
board, and he had also boarding-nettings triced up to guard against any
sudden attack they might venture to make.  We had on board a Sandwich
islander, who managed to make himself understood by the natives.
Through his means our good captain let them know that he wished to cut
down some trees, and that he was ready to pay for permission to do so.
The captain then inquired for their chief, and said that if he would
come off and receive part of the payment, the remainder would be given
after the spars had been brought on board, and as a proof of his good
intentions, he sent the chief a present of an axe and a piece of cloth.
This had the desired effect; and in a short time an old warrior came
alongside in his canoe, and announced himself as the chief of the
district.  The Sandwich islander then explained what the captain wished,
and certain articles which had been agreed on were given to him, he
undertaking, while the trees were being cut down and carried off, to
keep his people at a distance to prevent the possibility of any dispute
arising.

As soon as the chief and his followers had returned to the shore, two
boats' crews, well armed, put off, and while one party were engaged in
felling the trees, the other remained drawn up to guard against any
attack which the natives might treacherously venture to make.  The spars
having been brought on board, the old chief returned for the promised
remainder of the payment.  He seemed highly pleased with the
transaction.

"I see that you are wise and just people," he observed.  "If all whites
who come to our shores acted in the same way, we would be their friends;
but it has not been always so, and after they have ill-treated and
cheated us, we have been tempted to take advantage of their folly and
carelessness to revenge ourselves."

This remark induced the captain, through the interpreter, to make
inquiries as to what the chief alluded to.  At length he learned that
some time before a vessel, with white people on board, had come into the
harbour to obtain sandal wood; that after the natives had supplied a
large quantity, sufficient to fill her, the captain had refused the
promised payment; but, in spite of this, that the crew were allowed to
go on shore and wander about in small parties, when some of them had
quarrelled with the natives and ill-treated them.  In consequence the
sailors had been set upon, and killed every man of them.  A party of
warriors then put off for the ship, and pretending they had come to
trade, clambered up her sides before the part of the crew who had
remained on board had heard of the massacre, or suspected their
intentions.  The savages thus taking them at a disadvantage, put every
person to death, with the exception of a woman and child, who were saved
by the intervention of the old chief.  The vessel, it appeared, by some
accident, caught fire, and had been utterly destroyed.

The captain, on hearing this, made eager inquiries about the poor woman
and the child.  The former, however, had, he found soon afterwards,
died, leaving the little girl in possession of the chief.

Instead of threatening the old chief with the vengeance of his people,
as some might have done, he spoke to him gently, saying that he himself
had not come there as a judge, or to take vengeance for injuries which
other white men might have received, but that we wished to know whether
he would be ready to give up the little girl he had under his care.  The
old man seemed very much struck by this style of address, and confessed
that the child was still living with him, but that he was very fond of
her, and that when she grew up he hoped that she might become the wife
of one of his sons.

This of course made the captain still more anxious to recover her, and
he used every argument he could think of to induce the old man to give
her up.  He told him that, unaccustomed to the mode of life of his
people, she would probably die, as her mother had done, and that if he
really loved her, he would be anxious for her safety, and that though he
had paid him liberally for the trees, he would give him twice the amount
of goods if he would, without delay, bring the little girl on board.
This last argument seemed to weigh greatly with the chief, and he said
he would think about it, and returned on shore, leaving us in doubt,
however, what he would do.

Our anxiety about the poor girl was, as may be supposed, very great.
The men, on hearing of the matter, came aft, and each one said that he
would be ready to contribute some article to induce the chief to give
her up.  Some even proposed, that should he refuse, to land and compel
him to do so by force of arms.  The captain thanked them for their zeal,
but told them that that was not the way he conceived Christian men
should act.

I well remember that evening, when we were assembled to worship God as
usual, in the cabin, how my father lifted up his voice in prayer, that
the heart of the chief might be moved to restore the little Christian
damsel to those who would bring her "up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord," and that she might be saved from the fearful fate the old man
intended for her.  God never fails to listen to the prayers of
believers.

The next morning, as we anxiously turned our eyes towards the shore, the
chief's canoe was seen coming off.

"Our prayer has been answered," exclaimed my father, who was watching it
through a spy-glass.  "There is a child by his side."

The sailors sprang into the rigging, and every one on board eagerly
watched the approach of the canoe.  It was soon alongside, and the
little girl we had been looking for was handed up on deck, followed by
the old chief.  She was dressed in a clean white frock, and her hair was
neatly braided, and ornamented with flowers and feathers; but she looked
thin and ill, and sadly scared.  When my mother approached the gangway
she flew towards her, and threw herself into her arms, as if she was
sure that she should find in her a loving friend.

"Mamma! mamma!" she exclaimed; but she could utter no other words; and
had it not been for those sounds we should have supposed that she had
lost the power of speech.  My mother could not restrain her tears, as
she held the forlorn little creature to her heart.

Such was the way in which we met with little Maud.

Nothing would induce her to leave my mother while the old chief remained
on board; and although he and his people might have treated her kindly,
they certainly had not won her love.

Having received the promised reward, to which the captain added a few
other articles, the chief prepared to take his departure, evidently very
well satisfied with the transaction.  The captain, however, warned him,
that should he venture to attack another vessel he would not escape a
severe punishment; but that if he would promise to behave well towards
white people in future, they would come and trade with him, and bring
him a greater blessing than he could at present comprehend.  The captain
said this, because he hoped that some day he might be able to convey a
missionary to the place, that he might spread the blessings of the
gospel among the heathen inhabitants.

After the ship was refitted we put to sea, but she was some time engaged
in catching whales, so that our voyage was a very long one.  The little
girl who had been rescued from the savages was utterly unable to explain
anything that had happened to her.

Weeks passed away, and not a word did she utter, and my father and
mother began to fear that the hardships she had gone through had
deprived her of her senses.  For a long time she could not be induced to
leave my mother's side, and seemed to mistrust every one else.  If
separated from her, even for a few moments, she would run back again,
and seizing her gown, glance up with an imploring look, as if begging to
be protected from some imaginary danger--she would not even trust
herself with me, and seemed to fancy that I might hurt her.  Possibly
she might have been ill-treated by the native children, and was unable
to distinguish the difference.  Gentle and careful treatment, however,
had its due effect on her, and her fears were gradually allayed.

At length one day she, of her own accord, took my hand, and looking into
my face said, "Girl not hurt poor Maud."  These were the first words we
had heard her utter.  Until then also we were ignorant of her name.

Putting my arms round her neck I kissed her, and answered, "No indeed I
will not hurt you, but I will treat you as a dear sister, and love you
very very much."

A faint smile passed over her countenance, as if she comprehended my
answer.  After that she would remain contentedly with me--still her
mind, for some time longer, continued apparently in the same state as at
first.  My father and mother, however, felt sure that her senses would
ultimately be restored.  They were not mistaken; but even when she had
begun to speak, she made no allusion to the circumstances of the
massacre, or her life among the natives, and we forbore to ask her any
questions.

When at last we landed here, her alarm at seeing the natives was very
great, and my father was afraid that it would cause her mind to relapse
into its former state.  By doing all we could to re-assure and cheer
her, no ill effects occurred.  When once we were settled, and she had
got accustomed to the scenery, and the appearance of the people, her
improvement was more rapid.  In course of time her mind and bodily
health were perfectly restored.  On seeing me at my lessons, she showed
a strong wish to join me, and though she had forgotten even her letters,
if she had ever known them, she made rapid progress, so that she was
soon able to read fluently, when she eagerly perused every book my
father would allow her to have from his library.  Even then, however,
she could give no account of her former life, and we knew no more of
little Maud than at first.  My father and mother treated her as they
would a daughter, while I looked upon her and loved her as a younger
sister.

We had now been upwards of three years at the Station.  My father had
laboured on in faith, as a missionary in all regions must be prepared to
do, for as yet only the comparatively small body of Christians as I have
mentioned, who had settled round us, had been brought out of heathenism,
while the larger number of the population appeared even more hostile to
the new faith than at first.  Still my father would often say, when he
felt himself inclined to despond, "Let us recollect the value of one
immortal soul, and all our toils and troubles will appear as nothing."
Such was the state of things at the mission station when my history
commences.



CHAPTER THREE.

THE ISLANDS OF THE PACIFIC DESCRIBED.--MY MOTHER'S ILLNESS.--NASILE, A
MESSENGER FROM LISELE, COMES TO THE SETTLEMENT, FOLLOWED SHORTLY BY
LISLETE AND MASAUGU, WHO PROMISES TO LOTU AFTER HE HAS DEFEATED HIS
ENEMIES.--MY FATHER WARNS HIM IN VAIN OF THE FEARFUL DANGER HE RUNS BY
PUTTING OFF BECOMING A CHRISTIAN.

The vast Pacific--in one of the islands of which the events I am
describing occurred--presents a wide and hopeful field for missionary
enterprise.  It is scattered over with numberless islands--in most cases
so clustered together as to form separate groups--some rising in lofty
mountains out of the sea, surrounded by coral reefs, beautiful and
picturesque in the extreme, while others are elevated but a few feet
above the ocean, generally having palm trees growing on them.  These
latter are known more particularly as coral and lagoon islands.  The
islands of the character I have last mentioned have been produced by the
gradual sinking of the land beneath the ocean, when on its reaching a
certain depth, countless millions of coral insects have built their
habitations on it, and have continued building till they reached the
surface--the new islands consequently keeping the forms of the submerged
lands which serve as their foundations.  The lagoon islands have been
formed by the insects building round the edge of some submerged crater.
As the land sank the creatures have continued to build upwards, and thus
a ring of coral rock has arisen in the ocean--sometimes complete, at
others with a break or opening in it.  In other instances the coral
insects have built near the shore, and as the land has sunk they have
continued to build upwards, but in consequence of requiring the pure
salt water, have not advanced towards the land, which, however, still
sinking, a wide space of water has appeared between it and the structure
raised by them.  This is the cause of the numerous encircling reefs
which are found around so many of the islands of the Pacific--affording
harbours within them, and sheltering the shore from the fury of the
waves.

Many of the islands are also of volcanic origin; some contain active
volcanoes, and while the land in some instances has sunk, in others it
has risen, and is broken into the most curious and fantastic shapes,
bringing up also with it the coral rocks which were formed on it while
it lay beneath the sea.

Most of these islands are clothed with a varied and rich vegetation.
The climate of those at a distance from the equator is generally
healthy, but that of others near the line, especially to the westward,
is unhealthy in the extreme, so that even the natives of other islands
of the same ocean cannot live on them throughout the year.

The eastern groups are inhabited by a brown skinned and generally
handsome race, often not darker than Spaniards, and supposed to be
descended from a common stock, as in general appearance and language
there is a great resemblance.

The groups of the large islands to the westward on either side of the
equator are peopled by a black and savage race, in many respects
resembling the negroes of Africa, and sunk even still lower in
barbarism.  Such are the inhabitants of the Fijis, New Caledonia, and
New Hebrides, the Solomon Islands, New Guinea, and others to the
northward of them.

When Captain Cook sailed over the Pacific, and till many years
afterwards, the people of these beautiful islands were sunk in the
grossest idolatry and barbarism.

Towards the end of the last century, when the Christian Churches awoke
to their responsibilities for making known the glad tidings of salvation
to their heathen fellow-creatures--societies were formed to send
missionaries to various parts of the world.  A band of twenty-nine
missionaries, some of them unhappily untried, were sent out by the
London Missionary Society in 1796, to the Pacific islands.  They made
slow progress, but at length, in 1815, idolatry was overthrown at
Tahiti, and the gospel firmly established in that island.

Two years afterwards, the Rev. J. Williams and the Rev. W. Ellis, two of
the most distinguished missionaries who have laboured among the islands
of the Pacific, arrived at Tahiti.  The former took up his abode at
Raiatea, one of the Society islands, and afterwards going alone to the
island of Rarotonga, though not bred a shipwright, built there, with his
own hands, aided only by the natives, a vessel of about seventy tons
burden.  Having rigged her with sails of matting, he and a native crew
returned to Raiatea, and thence he proceeded to Samoa with a large party
of missionaries, for the purpose of leaving them at different islands on
the way.  He sailed in her afterwards over many thousand miles of ocean,
visiting missionary stations--the little craft truly performing her duty
as the "Messenger of Peace."

She was the first of many missionary vessels which have since been sent
out by different societies to the Pacific.  Some have been lost, but
their places have been supplied by others; indeed it is only by means of
such vessels that the now numerous missionary stations scattered
throughout that wide ocean, can be properly maintained.

How well might some of the beautiful yachts which float idly on the
waters of the Solent, be employed, if their owners, influenced by the
love of immortal souls, would hoist the banner of peace at their
mast-heads, and go forth to those distant islands, to sail here and
there visiting the isolated stations, or conveying fresh missionaries to
the numberless groups still in heathen darkness.

I cannot help saying this when I recollect how often, for long months,
and even for years together, we were left without a visit from any
European Christian, and how eagerly we watched the approach of each sail
which appeared in the horizon, hoping that she might bring us news of
distant friends, or necessaries of which we stood greatly in need, or
still more, that a brother might be on board who might afford counsel
and encouragement in the difficulties by which we were surrounded.  My
dear father often felt the want of the assistance I have spoken of.  My
mother was indeed a helpmate meet for him, and was a source of comfort
and consolation; but especially when the heathens threatened our lives
and those of the native converts, oh, how thankful he would have been
for the advice and support of an experienced Christian friend.

My mother had for some time been a sufferer from illness, and though she
still continued her usual duties, we watched her form grow thinner, and
her cheek paler, day by day.  My father, strange as it may seem, did not
appear to remark the change, but Maud and I, when we were together,
could not help speaking about it.  Still, as my mother did not complain,
we could only hope that, should her anxiety about the condition of the
mission decrease by its prospects becoming more promising, her health
would improve.

We did all we could to lessen her cares by assisting her in her
household duties.  Maud and I learned to cook, and we also cleaned and
swept out the house and kept it in order, with the help of a native
girl, who, though not very expert, was willing to learn and to follow
the example we set her.

We were anxiously expecting the return of Lisele, and Maud and I paid
frequent visits to Abela, to inquire whether she had received any
message from her niece.  She shook her head sorrowfully, saying she was
afraid that Masaugu was too much wedded to his heathen practices to be
induced to abandon them by any arguments Lisele could use, and that he
was far more likely to prevent her from returning.  This made us very
sad, for we had had hopes that Lisele had really become a Christian, and
would remain faithful to the truth.

Abela guessed by our looks what was passing in our minds, and she added,
"though the chief's heart is very hard, I have been praying that it may
be changed, and I know that with Jehovah nothing is impossible."

While we were still seated in the hut, a native arrived whom we knew,
from his scanty dress and his wild savage look, to be still a heathen.
He brought a message to Abela from her niece, saying that she hoped
shortly to return to the settlement, as her father had consented to pay
the English missionary a visit.

"I shall rejoice to see her again," said Abela to the native.  "And has
she spoken to you, my friend, of the true religion?"

"Yes, she has told me that we cannot see the great Jehovah who made the
world and all things in it, but that He sees us and knows everything we
think of, say, and do; and that He hates all sin, but that He loves the
sinner, and wishes all human beings to come and live with Him for ever
and ever in the beautiful place He has prepared for them," was the
prompt and unexpected answer.

"But has she told you that you are a sinner, and that your sins must be
wiped away before you are fit to go to that pure and beautiful heaven
she spoke of?  Has she told you how you can become fit for heaven, and
has she pointed out to you the only way you can go there?" asked Abela.

"Yes, she told me that many things I thought right are very wrong in the
sight of Jehovah, and that I cannot undo what I have once done, and that
the only way by which those things can be blotted out, is by believing
that Jehovah's dear Son came down upon earth and was punished by a cruel
death instead of me, and that if I believe this, and trust to Him, I
shall be received into that glorious place above the blue sky, which He
has prepared for all who love Him," answered the native.

"But do you believe this?" asked Abela.  "Do you believe that Jehovah is
satisfied that another was punished instead of you, and that He
therefore has set you free?"

"I did not understand it, but it seemed very good," answered the native.
"I should like to remain and learn more about the matter."

"Oh yes, do remain," exclaimed Abela.  "Go not back to worship again the
blocks of stone in which our countrymen put their trust.  The English
missionary will explain matters more clearly to you than I can."

I assured Nasile--for such the native told us was his name--that my
father would gladly explain the truth to him, and leaving him in
conversation with Abela, we hastened homewards with the satisfactory
intelligence.

In a short time we saw a party coming across the hill.  At first their
appearance caused some consternation, it being supposed that they were
heathens intending to attack the village.  As they drew nearer, however,
Masaugu was distinguished at their head, accompanied by Lisele.  The
chief was a tall fine man, with ample folds of native cloth round his
waist and over his shoulders.  My father hastened out to meet him, and
welcome him to the Station, and Maud and I followed.  As soon as Lisele
saw us she ran forward and threw her arms round me, and then embraced
Maud, calling us her dear sisters, and telling us how rejoiced she was
to come back.

"I was afraid at first that my father would not listen to me," she said.
"But I prayed and prayed, and at length, to my joy, he said that he
would go and hear more of the strange things I had told him of."

My father at first intended to conduct the chief into the chapel; but
though he was willing to go, several of his followers were afraid of
entering it, believing that some incantations would be used, and that
they might be compelled to _lotu_ against their will.  The whole party
therefore seated themselves in a shady place outside.  Here my father
addressed the chief; and he hoped that while speaking to him, what he
said might be attended to and understood by many of his followers.  Not
saying a word about the false gods he worshipped, my father told him of
the greatness and power and love and mercy of Jehovah, and explained to
him the simple plan of salvation which He has offered to sinful man.

The chief appeared much interested.  "I understand," he answered, "that
the white man's God is greater and more powerful than my gods, and I am
resolved soon to worship Him, as I am sure He can do more for me than
they can; but I have some enemies who have offended me, and I am about
to set out on an expedition to punish them, and when I have obtained the
victory, I will return and do as I have promised."

"Oh! my friend," exclaimed my father, "I should have told you of Satan,
who is allowed--we know not why--to go about the world to deceive men,
and he it is who has made you resolve to do this.  Jehovah does not
allow you to say that you will serve Him by-and-by.  He requires you and
all men to obey Him at once.  Satan, on the contrary, ever strives to
persuade people to put off serving Jehovah till by-and-by, that he may
get them altogether into his own power before they can do so.  Thus it
is that he deceives men and destroys their souls in all parts of the
world, and thus he has done at all times.  Jehovah has told us that He
will not allow us to punish our enemies, but that we are to love them
and do good to them.  Oh! let me warn and entreat you not to go on the
expedition you propose."

The chief was silent for some time.  Lisele and Abela, who had arrived,
united with my father in entreating him to remain and hear more of the
truth.

"What you say may be very right and good for those who profess to follow
Jehovah," he answered at length, "but I have not yet abandoned my gods,
and they will, I am sure, help me to gain the victory.  What I say is
wise, is it not?" he added, turning to his heathen attendants.  Of
course they all applauded him, and greatly to my fathers grief, he arose
to take his departure.

"Remember, oh chief, that I have warned you," said my father.  "We
cannot pray that you may gain the victory, because Jehovah will give it
as He thinks fit; but we will pray that your heart may be changed, and
that you may still worship Him whom you now reject."

"Alas! how many act as this poor heathen is doing," said my father,
after Masaugu and his companions had gone away.  "They believe in God,
and yet, blinded by Satan, fancy in their folly that they can safely put
off the time to begin serving and obeying Him."



CHAPTER FOUR.

OUR ANXIETIES INCREASE ON THE DEPARTURE OF MASAUGU.--MY FATHER IS
SUMMONED TO VISIT A SICK MISSIONARY AT ANOTHER ISLAND, AND WE ARE LEFT
UNDER THE CHARGE OF NANARI, THE NATIVE MISSIONARY.--MY MOTHER'S SUDDEN
DEATH.--A VESSEL APPEARS OFF THE COAST, AND AT KANARI'S SUGGESTION I
SEND OFF A NOTE, WARNING THE CAPTAIN OF THE DANGER TO WHICH HE IS
EXPOSED FROM THE NATIVES.

We rejoiced to find that Lisele was allowed to remain with her aunt at
the settlement.  She had tried, even before her return to the
settlement, to persuade her father to abandon his intentions of going to
war.  The tribe he intended to attack inhabited an island some leagues
away to the south, and as we stood on the shore we could see its blue
outline rising out of the ocean.  Lisele had reminded her father that he
had professed to wish us well, and that by going away he would leave us
exposed to the attacks of other heathen tribes, who would now venture
without hesitation through his territory, to attack us.  He replied that
they would not dare to do so, as he had threatened them with punishment
on his return should they molest them.

"Alas!" said Lisele, who told us this when we went to see her at her
aunt's house.  "Suppose he is defeated, what protection shall we then
have from our enemies?"

"We must trust in Jehovah, my child," said Abela.  "Or, if he thinks fit
to allow us to be afflicted, we must submit without murmur to His will.
We know that we can but suffer here for a short season, and that He has
prepared a glorious and happy home for those who love Jesus, and obey
His commandments down on earth.  Oh yes! since I have known the truth, I
have learned to understand that this world is a place of trial, and that
we must not look for peace and happiness and rest while we are in it.
God indeed made the world beautiful, and intended it to be happy, but
Satan persuaded man to sin, and sin has caused man to depart from God,
and brought all the disorder and misery and suffering which we see
around us.  Faith in Jesus Christ can alone remedy all these evils, and
I am sure that they will exist till all the world learns to love and
obey Him."

These remarks of Abela will show that she had made great advances in
Christian knowledge, and was well able to instruct her young niece.

Lisele came back with us to the school, which my mother, although weak
and suffering still, insisted on superintending.  I think that she
herself was not aware how ill she really was.

We used to go down every morning to the sea to bathe in a little
sheltered cove, almost surrounded by high rocks, where there was no
danger of a visit from a shark.  Here my father had built a small hut in
which Maud and I might dress.  The native girls dispensed with any such
accommodation, and while we were content to swim about in the bay, they
would boldly strike out a long distance from the land.  Even when the
wind blew strong on the shore, and the surf came rolling in, they would
dash through it, now diving under a huge breaker, now rising to its
foaming summit, and playing about as securely as if they were on the dry
land.

Two mornings after the chief had paid us a visit we went down as usual
to bathe, when we saw a large fleet of canoes, propelled by paddles,
gliding over the smooth water of the lagoon towards the passage which
communicated with the open sea.  On first seeing them we were about to
hurry home, fearing that they might be enemies, but Lisele quieted our
alarm, by telling us that they were her father's fleet, starting on his
proposed expedition.  They were curious looking vessels.  Each consisted
of two long narrow canoes placed side by side, but at some distance from
each other, and united by strong beams, on which a platform or stage was
erected, thus making one vessel.  The rowers sat with long paddles on
either side, while on the deck stood the warriors in their war-paint and
feathers, and flourishing their lances and whirling their clubs,
inciting each other to the deeds of valour, or rather of cruelty, which
they intended to perform.  Instead of a mast in the centre, there was a
triangle with the ends fixed on either side, on which the mat-formed
sail extended on a long yard ready to be hoisted.

As they glided by the sound of the wild shouts and shrieks they uttered
reached our ears.

"May my poor father be protected," said Lisele to me, as we watched
them.  "Once I should have thought what we see very fine, and should
have sung and clapped my hands with joy.  Now that I know how wicked it
is to go and fight and kill other human beings, I feel inclined to weep
with sorrow."

"We must pray for your father, Lisele," I said, "that God will turn his
heart and make him see the crime of warfare."

"Yes, yes; that is my comfort," she answered.

When the canoes reached the outlet from the lagoon the sails were
hoisted, and at a rapid rate they glided away over the ocean, while
Lisele, Maud, and I, knelt down on the sand and prayed, not that God
would give the victory to the chief, but that He would turn his heart
and make him to know the truth.

As we were leaving the beach we saw another canoe coming round a
headland through the lagoon, which she had entered by a further off
passage.  Had the strange canoe been a little sooner she would have
encountered the fleet, and very likely have been stopped and compelled
to accompany the war party.  Her appearance caused us some anxiety.  If
she had heathens on board, they might land and rob us, or cause us even
more serious annoyance.  We continued to watch her, as we knew that we
should have plenty of time to escape and give warning at the village
before she could come to shore.  At length we discovered a flag flying
from the end of her yard, and great was my joy to see that on it was
worked a dove with the olive branch of peace--I consequently hoped that
a missionary might be on board coming to visit us.  We waited therefore
for the arrival of the canoe.  We could distinguish, however, as she
drew near, only natives on her deck.  They all were in the dress adopted
by Christian converts--in shirts and trousers.

The canoe soon ran up on the beach, when a native stepped on shore with
a letter in his hand.  He told me that he had been sent by Mr Hilton, a
missionary stationed on an island about fifty miles off.  Mr Hilton was
very ill, and entreated my father to come and see him; for, believing
that he should not recover, he was anxious to commit his motherless
children to his charge.  We accordingly conducted the messenger up to
the house.

The letter caused my father much grief and perplexity.  He sorrowed to
hear of his friend's illness, and felt anxious to go to him, and yet he
was unwilling to leave my mother and us for so long a time, when the
settlement might possibly be annoyed by heathens.  Still he knew that he
could with confidence leave the instruction of the people to Nanari, who
would also protect my mother and us to the best of his power.  He sent
for Nanari, and spoke to him on the subject.

"God helping me, I will do all that man can do," answered Nanari.  "And
nothing shall tempt me to quit the post you have committed to my
charge."

My mother, feeling for our poor friend and for the young ones who might
soon be deprived of his protection, sacrificing her own wishes, urged my
father to go as he was requested.  As there was no time to be lost if he
would see his friend alive, bidding us a tender, and it seemed to me a
peculiarly solemn farewell, he went on board the canoe, which
immediately set sail on her return.  We accompanied him to the beach,
and watched the vessel till she was lost to sight in the distance.

On our return home we found my mother suffering greatly.  The agitation
of parting from my father had been more than she could bear.  Oh, how I
longed to recall him!  Little could he have known her dangerous state.
My father had a knowledge of medicine, and he might have applied
remedies of which we were ignorant.  Good Abela came up on hearing how
ill my mother was, though she could afford us but little assistance.
Suddenly, as I gazed at my mother, a fearful conviction came upon me
that she was dying.  She knew herself that such was the case.  I cannot
even now bear to dwell upon the sad scene, for sad indeed it was to us,
though my mother's heart was lifted up with joy and hope.

"God's will be done, my children," she said, taking Maud's and my hand
in hers.  "He will care for and protect you though troubles arise which
may seem overwhelming."

Abela and Nanari assured her that they would devote themselves to our
service, yet the absence of my father must have been a sore trial to
her.

During that night she breathed her last, and I was left motherless; so,
indeed, was dear Maud, to whom she had been truly a mother.

Then quickly followed the funeral.  All the Christians of the settlement
stood round the grave, in a beautiful spot which had been set apart for
the purpose, at a short distance from the chapel, when Nanari offered up
a prayer that God's Holy Spirit would influence the hearts of all
present, and enable them to possess the same hope of a joyous
resurrection as that in which my mother died, he then addressed the
people, urging them to put faith in God's goodness and wisdom, and
telling them that though troubles might come, not therefore to suppose
that He had forgotten to be gracious, but to go on praying and trusting
in Him, till He might think fit to call them out of this world, to be
with Him in glory and happiness unspeakable.

Maud and I spent that sad evening with our hands clasped together, often
weeping but seldom speaking.  My heart bled for my poor father, as I
thought of his grief and anguish, when, on his return he would find that
my mother had been taken from him.

"Still," said Maud, looking up in my face, "he will know that she is in
joy surpassing human understanding, and we cannot tell from what trials
and sufferings she may thus have escaped."

With the last thought I was greatly comforted.

As we stood together in the verandah that evening, gazing up into the
sky and thinking of the glories now revealed to my mother, we saw a
bright star with a long tail of light, such as we had never before
beheld.  I knew at once from its appearance that it was a comet.  Many
of the natives had seen it too, and we heard their voices uttering
exclamations of surprise and terror.  Soon afterwards we saw Lisele
approaching.  She hesitated, as if unwilling to intrude on our grief,
but I called to her, and she came up to us.  I told her what I knew
about comets, and begged her to try and calm the alarm of her people,
and to assure them that it was but a luminous mass, and that it
betokened neither good nor evil to the inhabitants of this world, though
Jehovah directed its course, as He orders everything else in the
universe.

"Ah, but the heathens will not think so," she exclaimed, "and we know
not what effect it may have upon their minds.  Perhaps they will think
it is sent through the incantations of the Christians, and will come in
consequence and attack us."

I scarcely thought this possible, but Lisele was positive that it would
have a bad effect.  She went, however, to tell the Christian natives
what I had said, and to assure them that the comet would do them no
harm.

Oh, how sad was that night and the next morning, when we looked on the
bed on which my mother had slept, and knew that we should never again
see her dear face there, so calm and beautiful.  We had, however, our
duties to perform, and we set about them as we knew she would have
desired.

While we were thus engaged Nanari appeared to learn if there was
anything he could do for us, saying that the people would bring us all
the food we might require, and begging that we would not be anxious on
that score.  He then told us that a vessel was off the coast, and by
going to the front of the house we saw her.  We hoped that she might
have friends on board coming to visit our Station, or that where my
father and Mr Hilton were, as we knew how gladly she would be welcomed
there.

As we watched her, we saw at length, to our disappointment, from the
course she was steering, that she was not coming to our Station, but was
apparently about to enter a harbour further down the coast.

"I would that I could warn those on board of the character of the
natives where she is going," said Nanari, when he saw this.  "Unless
they are on their guard I fear that they may be treated as others have
been."

We had only one small canoe at the Station, but Nanari said that if we
would write a message he would induce two of the Christian natives to
carry it off.  I accordingly hastily wrote a note, warning the captain
of the vessel against any treachery which might be intended, and with
much satisfaction saw the canoe paddle off towards her.  The breeze,
however, was strong, and it seemed doubtful whether the canoe would
reach the stranger before she came to an anchor.



CHAPTER FIVE.

WE RECEIVE THE SAD TIDINGS OF THE MASSACRE OF THE CREW OF THE VESSEL.--I
STILL HOPE THAT SOME MAY HAVE ESCAPED, AND LISELE TAKES MEANS TO RESCUE
THEM.--SHE SENDS HER COUSIN TOFA, TO MAFOA, THE YOUNG CHIEF TO WHOM HER
FATHER HAS BETROTHED HER.--A FEARFUL HURRICANE.--THE HEATHEN NATIVES
PREVENTED BY IT FROM ATTACKING THE SETTLEMENT AND SEIZING US.

We could scarcely hope that my father would have had time to return, yet
we anxiously looked for his arrival.  The canoe with the two natives had
been unable to reach the vessel, and information was brought to Lisele
that they had been seized and killed by the heathens, who had gone out
in chase of them.  A bright light was also seen at night in the
direction of the harbour in which the vessel was supposed to have
anchored; and the next day the dreadful rumour reached us that Nanari's
worst apprehensions had been realised, that she had been surprised by
the treacherous natives, and that every person on board had been put to
death.  At first we could not believe so fearful a story, but Lisele
assured us that she had no doubt of its truth.

"Is it not possible that some may have escaped?"  I exclaimed, when
Lisele gave me the account.  "Have all the people on board the beautiful
vessel, sailing by so proudly the other day, been killed?  Should any
have escaped could we not take means to let them know that there are
Christian friends here who would welcome them?  If my father was at home
I am sure he would make all effort to rescue the unhappy people."

Lisele replied that although the tribe who had committed the deed were
at present at peace with her people, that even should any white man have
escaped it would be difficult to get them out of the heathens' hands,
but that she would try what could be done.  "There is a young chief
among them who is more inclined than the rest of the people to be
friendly with my father," she observed.  "Although he is a brave
warrior, he is neither fierce nor cruel; and if, by chance, any of the
white men have fallen into his power he may possibly have spared their
lives.  I will try to send a message to him and ask him to protect them,
and to give them up to your father.  Yet I fear there is very little
probability of any having escaped."

Lisele's answer gave me very little hope that any had escaped the
massacre; but I was sure that she would take every means to ascertain
the truth.  Nanari, when he heard the account, was willing to go
himself, but both Abela and Lisele entreated him not to make the
attempt--urging that the heathens were so enraged at him for having
caused so many people to _lotu_, that they would be certain, should he
venture among them, to put him to death.

He at length was persuaded to abandon his design, and Lisele undertook
to send a young relative, who, although a heathen, was attached to her,
and would do whatever she desired.  Being still a boy he had not
accompanied her father, but he was more likely to succeed than anybody
she could think of.  In the course of the day Tofa, the lad of whom
Lisele spoke, made his appearance.  He was a fine intelligent-looking
youth, and I could not help hoping that through the means of his cousin
he might be brought to know the truth.  He seemed proud of the mission
given to him, though he was well aware of the danger he incurred.

"Tell Mafoa that if he really regards me as he professes, he will act
according to my wishes, and treat the white men as friends," said
Lisele.  Mafoa was the young chief of whom she had spoken, and who, I
had no doubt, from this remark, entertained hopes of making her his
wife.

Recollecting that should any seamen have escaped, they would have a
difficulty in understanding young Tofa, I wrote a short note which I
hoped would prove of more service than the last I had sent, mentioning
the missionary station, and saying that we and the Christian natives
would gladly afford them all the assistance in our power.  Several other
messages having been given to Tofa, he set off on his expedition; and we
kneeling down, offered up a prayer for his success.

Notwithstanding our anxiety, with the assistance of Lisele and Abela, we
held school as usual, while Nanari conducted the service in the chapel,
and instructed the young men and boys, as was his custom.  The night was
as calm as the preceding one.  The comet could be seen winding its
solitary course through the heavens, appearing even brighter than
before.  After Maud and I had gazed at it for some time we retired to
our beds.  I heard her sobbing, giving way at length to the sorrow she
had restrained in my presence--not that she could have felt my mother's
loss more than I did, but I was older, and had endeavoured, though the
strife was a hard one, to command my feelings.  At length I heard her
sobs cease, and I in time forgot my sorrow in sleep.

We were both suddenly awakened by a fearful noise.  We started up--all
was dark.  There came the sound of the wind howling in the trees and
falling timber, and the roaring of the sea, as it dashed upon the reef
with tremendous force, and rocks crashing down from the mountain
heights.  A hurricane was raging.  We sat up trembling with alarm.  My
first thought was for my dear father, should he now be at sea returning
to us.  Then other dreadful sounds, like thunder breaking overhead.
Something else terrific besides the hurricane was occurring, it seemed
to us, yet we dared not leave the house for fear of being blown away by
the wind.  After some time we assisted each other to dress, as well as
we could, in the dark, for we expected every moment that the roof would
be carried off, or the house itself blown down.  We remembered several
hurricanes, but this appeared more violent than any that had before
occurred.  We had been protected during former ones, and we knew that
the same power would take care of us now.  I had proposed lighting the
lamp, when Maud observed, should the house be blown down, it might set
the thatch on fire, and the whole village would be burnt.

"Let us remain in darkness, for remember God sees us as if it was light,
she said.  Darkness is no darkness with Him--the day and night to Him
are both alike."

I agreed with Maud, and together we knelt down side by side to pray for
protection.  Although the tempest continued to rage without, our house,
built by my father's hands, stood firm.  It was, like his own faith,
well knit and bound together.  He had not forgotten, when erecting it,
that such hurricanes were likely to occur, and he had accordingly
prepared for them.

So should we go through life, not trembling with the fear of
misfortunes, but ready to encounter them should they overtake us.

Hour after hour seemed to pass by as we thus knelt and prayed.  Every
now and then we could not help starting up, as a more fearful crash than
usual sounded in our ears.  Still the wished-for daylight did not
appear.  The truth was, that since the commencement of the storm but a
short time only had elapsed, though in our desolation and solitude it
had appeared very long.

At length we heard a knocking at the door.  I made my way, followed by
Maud, to open it, when two figures appeared, and I heard the voices of
Nanari and Lisele.  During the moment the door was open I observed a
bright glare in the sky above the waving and bending trees, but it was
only for a moment, as immediately they were inside they closed the door
behind them.

"Are you safe, are you uninjured?" they exclaimed.  "We could not bear
to leave you all alone, and, trusting to Jehovah's protection, we
ventured up here, hoping to comfort you."

We thanked them for coming, and I led the way into our sitting-room.
"What dreadful event is occurring in addition to the hurricane?"  I
asked.  "Can the forest be on fire?"

"The mountain has burst forth, and is sending up stones and ashes into
the air, while hot streams of lava are flowing down its sides," answered
Nanari.  "Not one but many forests may be burned, but we are in the
hands of Jehovah, and should not fear, my daughter."

I inquired whether he thought that the ashes or streams of lava might
reach as far as the settlement, he believed that, shut in as we were, by
a separate range of hills, that the lava at all events would not run
down towards us; though, with regard to the ashes and stones, how far
they might be carried, he could not say, and again he added the same
consolation he had before offered.

Poor Lisele was in much affliction.  Her father might probably be at
sea--as I feared mine was--and exposed to the dreadful tempest, and she
could not hope that he, having set forth against the warnings of his
Christian friends, would be under the protection of Jehovah.  "Alas!
alas!" she exclaimed, wringing her hands, should he be driven out over
the ocean and lost, he will not have known the good and merciful God who
would--had he listened to the advice given him--have received him as a
son, and taken him to dwell with Him for ever in the glorious country
you have told me of beyond the skies.

"We have prayed for your father, and may continue to pray for him, my
child," said Nanari.  "And Jehovah may still find a way to preserve him
from the danger in which he is placed."  Thus conversing, and often
kneeling down to pray, we passed the hours of darkness.

As dawn approached, the hurricane began to abate; and by the time the
sun rose out of the eastern ocean, it had entirely ceased.  As we opened
the door and gazed forth we had reason to be more than ever thankful
that we had escaped destruction.  Several tall trees, a short distance
from the house, lay torn up by the roots, and huge boughs strewed the
ground in every direction.  The chapel and school-house had escaped
injury; but Nanari, who went out to ascertain whether any of the people
had suffered, came back with a sad report.  Several of the cottages had
been blown down, two people had been killed, and many more injured.

Leaving Maud and Lisele to attend to the house, I accompanied Nanari to
visit the sufferers.  While receiving instruction as a missionary he had
been taught the simple methods to be pursued under such circumstances.
Abela, I was thankful to find, had escaped, and she assisted us in
bathing and binding up the wounds and setting the limbs of those who had
been hurt.  There was sorrow for those who had been killed, but it was
not such sorrow as the heathen would have shown who have no hope.

"Jehovah is merciful, and has called our brothers to a better and
happier land than this," exclaimed those who stood around, preparing to
carry the dead to their graves.

We were not aware of it at the time--but we learned afterwards--that on
that very night a band of savage heathens were on their way to attack
the settlement with the intention of killing Nanari, and carrying off
Lisele and us as prisoners.  How dreadful would have been our fate had
they succeeded, and, unwarned as we were, we should have been taken by
surprise without the possibility of escaping.

The volcano continued raging during the day, but the natives, accustomed
to see its fires burst forth from time to time, were less alarmed at it
than they were at the appearance of the comet.  As I watched it, I
conceived the hope that a stream of lava, flowing down between us and
the more hostile heathen tribes, might prevent them from approaching to
attack us.



CHAPTER SIX.

LISELE AND I FEEL GREAT ANXIETY ON ACCOUNT OF OUR FATHER'S NOT
RETURNING.--TOFA ALSO HAS NOT APPEARED.--WE ARE ASSEMBLED IN THE CHAPEL,
WHEN TOFA, WITH A WHITE STRANGER, ARRIVES AND WARNS US THAT THE HEATHENS
THREATEN AN ATTACK.--TOFA TAKES CHARGE OF HIS COMPANION.--WE FLY TO THE
MOUNTAINS, AND WITNESS THE BURNING OF OUR VILLAGE.  WE LIE CONCEALED IN
A CAVE, WHILE THE SAVAGES SEARCH FOR US.

The hurricane had caused sad damage to the cocoanut groves and
plantations in our little settlement, and we had no doubt that it, in
addition to the eruption of the volcano, had produced still more
destructive effects throughout the island, but I own that my thoughts
were far more occupied with my anxiety about my father.  In vain we
watched for the return of his canoe.  No sail appeared in the blue ocean
in the direction of the island to which he had gone.  Lisele too was
overwhelmed with grief at the non-appearance of her father; her only
hope was that he had conquered his enemies and remained in possession of
their country.  Still he would, she thought, before this, have
despatched a canoe to announce his victory.

Two days passed away, and we began to look for the return of young Tofa;
but on the third day, when he did not come, fears for his safety were
added to our other troubles.  The chief, indeed, the only refuge from
our sorrows, was prayer; how great was the comfort that brought to our
hearts none but those who have experienced it can tell.

We continued to attend to our usual duties.  Though the younger girls
and boys assembled for school, the older people were too much agitated
and alarmed to attend to their studies; they were also chiefly employed
during the day in repairing the damages caused by the storm.

In the evening, however, they all assembled in the chapel for public
prayer.  Nanari was addressing them, when the noise of feet was heard
without, and directly afterwards Tofa appeared, followed by a young
white man.  The latter took off his hat when he saw how we were engaged,
and stood reverentially at the door for a moment, as if unwilling to
interrupt us, though evidently in a state of great agitation.

Tofa, however, influenced by no such feelings, exclaimed loudly, "Fly!
fly! and hide yourselves.  Your enemies are approaching, and will be
here anon.  Mafoa tried to prevent them, but he could not prevail."

"My friends!" exclaimed Nanari, "the warning has been sent that you all
may seek for safety.  For myself, I will remain with the aged and
wounded people, who cannot fly; but you, my daughters," turning to Maud
and me, "who have been committed to my charge, I must see that you are
placed in a secure hiding-place, where the heathens cannot find you."

"We will place ourselves under your guidance," I answered, "but you must
also take care that this stranger does not again fall into the hands of
the heathens," I added, turning to the young man who was standing at the
door, and who appeared to be above the rank of a common sailor.  "Tell
me," I asked, "are you the only person who has escaped from the vessel,
which we heard was burned the other day along the coast?"

"I fear that such is the case, and why my life was spared I cannot tell
you," he answered.  "I jumped overboard, and was swimming towards the
shore, when I was taken up by a canoe, in which was a young chief, who
made signs that he would protect me, and faithfully kept his word.  I
should have remained with him had I not received a note sent, I presume,
by you."

This was said in a hurried tone, while Nanari was arranging a plan for
our safety.

I told the stranger of the warning we had just received from Tofa of the
threatened attack by the heathens, supposing that he might not have
understood what the lad might have said to him.

While some of our friends ran off to the huts to obtain provisions,
Abela and Lisele taking our hands, told us that we must set off at once
to the mountains, till the fury of the heathens had ceased.  Three or
four of our other friends also prepared to accompany us.

"But what will this stranger do?"  I asked.  "Surely if the heathens
find him when no longer under the protection of Mafoa, they will put him
to death."

"He is under my care," exclaimed Tofa.  "I promised Mafoa that I would
protect him, and I will show them that I am clever enough to hide him
away even although the whole tribe come to look for him."

I explained this to the young stranger, and advised him to put himself
under Tofa's guidance.  Nanari having commended us to the care of
Jehovah, we and our friends, not stopping even to obtain anything at the
house, hurried off towards the mountains, while Tofa led the stranger by
a more direct way up a precipice, which was too steep for us to climb.
As we were quitting the chapel, turning my eyes seaward for a moment, I
caught sight of several sails dotting the ocean in the far distance.  I
pointed them out to Lisele.

"They may be my father's canoes," she exclaimed, "and he might arrive in
time to protect us."

"Alas! even should they be Masaugu's fleet, they may be too late for
that," said Abela.  "We must not delay on such a chance; perhaps, too,
they may prove more deadly foes than those from whom we fly.  Let us
hasten on, and we may be able to learn what they are when our charge is
in safety."

Thus urged, Lisele no longer hesitated.  Night was coming on, but
provided we could make our way, the darkness would assist us in eluding
our savage foes should they pursue us.  The path towards the mountains,
at all times difficult, was rendered doubly so by the number of fallen
trees across it, thrown down by the hurricane.  Sometimes we had to
climb over the trunks, at others to creep under the branches.

"The heathens will be less able to discover our tracks," observed
Lisele, "than if the path had been open."

"Ah yes! my child," said Abela, "all is ordered for the best."

Now we went on and on, now clambering over wild rocks, now proceeding
along a narrow valley, now climbing its steep sides till we reached a
height whence we could look back upon our settlement.  "Hark!" said
Lisele, "what cries are those?"  We listened; the Indian girl's quick
ear had detected sounds which neither Maud nor I had till then
perceived.

"Alas! alas!" she exclaimed, "they are the shouts of the savage heathens
as they rush in among those we have left behind, and rage at finding
that we have escaped them."

That she was right in her conjecture we had too soon painful evidence.
Several bright lights appeared, and presently fierce flames burst forth
from amid the trees.  The savages had set the houses on fire to revenge
themselves on the inhabitants who had for the present escaped their
fury.  Our friends, not stopping to watch the progress of the flames,
hurried us on.  Proceeding along a narrow ridge, we once more descended
down a ravine thickly covered with trees.  The natives knew their way,
but so dense was the foliage that to my eyes all appeared dark around.
We could hear the roar of a torrent close to us.  Now they led us along
slippery rocks, tightly holding our hands; now we found ourselves
ascending, now descending, steep precipices.  At length they stopped,
and drawing aside the thick foliage, Abela led us into a small cavern,
the front of which appeared to be completely concealed by underwood and
numberless creepers with which it was entwined.  A portion of the
provisions, and some water which had been brought, were placed by our
sides.

"Here, my daughters, you will remain safe till the heathens, having
searched for you in vain, take their departure," said Abela.  "I know
this spot well, for before Masaugu's father conquered the territory he
now holds, I and my family dwelt in the neighbourhood.  I discovered it
as a girl when rambling about the mountains with my brothers, who are
dead, and no one else is acquainted with it.  We ourselves propose to
find concealment in different directions, for should the heathens search
for us, some may thus have a better prospect of escaping, and the faith
of Jehovah will still remain in the land."

Abela and her companions, having carefully allowed the shrubs to regain
their natural position, left Maud and me alone, and we soon lost the
sound of their footsteps.  The cavern was perfectly dry, and sufficient
air found its way through the boughs to prevent the atmosphere from
feeling close.  Some mats had also been left for us, on which we could
recline; but, as may be supposed, the fearful events that had occurred,
and the grief and anxiety which weighed on our hearts, prevented us for
many hours from sleeping.  No sound except that of the ceaseless roar
and splash of the neighbouring waterfall, reached our ears.  While we
sat, shrouded in darkness, it was difficult to avoid giving way to
despondency.  We did not, I need scarcely say, forget to pray, while we
had cause to be thankful at having received sufficient warning to escape
from the cruel fate which would have overtaken us had we been at the
settlement.

At last we slept, and the light of day was making its way through the
dense foliage when we awoke.  Our cavern, we now found, was even smaller
than we had supposed.  There was no room to walk about; indeed, it
afforded us just space sufficient to lie down at full length.  As we
peered out between the bushes, we could see the opposite sides of the
ravine rising up in a perpendicular precipice directly before us.  This
gave us an assurance that there was little probability of our being
discovered by the savages, even though they might search diligently for
us through the mountains.  Our friends had left us an ample supply of
provisions so that if necessary we might remain many days there without
fear of starvation.  But what was to be our future lot it was impossible
to say.

"It is a great comfort to know that God will decide it for us," said
Maud, putting her arms round my neck.  "He knows what is best, and He
will find a way of escape for those who trust Him, out of all
difficulties.  See," she added, "I have brought His word to comfort us,"
and she produced a small Bible from her pocket, which she had
thoughtfully put there when leaving the chapel.

What consolation did that book give us!  We read and prayed, and then
read again in a low voice, and strange as it may seem to some, the time
did not appear to drag heavily along; but calmness came ever our minds--
our hearts were at peace, we no longer feared what man could do to us.

We had been reading together, when suddenly we both started.  A wild cry
readied our ears; it was echoed by others in different directions, some
coming up the ravine, others sounding, it seemed, overhead.  I felt Maud
tremble as she clung to me.

"Can those cries come from the heathens, who have discovered our
footsteps?" she whispered.  "If so, we are lost."

"Not lost, dear Maud," I answered.  "They can but take our lives, and I
trust that though they may be near they will not find us.  Our friends
felt sure of our safety in this concealment, so let us not despair, but
it will be prudent not to speak."

We remained silent, clinging to each other.  Again the wild shrieks and
cries echoed around us, some of the voices appeared to be quite close.
We sat listening anxiously--now the sounds appeared to proceed from a
greater distance.  Yes, we trusted that the savages were at length
passing by us, their shrieks grew fainter and fainter, and ultimately
altogether ceased.

We had been again preserved from a threatened danger.  We could scarcely
believe that it was over when darkness once more crept up the ravine.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

WE REMAIN CONCEALED, NONE OF OUR FRIENDS APPEARING.--MAUD SEES A PERSON
ON THE HILL.--OUR ALARM.--WE AGAIN HEAR VOICES AND FOOTSTEPS.--OUR
NATIVE FRIENDS RETURN AND BRING US SAD TIDINGS; YET WE HAVE CAUSE TO BE
THANKFUL THAT SOME HAVE ESCAPED.--WE ARE MAKING OUR WAY TO A CANOE, WHEN
THE HEATHENS PURSUE US.--ESCAPE.--CHARLES NORTON GIVES ME HIS HISTORY.

Two more days passed away, and none of our friends had come near us.  We
began to fear that they had been seized by the heathens.  Should such be
the case, what must be our fate!

"We will wait where we are till our provisions are exhausted, and then
we must make our way down to the sea-shore, and perhaps we may be seen
by some passing ship and taken off," said Maud.  "Anything will be
better than trusting ourselves to the savage heathens."

I agreed with her that this was the only plan we could follow, that,
indeed, was almost a hopeless one.

"But suppose papa has been detained longer than he expected with Mr
Hilton, and returns to the settlement.  If so, we may see him and reach
his canoe," said Maud.  She always called my father papa.

This idea of Maud's gave me new hope, and then I thought how sad must be
our meeting when I should have to tell him of our mother's death.

Our chief want in our cavern was water; but Maud managed, by creeping
under the bushes, where she was sure she could not be seen, to reach a
pool filled by the never ceasing spray from the cascade.  I entreated
her, however, not to go out often, for I was afraid of her foot
slipping, or, notwithstanding her assertion, that some native passing
over the mountain above us might catch a glimpse of her.  She agreed,
therefore, to wait till just after dawn, when no one was likely to be at
so great a distance from any habitation.  She went out one morning to
fill the gourd, which held our store of water, and when she came back
she told me that she had seen a person looking down towards her from a
point a long way up above the top of the waterfall.

"I did not stop to look a second time," she said, "but, crouching down,
crept back, in the hopes that he might not have discovered me."

This circumstance caused us great alarm; still we hoped that even had
any one seen her, he might not be able to discover the entrance to our
cavern.

"Perhaps the person I saw may have been Tofa, or the young Englishman,"
exclaimed Maud, as if the thought had suddenly struck her.  "They would
naturally come to look for us, especially should they know that any of
our friends had been discovered by the heathens, and they might assist
us greatly."

"I trust that our friends have escaped," I said.  "Though it seems
strange that they should be so long in returning to us, and as Tofa and
the young Englishman are strangers, I would rather trust myself to those
whose fidelity has been well tried."

"Oh, but I am sure that the Englishman would defend us with his life,"
said Maud.  "I was struck by the good expression of his countenance, and
the way he behaved during the few moments we saw him.  I do trust that
he has escaped, and I long to know who he is, for I am sure that he is
not a common sailor."

In this I agreed with Maud: indeed, had I not known that it is imprudent
to trust strangers, I should have been _very_ thankful to obtain his
assistance.  Although he might be the person Maud had soon, we knew that
it would be very unwise to venture out of our concealment.

"Still I should like to try and look out through the brushwood, and then
should we see him approaching, and be sure that it is him, we might make
ourselves known," said Maud.

As Maud was sure that she could do as she proposed without being
discovered, I did not forbid her, though I felt that it might be wiser
to remain as closely concealed as we had been hitherto.  Still no one
approached.

"After all, I may have been mistaken," said Maud, coming back and
sitting down by my side.

We were employed as usual in reading, when the sound of voices at a
distance reached our ears, coming apparently up the ravine.  "Can they
be the savages returning to look for us," whispered Maud.

"I think that their voices would sound very differently to those we
hear," I answered.  "They would be wildly shrieking and shouting, unless
they intended to attack an enemy unprepared for them.  Still, as the
persons may possibly be strangers, we will keep concealed."

We remained seated on the ground, hoping that should enemies be
approaching, they would pass by without discovering us.  The footsteps
grew nearer.  We could hear them climbing up the precipice to the ledge
on which the cavern opened.  Maud, notwithstanding her usual courage,
trembled violently.

The boughs were drawn aside, when several natives appeared in front of
us.  A second glance showed us that they were entirely clothed according
to the custom of the converts, and then, to our joy, we saw that Abela
was among them.  We sprang up and threw ourselves into her arms.

"My children," she said, "we have left you long; but we have had many
difficulties to encounter, and, alas! disasters have overtaken our
friends.  But come, we have no time to lose, we will tell you more as we
go along."

We were thankful to find that besides Abela, those who had accompanied
us to our hiding-place had likewise escaped.  Our friends having taken
the baskets, and the remainder of our provisions, we set off down the
ravine, which led, as we supposed, towards the sea-shore.  I immediately
inquired of Abela if she had heard of my father.

"Alas! no, my child," she answered, "Our good pastor's canoe has not
returned; we have anxiously kept watch for him, and he could scarcely
have reached the shore without having been observed."  I then inquired
for Nanari, who might, I hoped, have escaped.  "He died faithfully at
his post with those whom he would not desert," she answered.  "He was
entreated by the sick and wounded to fly, but would not, and then, alas!
the savage people rushed in and slew him."

She then told me that Lisele was safe, although she had run great risk
of being captured by the heathens.  The fleet we had seen was the
remnant of that with which Masaugu had set sail.  Though at first
victorious in his expedition, he had been attacked by overwhelming
numbers of his enemies, and, with the loss of a large portion of his
warriors, and many of his canoes, had with difficulty reached the
island.  On his arrival he found a large party of the heathens, who had
heard that he intended to lotu, arrayed against him, and once more he
had to put to sea.  He had, however, reached the end of the island where
we now were.  There Lisele had joined him, and, at her earnest
entreaties, he had left a canoe to convoy us away.  Abela told us also
that Tofa and the young Englishman had been communicated with, and she
hoped that they would be found already on board the canoe.

"Oh then we will proceed at once to Mr Hilton's station," I exclaimed.
"What joy it will be if we find that my father has not yet quitted it."

"Such are Masaugu's intentions," said Abela.  "He has seen the folly of
his conduct in going to attack his enemies when so earnestly warned by
your father, and now he wishes to remain with the Christian missionary,
that he may receive instruction in the truths he before despised."

The news we thus received caused us many conflicting feeling's.  We
deeply grieved for the loss of the faithful Nanari, while my anxiety
about my father was still unrelieved.  Yet we rejoiced that Masaugu,
through the severe lesson he had received, should have been induced to
seek for Christian instruction.

Our path down the ravine was extremely difficult, and often dangerous,
and we could make but slow progress.  Abela, however, hurried on as fast
as we could venture to proceed, for she feared that the heathens,
knowing that many of the Christians had escaped, would be searching for
us, and that although they might not dare to follow Masaugu's fleet,
they would not hesitate to attack the single canoe, with only a small
party on board.  At length we caught sight of the blue ocean, but the
sparkling white lines of foam I saw dancing over it, made me fear that
the canoe would have a hard buffet with the waves.

We were already not far from the beach, when we saw two persons running
towards us--they were Tofa and the young Englishman.  "Hasten," they
exclaimed; "a large band of our enemies are coming along the shore, and
we have been in dread that you would be cut off."  The latter, who of
course spoke in English, took Maud and me by the hands to assist us, and
helped along by him we soon reached the boat.  The crew stood ready with
poles to urge on the canoe into deep water.  We were speedily on board,
and launching forth; the wind being favourable, a large triangular mat
sail was set, and we glided away from the beach.

Scarcely had we got beyond the reach of their spears, than the savages
arrived at the spot we had left.  Several were hurled at us, but happily
no one was hit, and the next shower, which the vindictive savages darted
from their hands, fell short of our canoe.

Abela and every Christian with her knelt down on the deck and offered up
an earnest prayer--in which we joined--that the hearts of our foes might
be changed, and that they would ere long be brought to know the truth.
The savages continued shrieking and shouting at us till we had got
outside the reef.  Happily no canoe was near, or they would undoubtedly
have followed us.

We could see Masaugu's fleet in the far distance; but as our canoe was
smaller than any of his we could not hope to overtake him.  I was
thankful, however, to find that he was steering towards Mr Hilton's
station, where we hoped in time to arrive.  The sea was, as I had
feared, very rough, and though our canoe was strong and buoyant, she was
tossed much about, and had it not been for the assistance of the young
Englishman and Tofa, we should have had great difficulty in clinging to
the deck.  In the centre was a small house or cabin, generally used by
the chief or owner of the canoe, and this we found was to be devoted to
our use at night as a sleeping place.  Still, as I surveyed the
curiously-constructed and apparently weak vessel, I could not help
feeling that a voyage on board her of the length we were about to
attempt, must be attended with much danger.  Happily we could say at sea
as on shore, "We will trust ourselves to the care of One all-powerful to
save."

As I now had a better opportunity of observing the young stranger more
particularly than before, I felt more convinced than at first that he
was a person of education.  His manner towards Maud and me especially,
was retiring and reserved, and he seemed unwilling to intrude himself
upon us.  After some time, however, he came and sat near us, and thanked
me for the note I had written, which, as he supposed, had not only been
the means of obtaining his freedom, but of his life being preserved.

"I wrote merely on the possibility of any European having escaped the
massacre which I understood had taken place," I answered.  "I can
therefore claim no thanks from you."

"I am not the less grateful," he answered.  "I had so fully expected to
be killed, that I feel like one risen from the dead."

"I trust that you have risen to newness of life," I ventured to say, for
I am sure it was a remark my father would have made, and I felt anxious
to be assured that the young man was under religious impressions.  It
was an opportunity indeed I dare not let pass by.

"Yes, Miss Liddiard, I do feel that," he exclaimed.  "And with what
horror do I reflect what would have been my doom had I died with my
companions.  I knew the truth when I was a boy, for I had been brought
up by a pious father and mother, but I became careless and wild, and
neglected all their precepts and warnings.  I went on from bad to worse,
and at length, believing that if I could get out to the Pacific--of
which I had read--I could enjoy unfettered liberty and licence, I
shipped on board a vessel bound out, round Cape Horn.  Having knocked
about in the way I proposed for some time, though, as may be supposed, I
did not find the life among rough seamen and fierce savages as agreeable
as I had expected, I at length reached Sydney in New South Wales.  I
there joined the sandal wood trader, which has been so fearfully
destroyed.

"Just before going on board I met an old friend of my father's, a
missionary, whom I had known at home.  He spoke to me seriously, and
warned me against joining the vessel, knowing as he did, the lawless
character of her crew.  He offered to obtain my discharge if I would
come and live with him.  His words made a deep impression on my heart,
although I was too self-willed to follow his advice.  During the voyage,
while we were sailing from island to island, those words often and often
recurred to my mind.  I in vain attempted to drive them from me.  When I
saw my companions being put to death--expecting to meet the same fate--
how earnestly I wished that I had followed my friend's counsels.  I
could only utter, `Lord be merciful to me a sinner,' and entreated God
to protect me.  When I found myself so unexpectedly preserved, I
remembered the prayer I had uttered, and resolved to give myself to the
service of God in any way He might open out for me.  You now know my
brief history, Miss Liddiard.  I felt bound to give it you, but I am
unwilling to trouble you with more than I have already told you about
myself.  My name is Charles Norton."

"You can have no difficulty in finding opportunities of serving God, Mr
Norton," I exclaimed.  "When we see thousands and tens of thousands of
human beings scattered about this broad Pacific ignorant of Him, and
given over to abominable heathen practices, all requiring to be fed with
the bread of life.  Why should you not prepare yourself to go forth as a
missionary among them?"

"I feel that I am too unworthy and sinful to undertake so serious an
office," he said humbly.

"No human being could be qualified to go forth as a missionary of the
gospel trusting alone to his own merits, and no one would be found to
undertake the office were all influenced by the opinion you express," I
observed.  "All must feel their unworthiness and we must take God at His
word, and believe that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin,
and then go forth and declare what great things He has done for us.  I
repeat what I have heard my father say:--We must not trust to our
feelings, but we must believe that God is a rewarder of those who
diligently serve Him, not only of those who have all along done so."

"You have given me new life and hope," exclaimed the young man.
"Henceforth, if my life is spared, after having prepared myself for the
task, I will devote it to making known the gospel to the poor heathens
of these regions."



CHAPTER EIGHT.

WHILE ON OUR PASSAGE IN THE CANOE A STORM ARISES.--WE ARE DRIVEN FAR
AWAY TO LEEWARD OF THE ISLAND.--ABELA INSTRUCTS TOFA IN THE TRUTH.--
SCARCITY OF FOOD AND WATER.--OUR SUFFERINGS BECOME INTENSE.--THE NATIVE
CREW GIVE WAY TO DESPAIR.

Although the sea was rough the canoe had made good progress towards our
destination when night came on.  The wind had been increasing, and I saw
the natives looking anxiously at the sky, which had become overcast.
The darkness was intense, and we had no compass in the canoe by which to
direct our course.  The native boatmen, however, continued steering on,
trusting to the wind, which had remained steadily blowing from one
quarter.  Still, as the waves rose, and our frail canoe pitched and
tossed about, it seemed to me that she would be unable to accomplish the
passage.

Abela was sitting by us.  "Alas," she exclaimed, "we have escaped the
fury of our enemies only, I fear, to perish in the waves."

"Nay, nay, Abela," said Maud.  "God, who has protected us heretofore,
can protect us still.  He will find a way for us to escape if it is His
will that we should do so."

"Ah, you are right," answered Abela, "and I am weak and faithless to
doubt His love."

Still I must confess that it required much strong faith not to feel
nervous and alarmed while we saw the dark foaming seas rising up around
us, and apparently every moment about to overwhelm our little vessel.
The crew had lessened the sail, but yet it seemed scarcely capable of
withstanding the furious blasts which struck it.  Maud and I, with Abela
and the other women, sat close together in the little hut on deck.  I
observed that Mr Norton and Tofa had come nearer us as if to try and
prevent us from being washed away should a sea break on board, which it
appeared too probable would occur.  The canoe was excessively buoyant,
or she could not have escaped being overwhelmed.  Onward she continued
to fly over the tumbling waters, and we at length, becoming accustomed
to the movement of the vessel, began to hope that she would reach the
shore in safety, and already the crew were looking out in the
expectation of seeing it ahead.

All our hopes were to be disappointed.  A furious blast struck the sail,
and before it could be lowered it was torn away, with the spars which
supported it, and we were left helpless on the wild ocean.  To attempt
to use the paddles in such a sea was useless.  The helmsman had turned
the head of the canoe away from the wind, and all that now could be done
was to fly before it.  The gale increased.  On we went, expecting every
moment that the seas would overwhelm us.

We could sit quiet and pray, but I felt much for our poor heathen crew,
who had no such consolation.  Abela had called young Tofa to her side,
and was endeavouring to explain to him the glorious truths of the faith
she held, he seemed greatly struck by her calm resignation.

"Formerly you would have shrieked out, and trembled with fear," he
observed.  "Now you seem as brave as the boldest of our warriors."

"I am brave, because I know in whom I trust," answered Abela.  "I have
the support of the Holy Spirit sent by Jehovah.  Though I am by myself
still very weak, my soul is at peace, and I know if I am taken away from
this world that I shall go to a better and more glorious land, where I
shall live with my Saviour, who has redeemed me, and bought me with the
price of His most precious blood."

"Oh, how I wish I could go with you to that glorious land," said the
lad.  "But I am not fit; I could not be received there, if Jehovah is
the pure and holy Being you say He is."

"You will be fit to go the moment you accept the offers Jesus makes you,
and you are sure to be received there," answered Abela, and once more
she explained to him the simple plan of salvation.  "You see, my son,
that you have nothing to do; but all has been done for you, to satisfy
God's justice.  You are bought by the blood of Jesus.  God makes you a
free gift of salvation.  If He required anything in return it would not
be a free gift.  If you had anything to pay it would show that the
purchase was not completed by Christ.  Now God says that the purchase
was completed on Calvary, and He tells us that eternal salvation is a
free gift; we, therefore, offend God when we want to pay anything to Him
in return, and we dishonour the purchase made by Christ when we fancy
that it is insufficient.  Still, after you have become the servant of
Christ, if life is spared you, you will desire to obey Him, and please
Him, and do His will by every means in your power.  This will show that
you have a living faith, and that you are really, as you profess to be,
His disciple."

"Oh, I am sure what you say is true," exclaimed Tofa.  "Although I
cannot yet understand it all I believe in Jesus, I trust to Him, I will
never never again worship the foolish idols I have till now trusted in.
You must tell me all you have said over and over again, for I wish to
know all I can about Jesus, that should the canoe be overwhelmed by the
sea, I may be ready to go and dwell with Him."

The young Englishman occasionally spoke to us.  He was not ignorant of
gospel truth, but, alas, he had long sinned against light and knowledge,
and rejected what he knew in his heart to be true.  His merciful
preservation had been the means of changing that heart, he was really
born again, and now the knowledge he possessed seemed to come back to
him.  Notwithstanding the fearful danger in which we were placed, his
manner was calm and composed.  He did not speak to us as many a brave
worldly man would have done, urging us to keep up our spirits,
expressing a hope that the storm would soon abate, and that we should be
able to return to the land; he observed only, "we must trust in God's
merciful protection; let us remember that we are in His hands."

Maud and I responded to what he said.

"Those days I spent in solitude in the mountains have, indeed, been
precious days to me, Miss Liddiard," he continued.  "I felt like the
prodigal son, who had returned to his father, and the bright gleam of
His smile seemed to rest on me.  My only regret was, that I had not His
word to apply to, but many precious verses which I had learned as a
child came back to me, and afforded me comfort and consolation, and then
I could pray as I had never prayed before."

I told him that we had been employed in the same way, and that happily
having a Bible we could turn to the sacred page, and draw comfort from
the ever flowing fountain.

Thus the hours of darkness passed away.  The canoe, from the lightness
of her construction, rode easily over the seas, driving, as she now was,
directly before the gale, and we were not pitched and tumbled about as
we had been when the wind was on her side, and we were attempting to
steer for the island.  When morning dawned the foaming waters were
around us on every side, and we could just distinguish in the far
distance, almost astern, the dim outline of the island which we had
hoped to reach.  Had the weather been moderate the canoe men might have
attempted to make their way towards it, but that, was now impossible,
and we continued to drive on, leaving it further and further behind.
Where we were going we could not tell.  The natives knew of no islands
in that direction, and I heard them reminding each other of several
canoes which had been blown off the land and had not again been heard
of.

We asked Mr Norton his opinion.  He had, he said, during the last day
he was on board examined a chart, and he could afford us but little hope
that we should reach any shore where we might obtain a new mast and sail
and be able to return the way we had come.  "There are islands a long
way off; but as the inhabitants, I fear, are savage in the extreme, it
would be dangerous to land amongst them," he added.  "Still, though we
speak of the dangers we may have to encounter, let us continue, trusting
firmly that God is watching over us, and though we cannot yet see the
way by which He intends to save us--if such is His good will--He has
nevertheless got it ready, while we on our part are bound to make every
exertion to preserve our lives.  As we may not for a considerable time
reach land, I must therefore, in the first place, strongly urge the
people to place themselves on an allowance of food and water.  We should
use as little as will suffice to sustain life, that we may the longer be
able to hold out."

I explained what the young Englishman said to Abela; and she and Tofa
spoke to their countrymen, and persuaded them to do as he advised.  The
wind had somewhat abated, but as it was still too strong to permit of
our making head against it, we continued to drive on as before.  We read
the Bible, and prayed several times during the day, and occasionally
some of the heathen crew came, and, kneeling down near us, listened
while I read.

Abela, although she had not begun her studies till about two years
before this, read very fairly, but she was especially powerful in
prayer, and her whole heart and soul seemed lifted up as she poured
forth her petitions--seldom failing to exclaim, "Lord be merciful to me
a sinner."

The hours passed on, and we felt that an all-powerful hand was
protecting our frail bark from the fury of the seas.  When the water
washed into the canoe beneath the platform, it was quickly bailed out
again, and everything was so firmly secured, that in spite of the
tossing and tumbling of the vessel she held as tightly together as at
first.

Another day and another and another passed by, and still the strong wind
prevented us from attempting to return.  Many of the heathen crew
appeared to have resigned themselves to their fate, and had it not been
for the influence Abela exerted over them--supported as she was by the
young Englishman and Tofa--I believe that they would quickly have
consumed all the provisions, and have then laid down to die.

We were already feeling the ill effects of the small amount of food we
could venture to eat.  The sun too, burst forth, and its burning rays
striking down upon us; we now, in addition to hunger, began to feel the
fearful sufferings of thirst.  What must it be should a calm come on!
And although the crew might then use their paddles with effect, their
strength would be gone, and very many days must pass before we could
regain the island from which we had been driven.

Often and often I thought of my poor father.  I persuaded myself that he
had certainly remained with Mr Hilton, and that had we arrived in
safety we should have had the happiness of seeing him.  Now should he
return to the settlement, what would be his feelings to find it
desolate, and to suppose, as he must, that we had shared the fate of the
other inhabitants.

Our condition was also becoming, humanly speaking, fearful in the
extreme.  As I looked at Maud's pale countenance I feared that she could
not long endure such suffering.  I was not aware that I looked equally
ill.  The young Englishman treated us with the most gentle and constant
attention; he even insisted on our taking a portion of his scanty
allowance of food and water, and when we refused to deprive him of it I
am sure that he took means to add it unseen to our shares.  At length
the gale ceased, the canoe no longer tumbled about, and the heat of the
sun's rays--as they shone upon the glass-like surface of the ocean on
which we floated--was intense in the extreme.  Abela urged the crew to
get out their paddles, but they answered, as I had expected, "we cannot
live to reach the island, and when our food and water are exhausted, we
will lie down and die.  There is nothing else for us to do."



CHAPTER NINE.

A CALM.--THE CANOE FLOATS MOTIONLESS ON THE OCEAN.--MANY OF OUR NUMBER
APPEAR TO BE DYING FOR WANT OF WATER.--I FEAR CHIEFLY FOR MAUD, WHEN A
SAIL IS SEEN, AND, WITH A RISING BREEZE, SHE APPROACHES.--WE ARE
RECEIVED ON BOARD THE "TRUE LOVE," AND KINDLY TREATED BY CAPTAIN HUDSON
AND HIS WIFE.

The canoe still floated motionless on the calm ocean, which shone like a
sheet of burnished gold.  Maud and I lay in each other's arms, expecting
thus to die.  Still we could whisper together, and talk of the glories
of that heaven we hoped soon to reach.  Abela sat like a mother watching
over us, but she too was sinking.  Of the heathen crew several appeared
to be dying, if they were not already dead; but others, who had listened
to the Word of Life, gathered round us that they might hear the
instruction which Abela, as long as she had the power of speech,
afforded them.  Young Tofa bore up bravely, and Mr Norton struggled
wonderfully with his sufferings.  He occasionally rose to his feet and
gazed around, as if he still hoped help would come ere it was too late.
Another day I felt sure must terminate the existence of most of those on
board.

I closed my eyes, feeling a faintness coming over me, when I was aroused
by Mr Norton's voice.  I saw him standing up, with his arms
outstretched, and his dim eye lighted up.

"A sail! a sail!" he exclaimed.  "She is bringing up the breeze--she is
standing this way."

This announcement gave me a strength I did not believe that I
possessed--I raised Maud in my arms.  "We shall be saved, dearest; our
prayers have been heard," I whispered.  She opened her eyes, and seemed
to comprehend me.

"We must make a signal, or the vessel may pass us," said Mr Norton.
"Can you direct the natives to assist me?  The broken spars, if lashed
together, will answer for a flagstaff."

I explained what the young Englishman required, and Tofa and a few
others, although scarcely able to lift themselves from the deck, secured
the spars, and fastened them together as he desired.  A piece of matting
answered for a flag, and the flagstaff was held up on the deck.

How eagerly we watched the distant sail.

"She looks like a whaler, and if so, a bright look-out is certain to be
kept on board," observed Mr Norton.

On she came.  Unless our small flag was observed, as the deck of the
canoe rose but a few feet above the water, should she pass only a mile
or two on either side she might sail away without noticing us.  We did
not forget to pray that we might be seen.  She came nearer and nearer.
At length, to our joy, we saw a flag run up to her mast-head as an
answer to our signal.

We were seen.  Still the breeze was light, and the ship seemed to be a
long time coming up to us.

Every moment was of consequence.  I dreaded lest aid should come too
late for dear Maud, while several others appeared unable to last much
longer.

How often do we mistrust God's mercy.  The vessel came close to us, and
heaving-to, a boat was lowered.

"She is a whaler," exclaimed Mr Norton.  "Water, water--bring water
with you," he shouted; but his voice was faint and hollow, he pointed to
his lips.

The sign was understood, for the boat put back, and a cask was lowered
into it.  In another minute, with sturdy strokes, the boat's crew dashed
alongside.  We heard the sound of English voices.

"You seem in a sad plight, my lad," said the officer of the boat.  "We
thought you were all savages.  Are there any more of you on board?"

Mr Norton pointed to where Maud and I lay.  The cask of water was
lifted on deck, and the officer approached us with a cup.  I begged him
to give Maud some.  He poured a few drops down her throat.

"Come, young lady, you must take some now," he said.

How delicious was that draught--it almost instantly revived me.  I gave
Maud some more, and then offered the cup to Abela.  Those of the crew
who could move crawled towards the cask.  The young seaman poured it out
from the cask into their hands, that they might obtain it sooner.  I
remember thinking it a fearful waste that any of the precious liquid
should be spilled.  Not till all the rest had received some water would
Mr Norton take the cup which the mate offered him.

"Now, young ladies, the sooner we get you on board, where our captain
and his good wife will look after you, the better," exclaimed the mate,
as he offered to carry us to the boat.  I begged that Abela might be
brought with us.  He lifted me up in his arms as if I had been a
feather, and others followed, with Maud and Abela.  Mr Norton had
scarcely strength to reach the boat.  I explained that Tofa was a
chief's son, and that having rendered us great service, I begged that he
might be treated with attention.

In a few minutes we were on board the "True Love," and in Captain
Hudson's cabin, under the care of his kind motherly wife.  She almost
shed tears as she saw us; Maud especially excited her sympathy.

"Poor dear child, she could not have lasted another hour, and she now
will require all the care we can bestow on her.  And we must look after
you too," she added, addressing me.  "I wonder you have held out so
well.  You must tell me all about it by-and-by.  You are too weak to
talk now.  I cannot get a word out of any one else--not even from the
young Englishman.  He fainted on reaching the deck, and my husband is
attending to him; but you need not be alarmed, he will come round in
time."

I inquired for Abela.

"The native woman is in one of the mate's cabins.  I will go and attend
to her directly, and all the rest who are alive are safe on board; but
five or six of the poor Indians were dead, I am told, before they could
be lifted from the deck of the canoe."

I grieved much to hear this, for I had entertained hopes that all when
brought under Christian instruction would have accepted the truth; but
God's ways are inscrutable--we only know that they are just and right.

Soon after Mrs Hudson had placed me in bed, I sank into a state of
almost insensibility, and was conscious only that I was attended by a
kind hand.  I could neither speak nor think, and knew not to what place
the ship was carrying us.  My first inquiry on coming to myself, when I
saw Mrs Hudson standing over me, was for dear Maud.  My heart leaped
with joy when I heard her voice saying, "I am here Mary--I am so very
very glad to hear you speaking again."  I found that she was lying on a
sofa outside my cabin, to which Mrs Hudson said she had entreated to be
brought, that she might be near me.  Abela, I found was also recovering,
and Mr Norton was well, and devoted himself to the care of the
sufferers, some of whom were still in a precarious state.

"He is trying to learn their language, and the young prince is never
weary in giving him instruction," said Mrs Hudson.

"They call Tofa the young prince, because the rest of his people pay him
so much respect," observed Maud.

I was truly thankful to hear this of Mr Norton.  I should have trembled
for him, lest after getting safely on board the ship had he shown that
he had forgotten his good resolutions.

"That young Englishman is a very superior person indeed," observed Mrs
Hudson.  "He has made inquiries about you and your sister every hour in
the day, and I really believe had you been taken from us it would have
broken his heart; he looked so anxious when I told him how ill you were.
He constantly also speaks to our crew, and reads the Bible to them, and
prays with them in the forecastle.  They seem very well pleased to hear
him, and though my husband has prayers every Sunday, he cannot go among
them and talk to them in the familiar way this young man does.  He tells
me, though I am sure he is a gentleman born by his manners, that he has
served before the mast, and therefore knows their habits and ways, and
that there is nothing like being on an equality with people to win their
hearts."

"Yes, that is what a missionary must be if he follows the example of his
Master," I said.  "Jesus made Himself equal to the poorest, and of no
reputation, that He might gain souls to Himself."

"Ah yes, my dear young lady, if all ministers of the gospel as well as
missionaries acted thus, His blessed religion would make more progress
in the world than it now does."

In addition to my other causes of gratitude I thanked God that we had
been taken on board a ship commanded by a believing captain, with a kind
excellent wife.  Through His mercy we were greatly indebted to Mrs
Hudson's constant and affectionate care for our recovery.



CHAPTER TEN.

MAUD AND I WITH MOST OF OUR PARTY RECOVER.--MR NORTON INSTRUCTS THE
CREW, AND PROVES THAT HE IS REALLY CONVERTED.--THE GREAT KINDNESS OF
CAPTAIN AND MRS HUDSON.--THEY OFFER TO TAKE US TO ENGLAND, BUT WE
RESOLVE TO REMAIN ON AN ISLAND INHABITED BY CHRISTIANS, ON WHICH WE
LAND, THAT WE MAY DEVOTE OURSELVES TO MISSIONARY WORK.--MAUD IS RESTORED
TO HER PARENTS.--CAPTAIN HUDSON, ON A SUBSEQUENT VOYAGE, BRINGS MY
FATHER TO US, AND I, HAVING BECOME THE WIFE OF MR NORTON, WE RETURN TO
OUR ISLAND, WHERE MASAUGU HAVING BECOME A CHRISTIAN, WITH LISELE AND HER
HUSBAND, ARE RESIDING.--THE WHOLE OF THE INHABITANTS BEFORE MY FATHER'S
DEATH BEING ALSO CONVERTED TO THE TRUTH.

We had been many days on board, and Maud and I were able to enjoy the
fresh air on deck, where Captain Hudson warmly congratulated us, in his
fatherly manner, on our recovery; arranging cushions on which we could
recline--for we were still too weak to sit up--and kindly doing all he
could for us.  How glad we were again to see Abela and her companions,
and to comfort them in their sorrow, for they believed that they should
never again see their native land.

Young Tofa, however, was perfectly content.  "I shall learn more about
the religion of Jehovah, and that will be my support wherever I am," he
observed.

Mr Norton came up and spoke to us so gently, and yet with unmistakable
earnestness in his mariner.  "Oh Miss Liddiard," he said, "I am now more
than ever sure that our merciful Father in heaven hears the prayers of
the greatest of sinners who have returned to Him.  I have never ceased
beseeching Him that you might be restored to health, and that while you
may enjoy happiness yourself, you may prove a blessing to many of our
fellow-creatures."

"I do indeed hope that I may be of use to some," I answered.  "I desire
no greater happiness than to be employed in God's service."

"Such will, I believe, be the occupation of the blessed throughout
eternity, although He has not revealed to His creatures the way in which
they are to be employed.  That surpasses human comprehension," he
observed.

A few days after this we came in sight of a high and picturesque island,
even more beautiful than the one we had left.

"My dear young lady," said Captain Hudson, "I should be very sorry to
part with you, and would gladly have carried you with me to old England,
but the poor natives are, I am sure, anxious to be put on shore, and as
an English missionary resides on yonder island, and all the inhabitants
are Christians, I thought it best to go there to land those who desire
to land.  Will you and your sister remain with us?  The ship's time in
these seas will soon be up, and when we get to England our house shall
be your home.  We have no children of our own, and my wife and I will do
our best to act the part of the parents you have lost."

My heart swelled with gratitude to the kind captain and his wife.  I
could scarcely speak.  I had often thought of England, and how
delightful it would be to see it, but I had resolved to devote myself,
as my dear father and mother had done, in endeavouring to make known the
gospel among the heathen islanders.  I knew their language and customs,
and felt that I was suited for the task.  I was sure also that Maud
would not consent to leave me; still, I did not wish to bias her should
she desire to accept Captain and Mrs Hudson's offer.  My eyes filled
with tears as I took the captain's hand, and expressed my gratitude for
his generous proposal.  I told him the object on which my heart was set,
and had it not been for that, how thankful I should have been to accept
his offer.  I then explained that Maud was not my sister, and gave him
her history, adding, that she would indeed be fortunate to have such
kind protectors as I was sure he and Mrs Hudson would prove.

"I will ask her," said the captain.  "But I should like to have had you
both."

I waited anxiously to hear what Maud would say, earnestly praying
meantime that she would be directed aright.  I had closed my eyes, when
I felt Maud's arms round me.  "I cannot, no I cannot leave you, dear
Mary, where you go I will go," she whispered.  "If you had said yes to
the good captain I would gladly have accompanied you.  If you remain out
here I will remain also."

As we neared the harbour a canoe, manned by natives in white jackets and
trousers and straw hats, came off.  One of them, in good English,
announced himself as a pilot, and under his charge the "True Love" was
safely conducted into a secure and beautiful harbour, where her anchor
was dropped.  Neat white-washed houses lined the shore; beyond them rose
several buildings of good size, the largest of which was a stone church
with tower and belfry.  Plantations extended on every side as far as the
eye could reach.  Everything wore an aspect of peace and contentment.
How different from that of the heathen island we had left!  Yet a short
time before the numerous dark skinned natives, well clothed and in their
right minds, were naked heathen savages, such as those among whom we had
dwelt, and often despaired would ever be brought to know the truths of
the gospel.

The boat was lowered, and Maud and I, with Mr Norton, Abela, and Tofa,
were seated in her, accompanied by Captain and Mrs Hudson, on our way
to the house of Mr Arnold, the missionary of which they had before
spoken, and to whom, they had told us, they were well-known.  On landing
we proceeded along a well made clean road, at the further end of which,
some way from the shore, stood Mr Arnold's house.  How neat and
beautiful it looked, with its garden full of flowering shrubs, and a
broad verandah in front!

Mr Arnold came out to meet us, followed by his wife.  A few words from
Captain Hudson served to explain who we were.

"Indeed you are welcome, most welcome," he exclaimed, taking our hands.
"We have enough and to spare, and there is work for all of you if, as I
trust, you are willing to labour in the Lord's vineyard."

We were soon seated around the missionary's hospitable board, for
Captain Hudson's ship was well-known, and Mrs Arnold had been preparing
for the guests she was sure would come before they left the Pacific.
She was an interesting looking lady, but there was an expression of
sadness in her countenance, which at once struck me.  Our host and
hostess had, of course, many questions to ask, and we gave them an
account of the dreadful events which had occurred to us.  Captain Hudson
told them of his wish to carry us on with him to England.

"We only desire to have willing labourers," observed Mr Arnold, "and
they having counted the cost must decide for themselves.  They have some
experience what it is; and you, Mr Norton, do you intend to return
home?" he asked.

"My desire is, the Lord helping me, to prepare myself for a missionary
among the heathen islanders of these seas," he answered.  "I have
counted the cost, and with God's grace I hope not to turn back."

Mr Arnold warmly pressed his hand.  "We will pray that His grace will
ever continue with you," he said.  I felt an infinite satisfaction at
hearing this.

While the gentlemen went out to walk we remained with Mrs Arnold, who
gave us much interesting information about their island, and her account
raised my hopes that our own poor savages, as I called them, might some
day enjoy the same inestimable blessings, and that smiling villages and
churches and schools might appear throughout the island.

On Mr Arnold's return I saw that he was greatly agitated, and cast an
eager inquiring glance at Maud.  He advanced towards her, but seemingly
restrained himself, and taking his wife by the hand, led her from the
room.

During their absence Captain Hudson, sitting down by Maud, to my great
surprise said, "Do you think, my dear, that the poor lady you supposed
was your mother was really so?"

Maud started, then seemed lost in thought.  "She was very, very kind to
me, and I used to call her `mamma,' because I had no other mamma then,
but I have a faint idea that there was some one else whom I loved still
better, and who had given me to her, saying, that we should meet again."

"Then I think there is no doubt it," exclaimed Captain Hudson.  "Suppose
you were to find your real father and mother, could you bear the joy of
meeting them?" he asked.

Maud trembled all over, and I now began to suspect the truth.  In a few
minutes Mr and Mrs Arnold re-entered the room.  I was surprised at the
wonderful command which Mr Arnold had over himself.  He placed his wife
on a sofa, and then led Maud up to her.

"It may be that we are in error," he said, "but God's goodness is great,
and such as this dear girl is might have been our child."

Mrs Arnold gazed at Maud's features for a few moments, then hastily
took off her tippet.  On her neck was a well-known mark which assured
her that her hopes were realised.  She drew her to her bosom and sobbed
aloud.

We truly grieved to part with good Captain and Mrs Hudson, but we were
to meet ere long again.  Our heathen crew were soon distributed among
the inhabitants, and all of them earnestly desired to be instructed in
the truth.  Tofa made rapid progress in his studies under Mr Arnold,
and expressed his ardent wish to return as a missionary to his native
land.  Mrs Norton laboured devotedly as a catechist, and rendered the
greatest service to Mr Arnold in his work, while Maud and I assisted
Mrs Arnold in the girls' school, as we had been accustomed to do under
my dear mother, while Abela was of great use among the older women.

Two years passed by, when it was announced that the "True Love" was once
more entering the harbour.  We hastened down to the landing-place to
meet our kind old friend.  We saw the boat coming with the captain and
his wife and a gentleman with them.  Captain Hudson assisted him to
land.  He gazed anxiously at us as we approached, then tottered towards
me with arms outstretched.

My joy was full.  He was my dear father.  He had supposed we had all
perished, till Captain Hudson, a short time before, had put in to visit
Mr Hilton's station.  His former faith had supported him through all
his afflictions, and now, how full was his heart with gratitude at
having me restored to him.  I saw by his thin and wasted figure and pale
countenance how much he required a daughter's care.  He brought glorious
intelligence from our island.

Masaugu had become a devoted Christian, and having made peace with his
former foes, had, accompanied by Lisele, returned home, many of his
people having also cast aside their idols.

I have not hitherto said that a short time before Mr Norton had asked
me to become his wife.  My father, hearing of his character from Mr
Arnold, gave his full consent.  Captain Hudson was bound in the
direction of our island.  With my devoted husband and father,
accompanied by Abela and Tofa and several of our formerly heathen crew,
we embarked on board the "True Love."

I could not have borne parting with Maud had I not known that she was
left with loving parents, who would amply supply my place as my husband
supplied hers in my heart.

I need not say how joyfully we were welcomed by Lisele and her Christian
husband, the young chief.  We had, notwithstanding, many difficulties to
encounter.  The heathens offered all the opposition in their power, but
at length they were conquered,--not by force of arms, but by the power
of gospel truth, and ere my dear father was laid beside my mother's
grave, he had the happiness of seeing the once heathen inhabitants of
our island, as also of many others in the Pacific, cast aside their
idols and become faithful worshippers of Jehovah, trusting to the
all-cleansing of the blood of the Lamb slain on Calvary for sinners.

FINIS.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mary Liddiard, by W.H.G. Kingston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MARY LIDDIARD ***

***** This file should be named 23190.txt or 23190.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/1/9/23190/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
