The Project Gutenberg eBook, Fostina Woodman, the Wonderful Adventurer, by
Avis A. (Burnham) Stanwood


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Fostina Woodman, the Wonderful Adventurer


Author: Avis A. (Burnham) Stanwood



Release Date: October 27, 2007  [eBook #23214]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOSTINA WOODMAN, THE WONDERFUL
ADVENTURER***


E-text prepared by the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading
Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from digital material generously made available
by Internet Archive/American Libraries
(http://www.archive.org/details/americana)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 23214-h.htm or 23214-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/2/1/23214/23214-h/23214-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/3/2/1/23214/23214-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive/Americal Libraries. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/fostinawoodman00burnrich


Transcriber's Note:

      Minor typographical errors have been corrected without note.

      Dialect spellings, contractions and discrepancies have been
      retained.

      The Table of Contents was not contained in the book and has
      been created for the convenience of the reader.





FOSTINA WOODMAN, THE WONDERFUL ADVENTURER.

by

A. A. BURNHAM.







[Illustration: THE SHIP ESSEX SAILS FOR CALIFORNIA.]



Boston:
1854.

Entered according to an Act of Congress in the year 1850, by
A. A. Burnham,
In the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts

Stereotyped at the Boston Stereotype Foundry.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.

Description of Fostina's Home--Introduction of Herself and Parents
to the Reader--Aunt Aubrey--Sudden Calamity--The Two Brothers and
Lewis Mortimer--Introduction of her Uncle, and the Great Change in
Fostina's Life.


CHAPTER II.

The Ship Essex sails for California, with Lewis Mortimer and the
two Brothers on Board--Fostina's Grief at their Departure--Her
Uncle's Family--Fostina's Dream--Rineldo Aubrey.


CHAPTER III.

Rineldo and his Cousin--He seeks to win her Love--Fostina makes
known to him her Love for Lewis Mortimer--Rineldo tries to gain
her Favor, and is encouraged by his Parents.


CHAPTER IV.

Rineldo's sudden Departure--His Return--He pleads in vain for
the Love of his Cousin--Sad Intelligence and the Death of Lewis
Mortimer--Fostina's Illness.


CHAPTER V.

Fostina goes to the Village--Deception Unmasked--The Mystery
Revealed--Fostina makes her Escape.


CHAPTER VI.

Rineldo's Surprise--Mr. Aubrey and his Son go in Pursuit of
Fostina--Visit to the Mountain and Cottage--Horrible Discovery--End
of their Search.


CHAPTER VII.

Fostina pursues her way through an unknown Country--She stops
at the Village Inn--Conversation between the Landlord and
Coachman--Fostina again appears in the Dress of a Female--Her
Departure.


CHAPTER VIII.

Fostina continues on her Journey--She arrives at a distant Country
Village--A Walk in the Forest--Visit to the Castle--Mistaken
Friends--A Mystery--Strange Discovery--Mysteries Revealed--The
Result.


CHAPTER IX.

Discovery of the Plot--Escape from the Castle--Lewis Mortimer and
Fostina return to the Village--They meet the two Brothers--Conclusion.





FOSTINA WOODMAN,

THE WONDERFUL ADVENTURER.




CHAPTER I.

_Description of Fostina's Home--Introduction of Herself and Parents to
the Reader--Aunt Aubrey--Sudden Calamity--The Two Brothers and Lewis
Mortimer--Introduction of her Uncle, and the Great Change in Fostina's
Life._


Reader, are you a lover of Nature? And do you behold with pleasure the
wonderful works of creation, where the hand of Art has made no claims?
Then follow me to the quiet and pleasant village of S----, and visit
there the Mountain Glen, and you will see one of the loveliest places
which Nature ever formed, and which stands unrivalled for its beauty,
in this great land of wonders.

Before introducing you to the leading characters whose history will
form the principal part of this work, I shall endeavor to give a faint
description of the beautiful scenery which this place commands.

It is situated in the northern part of Massachusetts, not far from the
Connecticut River, which flows on in its winding course through the
valleys, among the hills, until it falls, like a rush of mighty waters,
into its deep basin below.

Along these banks may be seen the rural cottages, scattered here and
there among the valleys, almost concealed from view by the deep
embowering shade of the forest which surrounds them. The traveller, as
he ascends a more elevated spot, will behold an extensive range of
mountains, as far as the eye can penetrate the distance. And while
contemplating the scenery before him, outstretched on Nature's broad,
canvas, his eye may involuntarily rest on the beautiful spot referred
to at the opening of my story.

It was a lovely morning in June, and the sun slowly and beautifully
rose in the blue heavens, spreading out his sheet of golden light over
the broad canopy of heaven, scattering with the melting influence of
his rays the heavy mist and fog which lay spread over the valleys of
S----. There a scene of rare loveliness was spread out to view--rich
landscapes and sloping meadows, clothed in green, waving their heavy
burden in the morning breeze. The dew lay heavily upon the earth, and
the thick foliage of the trees sparkled with the glittering dewdrops
bowing their branches beneath its weight.

Nought was heard save the gentle murmuring of the waters, which flowed
at the foot of the Mountain Glen. Sparkling streams pursued their
silent way, bordered by stately trees whose glittering foliage hung
heavy with the dew of the morning, and bent their graceful leaves to
meet the rippling wave which flowed beneath their branches. The lofty
oak rose in all its majesty, and spread its towering limbs around, as
if to protect the merry group which had collected under its shade, to
inhale the fresh breeze of the morning.

A short distance from the mountain, on the western side, there was
erected a magnificent dwelling, called the _Cottage of the Mountain
Glen_. Beautiful and romantic was this place, to a lover of nature, as
he stood upon the lofty hills, and could see the blue wreath curling up
from the white cottage, nearly hidden from view by the thick foliage of
the trees which surround it.

On approaching nearer this lovely spot, could be seen a winding
pathway, overhung with the branches of the willow, which grew on either
side, leading from the cottage to the mountain. Still further on could
be seen the cultivated gardens, forming a striking contrast with the
waving groves around, and rendered still more beautiful by the lofty
hills and mountains which overlooked the valleys below.

The arrangement of the grounds and the architecture of the buildings,
all exhibited evidences of the superior taste of the owner. And when
standing on the rising eminence, and gazing upon the beauties of this
romantic place, we could but think that it was indeed the abode of
happiness; and surely it was so, for here resided the beautiful heroine
of my story, whom I will introduce to you as Fostina Woodman, one who
was destined to become the wonder and admiration of all that knew her.

Here, in the cottage of the Mountain Glen, dwelt this lovely maiden, in
quiet and peaceful seclusion, with her father, three brothers, and an
elderly aunt, who, for many years, had been an inmate of the family.

Mrs. Woodman, one of the loveliest of women, beloved by all that knew
her for her mildness and amiable disposition, had died after a long
illness, leaving Fostina, her only daughter, when but five years old,
to the care of her sister, who then took charge of the family.

Mr. Woodman had, in his early life, been a tradesman, possessing some
property left him by his father; he invested the amount in goods, and
prosperity crowned his efforts with success beyond his greatest
expectations. He continued in his business until he had accumulated
what he thought necessary to complete his happiness, and then returned
to his native village, where he offered his hand and fortune to Fostina
Aubrey, the daughter of an honest gardener, who consented to their
union.

Accompanied by his youthful bride, Mr. Woodman started for the far
west, to seek out a home for himself and loving wife in some secluded
vale, where, in peace and quietness, he might pass the remainder of his
days.

After travelling a great distance from the land of his nativity, he
arrived at the village of S----, where he stopped to survey the
surrounding country. On one side it was rough and mountainous, solitary
and wild, while, on the opposite, could be seen cultivated fields
beautifully variegated with cottages and waving forests. Still farther
on, he beheld a lofty mountain about a mile from the village, which it
overlooked, together with an extensive range of country, presenting a
variety of beautiful scenery. Here he selected a place to erect his
dwelling, and called it the _Mountain Glen_, where, for many years, he
lived in possession of health and happiness. But alas,

    When in the midst of happiness,
    How oft doth sorrow come!

Consumption, that awful syren, had entered the joyous home of Mr.
Woodman, and marked his lovely wife for its prey; and although many
years elapsed before it effected its work, yet he well knew what would
be the result.

Pain and distress had wrecked her feeble frame, and dimmed the lustre
of her once sparkling eyes; her step was feeble, her voice grew weak,
and soon her gentle spirit took its flight to a fairer and brighter
world, leaving to her bereaved husband four children, the youngest
their only daughter. With joy the father saw that she partook in a
great degree of her mother's gentle spirit. This gave hope and
consolation to the now almost heart-broken parent, who, as he looked
upon his child, saw the perfect resemblance of her departed mother.

On the death of Mrs. Woodman, she gave up the charge of her children to
her sister, who watched over them with all a mother's kindness; with
careful attention she reared the tender plants left to her care by her
departed sister.

Fostina soon completed her twelfth year, and her father with pleasure
witnessed the growing intellect of his child, and the superior talents
which she possessed. He bestowed upon her a liberal education, and was
fully rewarded for his labors as he beheld, with astonishment, the
rapid progress of his lovely daughter.

Nor was Aunt Aubrey less pleased, as she saw her fair charge in all her
youthful beauty, possessing her mother's gentle nature, lovely in mind
and person.

                     *      *      *      *      *

Years rolled on in quick succession, and our lovely heroine had reached
her nineteenth year, beloved and admired by all who knew her, diffusing
love and happiness around to all that were blessed with her presence.

At the commencement of my story, one lovely morning, she was seated
beneath a stately oak, with her brothers, and Lewis Mortimer, a son of
a gentleman residing in the village, who had ever been a constant
visitor and welcome guest at the Woodmans. An intimacy had by degrees
gradually grown up between them, and he had now become almost a
constant member of the family. Lewis had long felt a strong attachment
towards Fostina, and she, too, was not ignorant of the feeling which
existed between them. She had but a faint recollection of her mother,
although her father had often impressed upon her youthful mind the
remembrance of one so fondly cherished in his memory.

Fostina had never experienced much of this world's sorrow; the
brightness of her sparkling eye and joyous countenance spoke the true
index of the soul within. From her infancy she had been cradled in the
home of indulgence, and received every care and attention from Aunt
Aubrey, which a fond mother could bestow, and she therefore felt not
her loss. Her father, too, had devoted most of his time, since the
death of his wife, to the care of her tender offspring.

But O, how soon was the happiness of Fostina to end! O lovely maiden!
if the dark curtain of futurity could be raised, and thou be permitted
to behold what awaits thee in the distant future, methinks the bright
hopes, which now fill thy young heart with joy, would be forever
crushed!

A sudden and awful calamity again visited the quiet and happy home of
the Woodmans, in the cottage of the Mountain Glen. The musical voice of
the gentle and loving Fostina was no longer heard to resound over the
Mountain.

That dreadful malady, the cholera, which has struck such horror and
dread upon the inhabitants of our country of late, had long prevailed
in the village of S----, sweeping off a great number of its inhabitants.
It had found its way into the peaceful cot of Mr. Woodman, and marked
three of its happy inmates as victims. The once happy home was now the
abode of misery and suffering. Mr. Woodman, his youngest son, and Aunt
Aubrey fell victims to the disease which proved fatal in its course.

Fostina and her two elder brothers were the only surviving members of
the unfortunate family, who were now bereft of their only remaining
parent and faithful nurse who had watched over them since the death of
their mother.

Poor Fostina would have sunk under this heavy affliction, had it not
been for the kind attention of her brothers, and the ever watchful care
of Lewis Mortimer, who whispered hope and consolation to his gentle and
confiding Fostina in the time of this severe affliction.

Weeks rolled on, and Lewis continued to remain with the bereaved
family, as they would not consent to have him depart.

But, alas! as time passed by, our lovely heroine was doomed to a more
severe trial of her young heart's affections.

Her brothers had long contemplated the idea of leaving their native
land for California in pursuit of gold, for which so many have
sacrificed their home, friends, and even life, without obtaining the
desired treasure. They had made known their intention to Lewis
Mortimer, and had prevailed on him to accompany them. In vain did
Fostina plead with them not to leave their home; but when she saw that
their determination was fixed, she endeavored to persuade Lewis not to
join them. She implored him not to forsake her, now that she was
bereaved of her beloved friends. He told her that the time of his
absence would pass swiftly on, and he should soon return with the means
that would repay her for the sacrifice during that short period. Again
he told her that he must obtain possession of that which he thought
necessary to effect their happiness in future years.

O vain ambition! delusive hope! Too many there are who think that true
happiness cannot be enjoyed without the possession of wealth.

Not many years after Mr. Woodman had settled at the Mountain, his
brother-in-law visited the place, and concluded to settle in the
village, which he did, establishing his residence a few miles from the
Glen.

It had been arranged by the brothers of Fostina, after their father's
death, that Mr. Aubrey, their uncle, should take possession of the
Cottage until their return, on condition that he would take charge of
their beloved sister during their absence. With the kind assurance of
this from their uncle, the brothers took leave of their affectionate
sister, promising a hasty return to their mountain home. But now came
the trying moment to Lewis Mortimer and his beloved Fostina. The
thought of absenting himself so long, from one he so dearly loved, so
wrought upon his feelings that he almost gave up the idea of leaving
his native land. But the entreaties of his youthful friends, and the
desire for gold which filled his breast, together with the repeated
assurances of Fostina's uncle, that he would watch over and protect her
during his absence, induced him at last to follow them.

Poor Lewis, it was a trying moment! The time had now come that he must
bid adieu to his fair betrothed! The lovely Fostina fell on his bosom
and wept bitter tears of anguish. He bid her await with calmness his
return, when they should never more be separated. One fond embrace, and
affectionate farewell, from the trembling lips of Lewis Mortimer, and
they parted!




CHAPTER II.

_The Ship Essex sails for California, with Lewis Mortimer and the two
Brothers on Board--Fostina's Grief at their Departure--Her Uncle's
Family--Fostina's Dream--Rineldo Aubrey._


[Illustration]


It was on the first morning in June in 184-, that the noble ship Essex
set sail for the distant lands of California, with a large crew of
enterprising young men on board from the village of S----, among whom
was Oscar Woodman, his brother Calvin, and Lewis Mortimer. Sad were
their feelings as they bid adieu to their quiet home in the Mountain
Glen, and gave a last, fond, lingering look at their native shore.

But soon the bright visions of the future, which filled their youthful
hearts, dispelled the gloom which hung around them as they parted with
their friends.

Long days and nights passed slowly away, and the good ship pursued its
course on the distant ocean. And often, in the dark and fearful night,
when the storm cloud gathered around, threatening to burst upon the
fearless and manly crew, often did poor Lewis think of his native home,
and his beloved Fostina, whom he had left behind, to seek a glittering
prize in a foreign land, fondly hoping that he might soon return in
possession of the long desired treasure.

The grief of the devoted Fostina, after parting with her brothers and
Lewis Mortimer, to whom she had given her young heart's affections, was
now almost insupportable.

After separating from her lover, Fostina retired to her room buried in
deep meditation; she felt as if she was now bereft of all her dearest
friends. All that she had held so dear in life, had been taken from her
in so short a period!

O lovely Fostina! in all thy youthful beauty, when surrounded by
friends, and thy young heart overflowing with happiness, little then
didst thou dream of this thy unhappy lot!

Mr. Aubrey removed to the cottage with his family, according to the
request of his nephews, which consisted of his wife and only son.
Fostina was now an inmate of her uncle's family, where she was treated
with the greatest kindness, and received from them every possible
attention which was in their power to bestow.

Her aunt was quiet and gentle in her manner towards her, ever ready to
administer the balm of consolation to the broken-hearted girl, who wept
in the bitterness of solitude. In her moments of grief and sadness, she
would retire alone to her apartment, there to meditate upon her lonely
situation. At these times Mrs. Aubrey never failed to exert her utmost
endeavors to cheer her with words of kindness, giving hope and
consolation that happy days were yet to come.

But, alas! the lonely maiden in the Mountain Glen had almost fallen a
victim to despair. Her merry voice, which had so often rung over the
Mountain like music in the air, was now no longer heard. The rose had
faded from her cheek, and her once bright eyes were dimmed with tears,
and her lovely countenance bore the traces of deep sorrow.

In vain did her uncle endeavor to soothe her grief, and calm her
troubled spirit, that

    Sought for rest, but found despair
      Companion of its way.

Often, at the close of day, Fostina would wander forth to visit the
graves of her departed friends, who now slept in sweet repose beneath
the shadow of the willow, which waved its drooping branches above them.
Here, side by side, they lay, in the same spot which had been selected
by Mr. Woodman in life, where they might live in peaceful seclusion.

Weeks rolled by, and the deep interest which Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey had
taken in their fair charge, and the great kindness which they
manifested towards her, had in some degree resigned her to her fate.
The ever-watchful care of Mrs. Aubrey, and the numerous favors bestowed
upon her by her friends, were now rewarded by the cheerfulness which
she assumed, when in the family circle.

It was late one lovely afternoon in the month of August, the sun had
sunk into the golden west, and all nature seemed to be hushed in silent
repose. The shades of twilight had gathered around, and the lovely
Fostina wandered forth to visit the graves of her departed friends.
After remaining there a short time, she turned her steps towards the
Mountain, and seated herself in a pleasant nook, overshadowed by a
lofty elm.

All was silent save the gentle murmur of the sparkling rivulet, which
flowed beneath her feet, and the graceful bending of the branches
around her, gently moved by the evening zephyrs. She was silent a
while, musing on the past and contemplating the scene before her,
recalling to her memory the many happy hours spent in this lovely spot
with the now absent and loved ones. She thought of the many happy
seasons passed in their society; and now what a striking contrast! The
bright hopes which had once caused her young heart to beat with joy and
gladness, seemed forever fled from her youthful breast! She leaned her
head against the branches of a willow, where she sat, and wept in grief
and sorrow. The shades of night had gathered round, and the lonely
maiden unconsciously fell into a quiet slumber. The moon had risen, and
now shone forth in all its beauty, casting its silver rays through the
branches of the willow which hung mournfully over the fair sleeper. As
the light shone upon her countenance, she seemed most lovely to behold.
A calm of quiet resignation had spread over her features, and she lay
like one

    Who slept--in sweet repose,
    With angels hovering round.

She slept, and dreamed the following dream:--

                     *      *      *      *      *

    FOSTINA'S DREAM.

    She thought it was a lovely spring morning, and her beloved Lewis,
    with her, accompanied by her brothers, had left their home, to be
    absent a few days on a visit to a friend who resided some miles
    from the village. After riding some distance from the Mountain,
    they heard the report of a musket, seemingly not far distant; the
    horses suddenly took fright, and rushed on through the forest at
    their utmost speed, throwing the travellers prostrate upon the
    earth. When Fostina had recovered from the shock she had received
    by her sudden fall from the carriage, what was her astonishment to
    find herself at her uncle's residence, attended by her uncle and
    aunt, with her cousin Rineldo watching over her! As soon as she
    was restored to consciousness enough to realize her situation, she
    earnestly inquired for Lewis and her brothers; and on being
    informed that they had not been seen, she immediately rushed from
    the house to the late scene of confusion. When she arrived at the
    spot, no one was to be seen; she called, but no answer came to the
    sound of her voice, save the echo of the distant hills. Almost
    frantic with grief, she hastened from the spot to the Mountain, but
    her friends could not be found; she continued her search, but in
    vain; she entered the cottage, but could gain no intelligence of
    the missing ones. The horrible reality now flashed upon her mind,
    that some enemy had pursued them, and her friends had been taken
    prisoners; the report which she recollected to have heard,
    confirmed her in this belief.

    With this awful impression resting upon her mind, the distracted
    girl threw herself down in despair; she thought of the mysterious
    circumstances which had taken place on that eventful day, but all
    was clouded with the deepest mystery. Night came on, and Fostina,
    little thinking of the dangers to which she was herself exposed,
    rose to renew her search for the lost ones, when she imagined that
    she saw a light glimmering at a distance through the trees; a
    second glance convinced her of its reality, and she turned her
    steps in the direction from which she saw it. On approaching the
    spot, she discovered that the light which she had seen issued from
    a rude dwelling. As she ventured nearer, she heard voices within,
    which induced her to enter. When she reached the entrance, she
    rapped gently at the door; an aged man made his appearance,
    manifesting great surprise on seeing the youthful stranger at his
    lonely residence, at that late hour of the night.

    He looked at the sorrowful maiden with tenderness and compassion,
    who seemed apparently in great distress. On seeing the kindness of
    the stranger, she briefly related to him the circumstances which
    had taken place on that day.

    He then informed her that a few hours before, a young man, severely
    wounded, had been conveyed there by some persons unknown. On
    hearing this intelligence, she immediately requested to see the
    unfortunate stranger. With feeble steps the aged man conducted her
    through an inner apartment, where, on entering, she beheld the form
    of the sufferer, stretched upon a low bed. She hastened to the
    couch, gave one glance, and found, alas! that her fears were but
    too true. She gazed a moment on the pale and emaciated countenance
    of Lewis Mortimer, and clasping her hands in agony, she uttered a
    piercing shriek!

                     *      *      *      *      *

The violence of her grief caused her suddenly to awake, and to her
great surprise, she found herself alone, surrounded by midnight
darkness. After a few moments had elapsed, Fostina recalled to her
memory where she was, and discovered that she had fallen asleep, and
had been visited with a most frightful dream. She stood a moment in a
listening attitude, thinking that she heard the sound of approaching
footsteps; she then turned, and beheld a dark figure standing by her
side, and supposing it to be some one from the cottage in request for
her, she made an effort to speak without betraying any emotion caused
by her frightful dream. At that instant the dark clouds which had
passed over the moon suddenly disappeared, causing it to shine upon the
form which now stood before the lonely maiden, revealing to her the
well known features of Rineldo Aubrey. He anxiously inquired why she
had remained out at such a late hour, saying that her friends were much
alarmed for her safety, and had sent him in haste to the Mountain in
search for her. She made but little reply to this remark from her
cousin, and carefully avoided making any allusion to her dream.

Rineldo now took her hand, and hurriedly led the way to the cottage.
Her heart beat violently, and she trembled in every limb. Her cousin,
observing her extreme agitation, hastened to the house, where, on
entering, they found Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey anxiously awaiting their
arrival. After assuring them that she was safe, she hastily retired to
her apartment, and threw herself upon the couch.

But no rest came to the poor maiden; all night she lay in deep
meditation. She recalled to her memory the dream which she had while
asleep on the Mountain; each circumstance came up vividly before her
imagination, and it seemed like a strange revelation made known to her,
too awful to escape her memory.

She arose the next morning at an early hour, and seated herself at an
open window which overlooked the gardens. Soon after her cousin came
in, and summoned her to breakfast; she arose and followed him to the
apartment with assumed cheerfulness, and soon after prepared herself to
take her accustomed walk. As she passed through the avenues leading
from the cottage, she was joined by her cousin, who, with great
kindness in his manner, asked if he should accompany her. After some
hesitation she consented, and they directed their steps to the
Mountain, which overlooked the Glen. After they had ascended, they
turned to take a view of the beautiful scenery which lay spread out
before them. Fostina soon expressed a wish to return, and her cousin,
observing her unusual paleness, readily complied; a few moments' walk
brought them again to the cottage, where they separated, Fostina
retiring to her chamber, where she remained during the day.




CHAPTER III.

_Rineldo and his Cousin--He seeks to win her Love--Fostina makes known
to him her Love for Lewis Mortimer--Rineldo tries to gain her Favor,
and is encouraged by his Parents._


A few days after the circumstances occurred which have been related in
the preceding chapter, Fostina and her cousin again met in the parlor.
He anxiously inquired of her if she had received any intelligence of
her absent friends; she informed him that she had not, but was daily
expecting a message from them. She sighed deeply, at this allusion to
her beloved friends, who were now far distant from her. She leaned her
head upon her hands and wept bitterly; her cousin endeavored to cheer
her with words of love and tenderness, and gently passing his arm
around her waist, imprinted a kiss upon her fair cheek. Fostina
thinking this a bold intrusion upon the sacred cause of her grief,
rose and left the apartment.

The day was fast drawing to a close, and the lovely maiden again
wandered forth to visit the sacred spot where slept her beloved
friends. After remaining there some time, she returned and seated
herself beneath a lofty elm, which stood near the cottage, and turning
her eyes in the direction of the Mountain, she beheld Rineldo
approaching, who, on seeing his cousin, immediately came forward and
seated himself near her, in the mean time, expressing great surprise
that she had again ventured out at that late hour alone.

Fostina made but little reply, and rose from her seat to depart;
Rineldo soon followed, not a little displeased with her seeming
indifference towards him, and the wish that she plainly manifested to
avoid his company.

Fostina had ever treated her cousin with respect, and regarded him as a
friend for the great kindness which he had ever manifested towards her
since she had resided in her uncle's family. She now saw that, by
receiving his attentions, she was placing herself in a dangerous
situation.

Rineldo sought every opportunity to converse with his cousin; he
declared his love and offered his hand, making every effort to win her
affections. Fostina in a resolute and determined manner made known to
him her love for Lewis Mortimer, which was forever unchangeable.
Rineldo, on hearing this declaration from the lips of his cousin,
passed the remainder of the day in silence, and made no farther
allusion to the subject.

Towards evening Fostina retired to her apartment, and seated herself at
an open window which overlooked the gardens belonging to the cottage.
The evening zephyrs moved gently the branches of a willow, which shaded
the window where she was seated. The lonely maiden sat musing awhile,
and then, with a low, musical voice, she sang the following lines:--

    "Mournfully, O, mournfully,
      This midnight wind doth sigh!
    Like some sweet, plaintive melody
      Of ages long gone by;
    It speaks a tale of other years,
      Of hopes that bloomed to die--
    Of sunny smiles that set in tears,
      And loves that mould'ring lie.

    "Mournfully, O, mournfully,
      This midnight wind doth moan!
    It stirs some chord of memory,
      In each dull, heavy tone;
    The voices of the much-loved dead
      Seem floating thereupon;
    All, all my fond heart cherished,
      Ere death had made it lone.

    "Mournfully, O, mournfully,
      This midnight wind doth swell!
    With its quaint, pensive minstrelsy,
      Hope's passionate farewell:
    To the dreamy joys of early years,
      Ere yet grief's canker fell
    On the heart's bloom--ay, well may tears,
      Start at that parting knell!"

On the following morning, Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey proposed riding to the
village, and expressed a wish to have Fostina and Rineldo accompany
them. It was with great reluctance that she gave her consent, thinking
that it would be placing herself in the society of her cousin, whose
company she wished to avoid.

At an early hour the carriage was brought to the door, and Mr. Aubrey
and his wife seating themselves, their son hastily stepping forward,
and taking the hand of Fostina, pressed it gently to his lips, while
with the other he raised the trembling girl to the carriage, and taking
a seat by her side, drove rapidly away.

They soon arrived at the village, where they stopped at the residence
formerly owned by Mr. Aubrey; but since his removal to the Mountain, it
had been occupied by a distant relative.

When they arrived at the residence of their friend, they were kindly
welcomed by the family, who appeared much delighted on seeing Fostina.
The day passed on very pleasantly, without any important occurrence,
and after bidding adieu to their friends they again returned home.

That evening Fostina retired at an early hour, feeling as if her
troubles were increased, and that instead of finding friends, she saw
herself placed among those, who she had every reason to believe would
seek to destroy her happiness. The unceasing attention of her cousin,
and the encouragement which he received from his parents to forward his
advances, after she had made known to them her engagement with Lewis
Mortimer, deeply wounded the feelings of the gentle and loving Fostina,
who now felt as if she was alone, as it were, without a friend to cheer
her in her forlorn situation. She felt that she could no longer repose
confidence in those whom she had once considered friends, and to whose
care she had been entrusted by her absent brothers.

As soon as Mr. and Mrs. Aubrey observed the cool indifference
manifested by Fostina towards their son, their former kindness seemed
changed to hatred and revenge. All feeling of love and sympathy, which
had been so strongly manifested, seemed forever fled from their hearts.
Mr. Aubrey appeared to have lost all memory of his departed sister, the
mother of Fostina, and would shrink as if from her presence, whenever
her name was recalled by her lovely daughter.

Rineldo Aubrey was their only son, and had consequently received every
indulgence from his parents; and he now thought, by exerting his
influence over them, he should obtain their assistance in persuading
Fostina to accept his offer. But when he found that all their efforts
were in vain, he devised every means in his power to destroy the
happiness of his cousin.

He vainly endeavored to draw her mind from Lewis, and convince her of
the improbability of his returning.

Fostina's grief, on hearing this from her cousin, was beyond
description; she passed the most of her time in retirement, seldom
joining the family circle, and avoiding all conversation with them, as
much as her circumstances would admit; and when her situation rendered
it necessary for her to be in their society, she met them with calm
indifference and submitted with quiet resignation to her fate, hoping
soon to receive intelligence from her absent friends.




CHAPTER IV.

_Rineldo's sudden Departure--His Return--He pleads in vain for
the Love of his Cousin--Sad Intelligence and the Death of Lewis
Mortimer--Fostina's Illness._


It was late one evening that Rineldo entered the apartment where his
father was seated, and informed him that he had received intelligence
from a friend residing in the country requesting to see him immediately
on business of importance. He made known his intention to his parents,
and accordingly, on the following morning, he started on his journey,
expecting to return in a few weeks.

Fostina, on hearing this, felt greatly relieved, thinking she should
now rest in peace and quietness during his absence. But the unfortunate
girl found no consolation; although she was no longer annoyed by her
cousin's presence, yet his parents were constantly endeavoring to
influence her in his favor, and without hesitation informed her, that
her future happiness would depend upon her marriage with their son. But
the determined girl, in a firm and decided manner, refused to comply
with their wishes, in accepting the proposals of her cousin, telling
them that she would never give her hand to one, while another possessed
her love.

Rineldo had been absent several weeks, and Mr. Aubrey began to be
somewhat alarmed for his safety, when, late one evening, as he was
riding to the village, he met his son on his return home. He rejoiced
to hear that he had a safe arrival, and immediately turned and hastened
to the cottage.

On the following morning the two cousins met, and Rineldo hastily
approached Fostina, expressing his joy on seeing her again after his
long absence. To this his cousin made little reply, and passed by with
cool indifference; he followed, and, with unusual kindness, asked the
pleasure of joining her in a walk through the gardens. Fostina remained
silent, and continued on her way some distance from the cottage. Seeing
the coolness with which he was treated, Rineldo turned his steps in
another direction, and after walking a short distance, he seated
himself in a little arbor, apparently in deep thought. After some time
had elapsed, he returned to the cottage and retired to his chamber.

At the close of the afternoon, he hastily descended and entered the
parlor where Fostina was seated. With trembling steps he approached his
cousin, holding a paper in his hand which had a few moments before been
left in his apartment, and directing her attention to some late
intelligence, requested her to read it. She took the paper from his
hand in silence, and placing it on the table near her, rose to depart.
Her cousin seeing her intention, immediately rose and left the room,
pointing to the paper which lay on the table as he closed the door.

Fostina, finding herself alone, returned to her seat and took the paper
which had been left, and casting a hasty glance over the contents, her
eyes fell on the following:--

    LEWIS MORTIMER, of S----, died suddenly on board ship Essex, on
    passage from Panama to California.

The paper dropped from her hand, and uttering a loud shriek, the
distracted girl fell senseless from her seat.

Rineldo, on leaving the room, had returned to his apartment, where his
parents were seated, who, on hearing the alarm, rushed to the parlor,
where they discovered Fostina lying insensible on the floor.

He made known to them the supposed cause of her grief, and hastily
summoning a servant, assisted in bearing the apparently lifeless form
of his cousin to her apartment.

Mr. Aubrey immediately brought restoratives, but there was little hope
of again rousing the consciousness of the unfortunate sufferer.

Towards evening he called in a physician, who, on seeing the patient,
expressed his fears, which greatly alarmed the family. He remained
several hours anxiously watching over his patient, who now seemed to be
in a state of delirium, occasionally starting as if from a sudden
fright, and calling for Lewis Mortimer.

The physician, on being informed of the cause of her sudden illness,
expressed his belief that her strength had been greatly reduced by
trouble and anxiety of mind, together with the sudden shock she had
received, and her recovery was doubtful.

Rineldo, on hearing this, seemed greatly alarmed, and with unceasing
attention continued to watch over his cousin. She had remained
delirious during the night, and towards morning the physician took his
leave. On the following day she appeared more calm, and apparently sunk
into a quiet slumber; at the close of the afternoon she suddenly
started, and gazing wildly around, seemed conscious of her unhappy
situation. She lay a few moments as if to convince herself of its
reality, and then buried her face in her hands, weeping bitter tears of
agony. Her cousin attempted to soothe her grief, but she motioned him
from the apartment. Soon after the physician entered, and expressed his
joy on seeing his patient recovering.

For several days she lay without making any allusion to the death of
Lewis, and bore her grief in silence; it seemed now as if the last ray
of hope was extinguished, and she well knew that Rineldo would take
advantage of her lonely situation to renew his former addresses.

Several weeks had passed away since Fostina had received the sad news
of Lewis Mortimer's death, and she had now so far recovered her health
as to sit by the window of her lonely apartment. One morning, as she
was seated near the door, gazing at the beautiful scenery which
surrounded the cottage, she beheld the stranger who now occupied her
uncle's residence in the village, conversing with Mr. Aubrey. He soon
after entered the cottage, and when he beheld the great change in
Fostina's countenance, he seemed greatly surprised, and expressed his
grief on seeing her look so ill. Soon after he departed, her cousin
entered, and taking the hand of Fostina, pressed it to his bosom, at
the same time, seating himself near her, again declared his
unchangeable love, and offered her his hand. She told him that if Lewis
Mortimer was dead, none other should ever possess her love, and she
should regard him with no other feeling than friendship. Rineldo,
seeing her determination, arose and departed, leaving his cousin alone
in her apartment.

[Illustration]

The next morning, Fostina prepared herself, for the first time since
her illness, to visit once more the burial place of her friends. With
feeble steps she passed slowly on, until she arrived at the spot, where
she seated herself beneath the shade of the willows which waved in the
morning breeze, sighing mournfully as they swept by the sorrowful
maiden, who was now seated by the tomb, where slept the loved and
cherished ones. Here she remained for some time, as if holding
communion with the spirits of the departed and revealing to them her
sad fate. She summoned all her courage and fortitude to meet whatever
awaited her in the future, and then with an effort she rose from her
seat and returned to the cottage.




CHAPTER V.

_Fostina goes to the Village--Deception Unmasked--The Mystery
Revealed--Fostina makes her Escape._


One lovely morning, a carriage drove up to the door of the cottage in
the Mountain Glen. The coachman alighted, and hastily approaching the
door, rang the bell, which was answered by Mr. Aubrey. He informed him
that he had been ordered there with a carriage by the physician to take
a young lady to the village, at the same time taking a note from his
pocket and inquiring for Miss Woodman. Fostina had been seated near the
window of her room, while this conversation took place, and on hearing
the inquiry of the coachman, immediately made her appearance at the
door, and received the note from the stranger.

She hastened to her room and perused the contents, which she found to
be an invitation extended to her by the friend of her uncle, requesting
her to come and spend a few weeks at his residence in the village.

Fostina with pleasure accepted the invitation of her friend, thinking
that for a short time, at least, she should be relieved from the
annoyances of her uncle's family. She, therefore, without hesitation,
prepared herself, and in a few moments was at the door of the carriage,
which she entered in silence, without making known her intention to any
of the family.

In a few hours the horses suddenly stopped, and the driver springing
from his seat, threw open the door of the carriage, and Fostina with
joy discovered that she had reached the home of her friend, who soon
made his appearance and conducted her into the hall, where she was
kindly welcomed by the family as the beautiful maiden of the Mountain
Glen.

It was not long before a servant entered, followed by the physician who
attended Fostina during her illness; he met her with a graceful bow,
and expressed his joy on seeing her restored to health.

The day passed very pleasantly away, and towards evening a servant
entered the parlor where Fostina was seated, and motioned her in
silence to accompany her. She arose and followed the girl, who
conducted her through several apartments, and then ascended into a room
above, and passing through a long entrance, arrived at the door of a
retired part of the dwelling. After some hesitation, the servant gently
opened the door, and invited her to enter; she obeyed the summons, and
the girl hastily retreated. As she entered, who should meet her
astonished gaze, but Rineldo Aubrey, seated on a sofa? She uttered an
exclamation of surprise, and turned towards the door, which she found,
to her extreme horror, had been locked by the servant.

She now turned and demanded of him an explanation of this mysterious
conduct. He rose from his seat, and walked to his cousin, bade her be
calm, and he would tell her all.

He then turned and parted the rich damask curtains, which hung in heavy
folds from the windows. The apartment was furnished in the most elegant
style, and a large table was placed in the centre, loaded with rich
viands; bottles of sparkling wine were placed upon the table, its
crimson dye forming a striking contrast with the rare fruits which
surrounded it.

Rineldo approached the table, and filling a glass from one of the
bottles, drank at the health of his fair cousin; then placing a seat at
the table, requested her to partake with him the repast which had been
prepared for the occasion. Fostina made no reply to this daring
outrage, but seated herself in silence by an open window, and burst
into a flood of tears. She now trembled for her safety, fearing that
some awful plot had been arranged by her enemies, and was soon to be
put into execution.

Rineldo now approached his cousin, and spoke in a low and firm voice.
"Beautiful maiden of the Mountain Glen! You are soon to be the bride of
Rineldo Aubrey, and this will henceforth be your home. Fair girl, make
no denial." "Never!" replied the heroic girl, springing from her seat,
and demanding him to open the door. "Not until you have consented to
become the bride of Rineldo Aubrey," cried a voice without; "until then
this room shall be your prison, and nought shall set you free!"

It was late, and Rineldo, taking a key from his pocket, unlocked the
door, and bidding his cousin good night, he withdrew from the
apartment.

Fostina was now left alone to meditate upon her forlorn situation; she
thought her doom was sealed forever. Must she be compelled to unite
herself with one whom she could never love? One who had sought by his
treacherous means to destroy her happiness, and who had betrayed the
confidence of her friends in executing his subtle plans.

She knew there was but one alternative; could she escape? If so, she
might free herself from her enemies, who now sought to ruin her
happiness.

She rose, and walked to the windows; they had been secured; two doors
which led from the apartment were also carefully locked. She again went
to the windows, but it was midnight darkness without; she then seated
herself upon the sofa, and calmly awaited her doom. Sleep forsook her
once bright eyes, which now were dimmed with tears, while, with patient
resignation to her fate, she awaited the return of morning. The lamp
shone dimly over the apartment, casting its glimmering rays upon the
rich tapestry that hung from the walls around her. There in youthful
innocence sat the once loved and loving Fostina.

Morning came; it was lovely; the sky was clear, the dewdrop glistened
in the sun, and the sweet music of the birds made the welkin ring; but
still the lonely maiden sat. Sadness and gloom were spread over her
pale countenance, and the expression of deep sorrow rested upon her
features.

The day passed slowly on without any intrusion upon her grief, until
the close of the afternoon, when Rineldo again entered the apartment,
followed by his father, who informed her that the day was fixed for her
marriage with his son, and bade her prepare for the coming event. He
then retired, leaving Rineldo alone with his cousin; he remained until
a late hour, and again taking his leave, hastily left the room.

Fostina was now placed in the most trying situation, her only remaining
hope was the slight possibility of escape. She waited in silence until
the sound of voices had ceased in the rooms below; she then rose, and
went to the windows; they were secured, and all was darkness without,
as the evening before. No light could be seen, and silence reigned
throughout the village. She hastened to the door, and what was her
inexpressible joy, to find that Rineldo in his haste had left the key
remaining in the lock! Hope now filled her breast and gave her courage
to surmount all difficulties, which might befall her in effecting her
escape. With trembling hands she opened the door, and, listening a
moment, she passed on through the entrance leading from the chamber.
She then noiselessly descended the stairs, and after convincing herself
that all was silent, she groped her way through the midnight darkness,
until she reached the door of the hall, which she found unclosed. She
hastened through, now fearing that the door of the entrance was in all
probability closely secured. On approaching it, she found, to her great
delight, that it was bolted on the inside; she listened again, but no
sound was heard; then sliding the bolt, she opened the door and stepped
forth into the open air.

Fostina now felt herself free from the iron grasp of her enemies; but
should she be overtaken!--the thought startled her. She gazed wildly
around, but no one was to be seen or heard in the village, and
hastening to the street she walked with hurried steps in the direction
of the Mountain. She knew, from the conversation the evening previous,
that her uncle's family were at the house of their friend, and, that if
she succeeded in reaching the cottage, she might effect her escape
without fear of being discovered.

Urged on by necessity and the feeling of hope which now filled her
breast, the courageous girl fled swiftly on until she reached the
cottage, without encountering any dangers. She hastened to the door,
which she found was closely barred; then going to the window of her
apartment, she succeeded in raising it far enough to gain admittance.
But her situation grew still more alarming; it would not be safe for
her to remain at the cottage, for she well knew that her uncle, as soon
as they discovered that she had made her escape, would probably return
to the cottage, and if there, she must again fall a victim to their
treachery.

The idea now flashed across her mind, that if dressed in disguise, she
might possibly escape her pursuers. With this bold determination, the
heroic girl hastened to her brother's wardrobe, and taking a suit of
clothes, soon perfected her disguise. She then procured a valise
belonging to one of her brothers, and hastily packing a suit of her own
apparel, together with a few valuable articles which had been given to
her by Lewis, took the portrait of her departed mother, and placed it
in her bosom.

She now hastened from the cottage, closing the window through which she
had entered, and turned her steps towards the Mountain; and approaching
the brink of the precipice, she took the apparel that she had worn from
the village in making her escape, and which she had also taken with her
on her departure from the cottage, and casting it into the waters
beneath the Mountain, hastened from the spot.

With deep thoughtfulness, and great presence of mind, the noble girl
thought that her enemies would search the Mountain in their pursuit,
and on seeing a part of her clothing floating in the waters below the
precipice, would suppose her to be drowned, and she would then be
enabled to escape with safety.

Having thus far accomplished her purpose, she descended the Mountain,
and as the morning was fast approaching, she feared to enter the public
streets, and taking an unfrequented path which led through the forest,
she was soon far distant from her native village.

Here we will leave the lovely Fostina, who had so far bravely effected
her escape, and return to her uncle's residence in the village, where
slept her treacherous enemies, thinking their victim was now safe
within the hall of security.




CHAPTER VI.

_Rineldo's Surprise--Mr. Aubrey and his Son go in Pursuit of
Fostina--Visit to the Mountain and Cottage--Horrible Discovery--End
of their Search._


On the following morning, the family rose at an early hour, and hastily
set about making preparations for the marriage of the two cousins,
which was to take place on that day. Rineldo arrayed himself in costly
apparel, and ascended to the room of his intended bride. On reaching
the door, what was his surprise to find it open, and the key remaining
in the lock! He now recollected that he had forgotten to take it on the
evening before, and rushing into the apartment, and finding his cousin
was not there, he hastened below and informed his parents, who
immediately searched the house, but in vain. The family then readily
concluded that Fostina had returned home. Accordingly, Mr. Aubrey,
accompanied by his son directed his way to the cottage, but when they
arrived no traces could be seen of the lost one. They then hastened to
the Mountain, closely examining every place for concealment, but
Fostina could not be found. Rineldo then walked to the side of the
Mountain, and glancing into the waters below, beheld a shawl belonging
to his cousin, floating upon the surface. He instantly gave the alarm
to his father, who immediately rushed to the spot, where he discovered
that the fears of his son were but too true.

With all the horrors of an upbraiding conscience, the father and son
now returned to the cottage. Rineldo, with grief and terror filling his
distracted mind, hastily retired to his room, feeling that by his
treacherous plans, he had caused the untimely death of his cousin. He
felt that in seeking to destroy the happiness of another, he had
committed deeds of the darkest hue, and must now live a miserable
existence for his awful crimes.

Mr. Aubrey, too, felt the reproval of a guilty conscience; remorse took
possession of his breast, and he beheld in his imagination the form of
his departed sister standing before him, threatening vengeance upon the
murderers of her child. And the agonizing voice of Lewis Mortimer and
her brothers seemed borne to him in every breeze across the ocean, from
a foreign land, calling on Heaven to avenge the wrongs of their beloved
Fostina.




CHAPTER VII.

_Fostina pursues her way through an unknown Country--She stops at the
Village Inn--Conversation between the Landlord and Coachman--Fostina
again appears in the Dress of a Female--Her Departure._


Let us now turn to the beautiful maiden of the Mountain Glen, whom we
left on the morning after her escape, pursuing her lonely way through
the dismal forest.

Morning dawned, and all Nature seemed animated with its approach; the
birds sang merrily in the forest, as if to cheer the lonely traveller,
who was now many miles distant from her Mountain home. She soon reached
an opening in the forest, from which she saw an extensive plain. Urged
on by the dangers which surrounded her, Fostina hastened on her way,
sometimes wandering along the forest, then again through a strange and
unknown country.

The day was fast drawing to a close, the sun had sunk beneath the
western horizon, the shadows of evening began to appear, and Fostina,
weary and fatigued, had now entered a small but thickly settled
village. With hurried steps she continued her way, until she arrived at
the inn. Here she entered, and calling for a private apartment, was
soon conducted by the landlord into a neatly furnished room.

After partaking of some little refreshment, Fostina summoned the
servant, and taking a heavy purse from her valise, which she had taken
on her departure from the cottage, she placed a large portion of the
contents in the hands of the servant, saying she should depart at an
early hour the next morning.

Fostina was now left alone, and thinking herself safe beyond the reach
of her enemies, she threw herself upon the couch to rest. Soon after,
her attention was arrested by the heavy tramp of horses, and a carriage
approach the door of the inn. The bell immediately rang, and the
servant announced the arrival of the stage, and then for a while, all
was again silent.

Fostina now sank into a profound slumber, from which she was suddenly
awakened by the sound of voices in an adjoining room. Curiosity induced
her to listen, and she discovered that the landlord and coachman were
engaged in earnest conversation from which she gathered the following.

The driver informed him that, on riding through the village of S----
that evening, he was told that a mysterious circumstance had taken
place on that morning;--that a young lady, residing at the cottage in
the Glen, had been drowned in the waters below the Mountain, either
intentionally, or by a fall from the precipice. It was also reported
that the friends of the unfortunate female had been absent on a voyage
to California, and a short time since, she had received intelligence of
their sudden death. This was soon followed by a long illness, which
left the sufferer a victim to insanity.

The landlord expressed his grief, on hearing this sad communication,
and Fostina now had the consolation of knowing that the impression was
left upon the minds of her uncle's family that she was drowned near the
Mountain; and feeling still more safe than before, she composed herself
and again fell asleep. No other sound disturbed the fair sleeper during
the night; and at an early hour, the following morning, she awoke
greatly refreshed.

She hastily arose, and taking her apparel from her valise, replaced her
brother's instead, and again arrayed herself in female attire. Then,
without summoning a servant, she left the apartment, and entered the
street, where she immediately took her seat in the stage, which rolled
rapidly away from the inn.




CHAPTER VIII.

_Fostina continues on her Journey--She arrives at a distant Country
Village--A Walk in the Forest--Visit to the Castle--Mistaken Friends--A
Mystery--Strange Discovery--Mysteries Revealed--The Result._


Fostina continued on her journey for several days, riding most of her
way in the stage coach, and stopping at the public inns at night.

Nothing of importance occurred to our young adventurer, until nearly
two weeks had passed away since her departure. She was now a great
distance from her native village; and thinking herself far beyond the
reach of her enemies, she came to the conclusion that she could now
rest in safety, without fear of being molested. Far from her native
home, where the sound of no familiar voice met her ear, without a
kindred friend to sympathize with her in her lonely situation, roamed
the beautiful maiden of the Mountain Glen, to seek a home in a
stranger's land.

It was a cold and rainy afternoon, and Fostina had been riding for some
hours through a country village, when the coach suddenly stopped, and
the passengers, among whom was our lovely heroine, hastened to the inn.
Here she remained for some days, where she received great attention and
kindness from the landlady, who, either from curiosity or friendship,
appeared greatly interested in the young stranger whose arrival in the
village had excited the wonder and surprise of all the inhabitants, and
had now become the object of inquiry of all who looked on her pale, but
lovely countenance, which wore the expressions of deep sorrow. Since
her arrival she had passed the most of her time in the solitude of her
apartment, occasionally wandering forth to a more retired part of the
village.

It was at the close of a pleasant afternoon, that Fostina had ventured
out some distance from the village, and, taking a retired path which
led through the forest, she pursued her way a great distance in
thoughtful meditation. Night came on before she was aware of its
approach, and she hastily turned to retrace her steps; she wandered on
for some distance, but could see no opening in the deep forest which
surrounded her. It was late, and she knew not what course to pursue.
She feared it would not be safe for her to remain in the forest, and
yet there was no probability of her reaching the village that night.

She stood a few moments in silence, and then turning in another
direction, she discovered a hill at some distance, to which she
immediately directed her steps. On arriving there, she hastily
ascended, and on reaching the top, discovered lights about a mile
distant. Armed with fresh courage and resolution, she now descended and
made her way through the forest, when, on approaching the spot, she saw
what appeared to be the ruins of an ancient castle.

[Illustration: _Ruins of an Ancient Castle._]

Curiosity led her to a closer examination, when she again saw lights
issue from several windows; this confirmed her in the belief that some
part of the building was inhabited. She then entered the gate, which
led to the entrance, and gently rapped at the door; an elderly woman
made her appearance, seeming somewhat alarmed. Fostina informed her
that she had lost her way, in returning to the village, and seeing the
light in the forest, she had succeeded in finding their residence. The
good lady, after hearing the story of the young stranger, bade her walk
in and be welcome.

With trembling steps Fostina entered the castle, and following on
through a long entrance, she found herself in the presence of several
persons, who were seated in a small but neatly furnished apartment. On
being conducted into the room, Fostina found herself kindly received by
the family, and after briefly relating to them the circumstances, the
kind lady immediately summoned the servant, and a table was quickly
spread before the stranger.

After partaking of the repast which had been prepared, Fostina remained
a while with the family, and then obeying the signal of Mrs. Cameron,
her friend, she was conducted through a long suite of apartments, and
entering a small retired room, bade her good night.

Fostina, being left alone, consoled herself with the idea that she was
now among friends. She gazed with feelings of curiosity mingled with
surprise, on seeing the extreme neatness and great taste which had been
displayed, in the arrangement of furniture and other articles, in the
apartments through which she had passed, and wondered why this place of
seclusion had been chosen by her new-made friends.

The exterior of the building bore an ancient appearance, and a part
seemed to have already fallen to ruins, while the interior appeared to
have been lately repaired, and well fitted up for the comfort and
convenience of its present occupants.

Fostina, after recalling to her memory the circumstances of the
preceding day, soon composed herself, and fell into a quiet slumber.

On the following morning, when she awoke, the sun had risen, and the
walls of the tower echoed with the sound of bells. She arose, and
hastily preparing herself, was soon summoned to breakfast with the
family, which consisted of Mr. Cameron, his wife, and servant.

After remaining some time, Fostina made known her intention to depart,
upon which Mr. Cameron inquired if she was a resident of the village.
She informed them that she was a stranger in the place, and had stopped
at the village inn, where she had been but a few days.

On hearing this, the family with great earnestness urged her to remain
with them; Fostina gratefully accepted the invitation, and, at their
request, promised to take up her abode in this retired spot during the
coming winter, thinking, in this secluded place, she might pass her
time in peace and quietness, free from care and anxiety.

Weeks passed away, and Fostina continued to remain at the castle, much
pleased with her new home. During this time she had not revealed any
thing connected with her history, to her friends, who had never made
any allusion to the subject. Although Fostina had often observed that
there was something mysterious in the conduct of the family, yet they
had always treated her with the greatest kindness.

It was late one evening, soon after the family had retired, that the
sound of voices was heard, and footsteps approaching the castle,
followed by a loud rapping at the door, which was immediately opened by
Mr. Cameron, who, on hearing the alarm, hastened to answer the call.
Soon after, persons were heard entering, and descending into a lower
room.

Fostina, trembling with fear, hastily arose, and was on the point of
rushing to the apartment of Mrs. Cameron, to ascertain the cause of the
disturbance. But the fear of encountering some one in the passage,
caused her to remain silent. She listened, and distinctly heard the
voices of several persons conversing in a low tone. A few moments
elapsed, all was silent; she then retired, but not to rest; the
circumstances which had taken place that night, together with the fact
that the disturbance had caused no excitement in the family, gave
Fostina great cause for alarm. She lay in breathless anxiety until past
midnight, when she heard the same persons ascend from below, and take
their departure.

At an early hour the next morning Fostina entered the hall, where she
met Mrs. Cameron, and inquired into the mystery of the proceedings the
evening previous. She informed her that report had long been current
that the castle was haunted, and as she had often heard the same
disturbance during the night, she was confirmed in the belief that it
was so.

Fostina could scarcely credit this intelligence, but made no farther
inquiries upon the subject.

The day passed heavily away, and Fostina observed that her friends were
unusually silent. Toward evening, Mrs. Cameron entered the room where
she was sitting, and asked if she would prefer a more retired room,
where she could feel secure, if again they should be troubled with any
supernatural visitations. She then ascended into a distant part of the
castle, and entering a small room, told Fostina not to give herself any
uneasiness, as she thought she might rest there without fear of being
disturbed. She then closed the door and descended the stairs, leaving
Fostina alone in her apartment.

After retiring, she soon fell asleep, and lay for several hours, until
she was suddenly awakened by a repetition of the same noise which she
had heard the evening previous. She listened, and could hear the sound
of persons traversing the hall; but being now farther distant, she was
unable to hear the conversation.

She listened attentively, as if to catch the sound of their voices,
when her attention was suddenly arrested by a faint groan, seemingly
not far distant from where she lay.

She now believed herself to be surrounded with the spirits of the
departed. But not fearing any danger from this source, she again
composed herself, and raising her head from the pillow, looked
anxiously around the apartment, when, to her extreme horror, she
discovered a light issuing from a small opening in the ceiling above!

She made an effort to rise, that she might discover some cause for its
appearance, when, to her great surprise, she heard the sound of
footsteps in the apartment above, followed by a long-suppressed groan!

Fostina remained motionless, and could scarcely realize the loneliness
of her situation; she arose, and after pacing the room for some time in
silence, seated herself on the sofa, anxiously awaiting the return of
morning.

Nearly two hours had passed away in silence, and Fostina rose from her
seat and walked to the window; she drew back the shutter, and
discovered that the morning had already dawned. She felt relieved on
its approach, and looking down from the window, she saw Alvin, the
servant, coming in the direction of the castle, and gently raising the
window, requested him to come immediately to her room. He hastily
obeyed the summons, and met Fostina at the door. After informing him
what had taken place, she descended with him to the hall, where they
met Mr. and Mrs. Cameron.

Fostina again informed them what she had seen and heard during the
night; on hearing which, they seemed greatly embarrassed, as if wishing
to avoid any conversation to which the subject might lead.

After breakfast was over, Mr. Cameron gave orders to have the carriage
brought to the door, saying that he was going to the village, and
should not return until the following morning. In a few moments the
servant appeared with the carriage, and Mr. Cameron and his wife
departed.

As soon as they had left the castle, Fostina returned to the hall,
followed by Alvin, who now seemed anxious to improve the opportunity of
conversing with her. She soon perceived this, and earnestly inquired of
him the cause of the mysterious conduct of her friends, who, she
believed, possessed more knowledge of the haunted castle than they were
willing to disclose.

Alvin remained silent for some time, and then rising from his seat,
closed the doors, and approaching Fostina, solicited a promise from her
never to reveal any thing which he should make known to her concerning
the family.

She answered him that she would never betray his confidence, and
earnestly entreated him to tell her all he knew.

Then seating himself near Fostina, he unfolded to her the mysteries of
the haunted castle as follows:--

He had been a servant in the family of Mr. Cameron two years, and had
resided at the castle, where a band of robbers had nightly collected
together for the purpose of dividing their booty, which they plundered
from the neighboring village.

He then explained to her the cause of what she had seen and heard, in
the apartment over which she had slept, stating that, about two months
previous, a stranger, apparently an invalid, had been conveyed there
and confined in an upper room in the castle, in which he was still held
prisoner. For what purpose he knew not, as he had never dared to make
any inquiries of the family, and had not been allowed to hold any
conversation with the prisoner.

After hearing this intelligence from Alvin, Fostina agreed with him to
seek an interview with the stranger, and arrange some plan to assist
his escape. They then left the hall and ascended together a winding
staircase, which led to the apartment occupied by the prisoner. On
arriving at the door, they found it firmly secured by an iron bar,
which Alvin, after several attempts, succeeded in removing. He then
opened the door, and glancing into the room, beheld the prisoner seated
on a low seat, holding a book in his hand as if engaged in reading. On
the entrance of Alvin, he fixed his gaze sternly upon him without
speaking. Alvin informed him that they were friends, and had come to
set him free, and turning round, he stepped back into the passage where
he had left Fostina, when, to his great surprise, he beheld her lying
senseless on the floor!

Another instant, the prisoner rushed to the spot, and clasping the
apparently lifeless form of Fostina, he bore her to his apartment!

During this time, Alvin had remained motionless, gazing with wonder and
surprise, utterly confounded by these mysterious circumstances. In a
few moments Fostina recovered her senses, and opening her eyes, beheld
the pale and emaciated countenance of Lewis Mortimer, who now clasped
her to his bosom!




CHAPTER IX.

_Discovery of the Plot--Escape from the Castle--Lewis Mortimer and
Fostina return to the Village--They meet the two Brothers--Conclusion._


Reader, behold now the plot of Rineldo Aubrey, who vainly sought to win
the love of the beautiful Fostina, and finding that he had a successful
rival, endeavored by his subtle plans to destroy his happiness. To
execute his designs more fully to his purpose, he had intercepted the
letters belonging to his cousin, from which he learned that Lewis
Mortimer had been unfortunately taken ill on his passage to California,
and concluded to return to his native village as soon as he recovered.
After receiving this intelligence, he hastened on his journey to the
place where Lewis was then confined by sickness, thinking an
opportunity had now offered itself for him to secure his victim, until
he had accomplished his purpose.

Having arrived at the village, where, as it had been stated in the
letter, Lewis had been left by his friends, he called on the attending
physician, and offered him a large amount of money to detain him a
certain length of time; and in order to do this, he must be conveyed to
some place of confinement.

The physician agreed to the proposal, and gave orders to have his
patient removed to the castle, as it was retired from the village, and
he thought he would be more likely to recover.

Rineldo, in the mean time, wishing to leave the impression upon the
minds of his friends that Lewis was dead, accordingly had his death
inserted in the public prints, which soon conveyed the sad intelligence
to Fostina, the result of which has already been made known to the
reader.

[Illustration: _Their escape to the Village._]

After a mutual explanation had taken place between Fostina and Lewis at
the castle, they soon contrived plans to effect their escape, and
wishing to make their way through the dense forest which surrounded
them as soon as possible, they directed their steps to a stream that
bent its course along the forest side. Fortunately, they espied two men
seated upon the opposite bank engaged in fishing. Lewis, on seeing
them, instantly gave the signal for them to cross the water in the boat
that lay anchored near them. They cheerfully obeyed his call, and in a
few moments Fostina and Lewis were safely landed upon the opposite
shore. They then immediately took their way to the village inn, where,
on the following morning, they entered the coach and started for their
native village, Lewis being determined to seek out his enemies, and
take possession of the cottage.

In a few weeks, they arrived at the village of S----, where, to their
inexpressible joy, they learned that the brothers had returned home
soon after the sudden disappearance of their sister, who, as it had
been reported by Mr. Aubrey, had fallen from the precipice in a fit of
insanity, and been drowned.

With hearts overflowing with joy, Fostina and Lewis now hastened to the
cottage, where they met the long absent and beloved brothers, who,
after hearing from their sister the recital of her sufferings and
adventures, returned their grateful thanks to Heaven for the
deliverance of their friends.

They now informed Lewis that, soon after leaving him at the village,
they fell victims to the same disease, and fearing that to continue
their voyage would be a sacrifice of life, they gave up the pursuit of
that which they must lose so much to obtain, and with happy hearts and
contented minds they resolved to return to their Mountain home, where
they fondly anticipated the pleasure of meeting with their friends, in
health and safety.

Fostina then learned from her brothers, that on their arrival at the
cottage, Mr. Aubrey had returned to his native country.

A few weeks after the lovers had returned to the village, Lewis was
restored to his former health, and Fostina having escaped from so many
dangers, now fulfilled her faithful promise to Lewis Mortimer, who was
indebted for his life and present happiness to the beautiful maiden in
the Mountain Glen.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOSTINA WOODMAN, THE WONDERFUL
ADVENTURER***


******* This file should be named 23214.txt or 23214.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/3/2/1/23214



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

