The Project Gutenberg EBook of Mrs. Dud's Sister, by Josephine Daskam

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Mrs. Dud's Sister

Author: Josephine Daskam

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23369]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. DUD'S SISTER ***




Produced by David Widger






MRS. DUD'S SISTER

By Josephine Daskam

Copyright, 1903, by Charles Scribner's Sons


They were having tea on the terrace. As Varian strolled up to the group
he wished that Hunter could see the picture they made--Hunter, who
had not been in America for thirty years, and who had been so honestly
surprised when Varian had spoken of Mrs. Dud's pretty maids--she always
had pretty ones, even to the cook's third assistant.

"Maids? Maids? It used to be 'help,'" he had protested. "You don't mean
to say they have waitresses in Binghamville now?"

Varian had despaired of giving him any idea.

"Come over and see Mrs. Dud," he had urged, "and do her portrait. We've
moved on since you left us, you know. She's a wonder--she really is.
When you remember how she used to carry her father's dinner to the store
Saturday afternoons--"

"And now I suppose she sports real Mechlin on her cap," assented Hunter,
anxious to show how perfectly he caught the situation.

Varian had roared helplessly. "Cap? Cap!" he had moaned finally. "Oh, my
sainted granny! Cap! My poor fellow, your view of Binghamville must be
like the old maps of Africa in the green geography, that said 'desert'
and 'interior' and 'savage tribes' from time to time. I should like
awfully to see Mrs. Dud in a cap."

Hunter had looked puzzled.

"But, dear me! she might very well wear one, I should think," he had
murmured defensively. "I don't wish to be invidious, but surely
Lizzie must be--let's see; 'eighty, 'ninety--why, she must be between
forty-five and fifty now."

Varian had waved his hand dramatically. "Nobody considers Mrs. Dud and
time in the same breath. If you could see her in her golf rig! Or on
a horse! She even sheds a lustre on the rest of us. I forget my
rheumatism!"

But Hunter, retreating behind his determination to avoid a second
seasickness--it might have been sincere; nobody ever knew--had stayed
in Florence, and Varian had been obliged to come without him to the
house-party.

On a straw cushion, a cup in her strong white hand, a bunch of adoring
young girls at her feet, sat Mrs. Dud. Rosy and firm-cheeked, crisp
in stiff white duck, deliriously contrasted with her fluffy
Parisian parasol, she scorned the softening ruffles of her presumable
contemporaries; her delicately squared chin, for the most part held
high, showed a straight white collar under a throat only a little fuller
than the girlish ones all around her.

Old Dudley himself strolled about the group, gossiping here and there
with some pretty woman, sending the grave servants from one to another
with some particularly desirable sandwich, "rubbing it in," as he said
to the men who had failed to touch his score on the links, tantalizingly
uncertain as to which one of the young women he would invite to lead
the cotillon with him at the club dance that week: none of the young men
could take his place at that, as they themselves enviously admitted.

What a well-matched couple it was! What a lot they got out of life!
Varian walked quietly by the group, to enjoy better the pretty, modish
picture they made. Their quick chatter, their bursts of laughter, the
sweet faint odor of the tea, the gay dresses and light flannels, with
the quiet, sombrely attired servants to add tone, all gave him, fresh
from Hunter's quick sense of the effective, an appreciation that gained
force from his separateness; he walked farther away to get a different
point of view.

He was out of any path now, and suddenly, hardly beyond reach of
their voices, he found himself in a part of the grounds he had never
approached before. A thick high hedge shut in a kind of court at the
side and back of the great house, and a solid wooden door, carefully
matched to its green, left open by accident, showed a picture so out
of line with the succession of vivid scenes that dazzled the visitor at
Wilton Bluffs that he stopped involuntarily. The rectangle was
carpeted with the characteristic emerald turf of the place, divided by
intersecting red brick paths into four regular squares. In the farther
corner of each of these a trim green clothes-tree was planted, all
abloom with snowy fringed napkins that shone dazzling white against the
hedge. One of the squares was a neat little kitchen-garden; parsley was
there in plenty, and other vaguely familiar green things, curly-leaved
and spear-pointed. A warm gust of wind brought mint to his nostrils. A
second plot held a small crab-apple tree covered with pink and orange
globes. A great tortoise-shell cat with two kittens ornamented the
third, and in the middle of the fourth, beside a small wooden table, a
woman sat with her back toward the intruder. On the table were one or
two tin boxes and a yellow earthen dish; in her left hand, raised to
the shoulder-level, was a tall thin bottle, from which an amber fluid
dripped in an almost imperceptibly thin stream; her right arm stirred
vigorously. She was a middle-aged woman with lightly grayed hair--a kind
of premonitory powdering. Over her full skirt of lavender-striped cotton
stuff fell a broad, competent white apron. Except for the thudding of
the spoon against the bowl, and a faint, homely echo of clashing china
and tin, mingled with occasionally raised voices and laughter from some
farther kitchen region, all was utterly, placidly still.

Varian stood chained to the open gate. Something in the calm sun-bathed
picture tugged strongly at his heart. He thought suddenly of his mother
and his Aunt Delia--he had been very fond of Aunt Delia. And what
cookies she used to make! Molasses cookies, brown, moist, and crumbly,
they had sweetened his boyhood.

What was it, that delighted sense of congruity that filled him, every
passing second, with keener familiarity, so strangely tinged with sorrow
and regret? Ah, he had it! He bit his lip as it came clear to him. His
little namesake nephew, dead at eight years old, and dear as only a
dearly loved child can be, had delighted greatly in the Kate Greenaway
pictures that came in "painting-books," with colored prints on alternate
pages and corresponding outlines on the others. Dozens of those books
the boy had cleverly filled in with his little japanned paint-box and
mussy, quill-handled brushes; and the scene before him, the rich tints
of the hedge, the symmetrical little tree brilliant with hundreds of
tiny globes, the big white apron, the lazy yellow cats, and everywhere
the prim rectangular lines so amusingly conventional to accentuate the
likeness, almost choked him with the suddenness of the recognition. They
must have colored that very picture a dozen times, Tommy and he.

Half unconsciously he rested his arms on the top of the gate and drifted
into revery. He forgot that he was at Wilton Bluffs, one of the greatest
of the country palaces, and lived for a while in a mingled vision of his
boyhood on the old farm and in the land of the Greenaway painting-books.

Suddenly a door opened into the green.

A housemaid advanced to the table, bearing in both red hands a long tray
covered with a napkin. On the napkin lay, heaped in rich confusion, a
great pile of spicy, smoking brown cookies.

"They're just out o' the oven," she began, but Varian could contain
himself no longer. He could not be deceived: he would have known those
cookies in the Desert of Sahara. He crossed the little plot in three
long steps, and faced the astonished maid.

"I beg your pardon," he said firmly, "but it is very necessary that I
should have one of those cookies! I hope you can spare one?"

She giggled convulsively.

"I--I guess you can, sir," she murmured, laying down the tray and
retreating toward the house door.

Varian faced the older woman, and, with hat still in hand, instinctively
bowed lower; for this was no housekeeper--he was sure of that. Even as
she met his eyes a great flood of pink rushed to her smooth forehead,
and she dropped her lids as she bowed slightly. He reflected
irrelevantly that he had never seen Mrs. Dudley blush in his life.

"You are very welcome to all you wish, I am sure," she said graciously.
"I--I didn't know any one liked them but me. I always have them made for
me--I taught her the rule. I always call them"--she laughed nervously,
and it dawned on him that this woman was really shy and "talking against
time," as they said--"I always call them 'Aunt Delia's cookies.' They--"

"Aunt Delia's cookies!" he interrupted. "What Aunt Delia?"

"Aunt Delia Parmentre," she returned, a little surprised, evidently,
at this stranger, who, with a straw sailor-hat in one hand and a warm
molasses cooky in the other, stared so intently at her. "She wasn't
really my aunt, of course--"

"But she was mine!" he burst out, "and these are her cookies, and no
mistake. Who are you?"

Again she flushed, but more lightly.

"I am Miss Redding," she said with a gentle dignity, "Mrs. Wilton's
sister."

He stared at her vaguely.

"Mrs. Wilton--oh! you're her sister? I didn't know--" He stopped
abruptly. As his confusion grew, her own faded away.

"You didn't know she had one?" she asked, almost mischievously.

"I didn't know you were here," he recovered himself. "You've never been
with Mrs. Dud before, have you?"

"No, not here when there was company," she said.

He hardly noticed the words; his mind was groping among past histories.

"Her sister--her sister," he muttered. "Why, then," with an illuminating
smile, "I used to go to school with you! I'm Tom Varian!"

She smiled and held out her hand.

"I'm very glad to see you," she said cordially. "Won't you--" She looked
about for a chair, but he dropped on the grass at her feet.

"You've changed since we met last," he remarked, biting into his cooky.
She looked at his bronzed face and thick silvered hair and nodded
thoughtfully.

"I was six years old then," she said; "and you were one of the 'big
boys'--you were fourteen."

"That's a long while," he suggested laughingly.

"It is thirty-six years," she replied simply.

He winced. His associates were not accustomed to be so scrupulously
accurate. It seemed indecently long ago. And yet there was a certain
charm, now one faced it, a quaint halo of interest.

"You used to hand me water in a tin dipper," he said.

She nodded. "Yes, that was for a reward, when I was good," she said
seriously. "I could hand the water to the big boys. I was very proud of
it. You drank a great deal."

He chuckled. "I was born thirsty," he acknowledged. "By George, how
it comes back! I can see it now, that school-house! Funny little red
thing--remember how it looked? Big shelf around the sides for a desk,
and another under that for the books? Bench all round the room to sit
on, and we just whopped our legs over and faced round to recite? And
carved--Lord! I don't believe there was an inch of the wood, all told,
that was clear! I nearly cut my thumb off there, one day."

"One of the big girls fainted away," she added, "and they laid her on
the floor and told me to bring a dipper of water; but my hand shook so I
spilled it all over my apron, and she came to before we got more. I was
very timid."

He began on another cooky.

"Did you have two pigtails? And striped stockings?" he inquired, his
eyes fixed reminiscently on the hedge.

She nodded softly.

"And played some game with stones? I can't just remember--"

"It was houses," she reminded him. "We little girls used to make little
houses--just marked out with stones in squares on the ground; and if you
boys felt like it, you'd bring us big flat stones to eat our dinner on."

"Ah, yes!" It all came back to him. "And then you'd race off to get
flag-root or something, and--"

"And gobble our dinner as we ran. It was fun, all the same," she added.

"But what a mite you were, to be in school!" he said wonderingly. "What
under heaven did you study?"

"I don't remember at all," she confessed. "But I suppose I spelled. Do
you remember the spelling-matches? And how you big ones wanted to 'leave
off head'?"

He chuckled. "I should say I did! And sometimes the greatest idiot would
'leave off head' because there wasn't any more time. It was maddening!"

He munched in silence for a while, and she did not dream of
interrupting.

"In the winter, though--George! but it was cold! We used to positively
swim through the drifts. I tell you, there aren't any such snows now!
How did you get there?"

"I only went in the summer," she said; "and I used to come in all
stained with the berries I ate along the way. It was dreadful"--she
grew stern, as if addressing the little girl in striped stockings and
pigtails--"the way I ate berries! I used to eat the bushes clean on the
way to school!"

She had got over her first shyness, and had gained time to realize her
big apron, which she hastily untied. He caught the motion and protested.

"No, no! Keep it on! I haven't seen a woman--a lady--in an apron for
years! Please keep it on! And do go on with the--the mess in the dish!"

"The mess"--she bent her brows reprovingly--"it's mayonnaise sauce. But
I don't think--"

He jumped up to put the bowl in her lap. A sudden twinge in his knee
wrung an involuntary groan from him. He walked a little stiffly toward
her.

"You have rheumatism! And you sat all the time on that damp grass!" she
cried reproachfully. "I thought at first it was the craziest thing to
do, but I didn't dare say so."

He ignored the charge but smiled at the confession.

"And now you're not afraid?"

She blushed again. It was very becoming.

"It seems--it seems foolish to act like strangers when it's been
so long--we remember so well--" She sighed a little. He studied her
face--so like her sister's and so utterly different. The same gray eyes,
but calm and drooped; the same clear white skin, but a fuller, yes, a
more matronly face, a riper, sweeter, more restful curve. The soft dark
shadows that accentuated Mrs. Dudley's eyes were lacking; a group of
tiny wrinkles at the corners gave her instead a pleasant, humorous
regard that her sister's literal directness missed utterly.

Nervous under his scrutiny, she rose hastily, and before he could
prevent her she had brought him a roomy arm-chair from the house.

"At our age there's no use in running risks," she said simply, "you
ought not to sit on the grass; leave that for the young folks."

Again he winced, but dropped with relief into the chair.

"Oh, one must keep up with the procession, you know!" he said lightly.

She made no reply; and as she lifted the bottle and began to beat the
yellow mass again, it occurred to him that the remark was exceptionally
silly.

"Does it have to go in slowly like that--the whole bottleful?" he
inquired lazily.

She nodded. "Or it curdles," she explained. "The cook sprained his wrist
yesterday. He never allows anybody to make the mayonnaise--he can't
trust them--and I was glad to do it for him. He says mine is as good as
his. Did you ever see him?"

"Well, no," Varian returned. "But he doesn't need to be seen to be
appreciated."

A strange suspicion crept over him.

"Do you often--Do you do much--How is it that you--" He could not say it
properly. Was it possible that Mrs. Dud---- It was unworthy of her!

She caught his meaning, and her cool gray eyes met his with their
uncompromising directness. He seemed convicted of unnecessary shuffling.

"Oh, Lizzie asked me not to do anything," she said quietly. "She
wanted me to enjoy myself with her friends. But I'm not used to so much
society, and I don't want to be any hinderance. I'm not so young as I
used to be. I'd have liked the gayety well enough when I was a girl, but
I guess it tires me a little now. There seems to be so much going on
all the time. Lizzie says she's resting, but it wouldn't rest me. Do you
find it so?"

He recalled his yesterday's programme: driving a pulling team all
the morning; carrying Mrs. Dud's heavy bag over the links all the
afternoon--she preferred her friends to caddies; prompting for the
dramatics rehearsal, with a poor light, all the evening, while the
actors gossiped and squabbled and flirted contentedly.

"It is not always restful," he admitted.

"It makes my head ache," she remarked placidly. "I like to see the girls
enjoy themselves. I'm glad they're happy--some of those visiting Lizzie
are so pretty!--but I'm glad I haven't got to run about so much. I'm
very fond of driving myself, if I have a good quiet horse that won't
shy and doesn't go fast, and Lizzie has one for me--a white one that's
gentle--and I drive about in the phaeton a great deal. The doctor
that came that night--were you here?--when Mrs. Page fainted and they
couldn't bring her to (it seems she was in the habit of taking some
medicine to make her sleep, and it weakened her heart) asked me if I
wouldn't like to take out some patients of his, and so I called for a
very nice lady--a Mrs. Williams; you probably don't know her?--and after
that a young girl with spinal trouble, and--and several others. They
seemed to enjoy it, and I'm sure I did. Once I took a young girl that's
staying here--she had a bad headache. She was a sweet girl, and I liked
her. She said the drive helped her a great deal. It's astonishing"--her
eyes met his wonderingly--"how much trouble you can have, with all the
money you want! I--I was sorry for her," she added, half to herself.

Before he thought he leaned forward, took her hand with the silver
tablespoon in it, and kissed it gently. He admired her as he would
admire some charming soft pastel hung in a cool white room.

"How sweet and good you are!" he said warmly; and then, to cover her
deep embarrassment and his own sudden emotion, he continued quickly,
"Are you very busy in the morning, always?"

"There are different things," she murmured, still looking at her spoon.
"I have letters to write--I keep up with a good many old friends in
Binghamville and Albany, where I lived with my married niece ten years,
till they moved West. I loved her children; I half brought them up. One
died; I can't seem to get over it--" Her eyes filled, and she made no
effort to cover two tears that slipped over.

Varian took her hand again. "I know about that--I know!" he said softly.

"Then there are my flowers; I do so enjoy the beds and the greenhouses
here," she went on more cheerfully. "The gardeners are very kind to
me--I think they like to have me come in. Mr. McFadden gives me a good
many slips and cuttings. I love flowers dearly. Then I read a good deal,
and there is always some little thing to do for the young girls here.
They--the ones I know--come in for a moment while I mend something, or
pin their things in the back, and it's surprising how much there is to
do! They fly about so they can't stop to take care of their things. They
talk to me while I set them straight, and it's very interesting. I tell
Lizzie I go out a great deal, just hearing about their adventures, when
she drops in to see me. She never forgets me; she brings somebody to my
sitting-room every day or so that she thinks I'd enjoy meeting--and I
always do. She never makes a mistake."

"Oh, she's wonderful," Varian agreed easily. "There's nobody like Mrs.
Dud, of course."

She stopped her work a moment and looked curiously at him.

"What do you mean by that?" she asked. "You all say it--in just that
way; but I don't think I quite see what you mean. Why is she wonderful?
Because she looks so young?"

"That, in the first place," Varian returned, with a smile, "but not only
that."

"Of course that is very strange," she mused. "Now Lizzie is three years
older than I. You would never think it, would you?"

"No," he agreed, still smiling; "but then, Mrs. Dud looks younger than
everybody. It is her specialty. I think what we mean," he continued,
"is her amazing capacity; she does so much, so ridiculously much, and
so much better than other people. We try to keep up with things--your
sister is a little bit ahead. She seems to have always been doing the
very latest thing, you see. And all her responsibilities, her various
affairs--it makes one's head swim! The women have set themselves
a tremendous field to cover nowadays, and when one succeeds so
admirably--" He paused.

She shook her head thoughtfully.

"But everything is done for her!" she protested. "Why, I have never
yet seen all the servants in this house! And you know there is a
housekeeper? Lizzie sees her a little while in the morning, that's all.
And she never sews a stitch--there's a seamstress here all the time,
you know, and that has nothing to do with the clothes that come home
in boxes. And little Dudley has his tutor, and his old nurse that looks
after his clothes. What is it that she does to make it so wonderful?"

He only smiled at her perplexity, and she added confidentially:

"Lizzie wanted me to go to her dressmaker, but I didn't like the idea of
a man, to begin with, and then I knew Miss Simms would feel so hurt. She
lives in Albany, and she's made my dresses for so long that I thought,
though she may not be so stylish, I'd better keep up with her; wouldn't
you?"

A perfectly unreasonable tenderness surged through his heart. How sweet
she was!

"If she made that dress, I certainly should!" he declared.

She smoothed the crisp lavender folds deprecatingly.

"Oh, this is only a cotton dress," she said. "But she made my gray silk,
too, and Lizzie herself said it fitted beautifully."

She took up the bottle again: it was nearly empty.

"Now my mother," she began, "_she_ was wonderful, if you like. Do you
know what my mother used to do? We lived on the farm, you know, like
yours, and most of the work of that farm mother did. She did the
cooking--for all the hired hands, too; she made the butter, and took
care of the hens; she made the candles and the soap; she made the
carpets and all our clothes--my brothers', too; and she put up preserves
and jellies and cordials, and did the most beautiful embroidery; I
have some of mother's embroidered collars, and I can't do anything like
them."

"It was tremendous," he said. "My Aunt Delia did that, too."

"We were old-fashioned, even for then," she said. "Everybody didn't do
so much, of course, as we did. Lizzie says we were just on the edge of
the new age. It certainly is different. And of course I wouldn't go back
to it for anything. After we came back from boarding-school it was all
changed. We moved, then, nearer the town. But, do you know, my mother
went to singing-school, and Lizzie was looking that up in a book, the
other day, to see what they did--she wanted it for a party!"

He laughed. "That _is_ delicious!" he said.

"See what I found to-day!" she added, drawing a small object from
her pocket. "I hunted it up to show Miss Porter tonight. She was so
interested when I told her about it."

She showed him, with a tender amusement, a little slender white silk
mitten. Around the wrist was embroidered in dark blue a legend in Old
English script. He puzzled it out: _A Whig or no Husband!_

"That was mother's," she said, "the girls wore them then. She was quite
a belle, mother was! And when people ask me how Lizzie does so much, I
say that she inherits it. But at her age mother was broken down and
old. She had to be. There were nine of us, and here there's only little
Dudley, and it was so long before he came."

They sat quietly. The setting sun flamed through the crab-apples and
burnished the fur of the tortoise-shell cat. The mint smelled strong.
The sweet, mellow summer evening was reflected in her handsome face,
with its delicate lines, that only added a restful charm to forehead and
cheek. He had no need to talk; it was very, very pleasant sitting there.

A maid came out to get the mayonnaise, and the spell was broken. He took
out his watch.

"Just time to dress," he sighed. "Will you be here again? We must talk
old times once more."

She smiled and seemed to assent, but her eyes were not on him; she was
still in a revery. He walked softly away. She seemed hardly to notice
him, and his last backward glance found the quiet of the picture
unbroken; again it was a page from the Greenaway book.

He reached the terrace; laughter and applause from the piazza caught his
ear. Fresh from the atmosphere he had left, he stared in amazement at
the scene before him.

Swift figures were scudding from one to another of the four great elms
that marked out a natural rectangle on the smooth side lawn.

"Puss! puss! Here, puss!" a high voice called, and a tall slender girl
in a swish of lace and pink draperies rushed across one side of the
square. A portly trousered figure essayed to gain the tree she had left,
but a romping girl in white caught him easily, while Mrs. Dud, the tail
of her gown thrown over her arm, skimmed triumphantly across to her
partner's tree.

"One more, one more, colonel. You can't give up, now you're caught! One
more before we go in!" called the pink girl.

"Here's Mr. Varian. Come and help us out--the colonel's beaten!" added
Mrs. Dud.

"Here, puss! here, puss!" With excited little shrieks and laughs they
dashed by, the colonel making ineffectual grabs at their elusive skirts.
Varian shook his head good-naturedly.

"Too late, too late!" he called back, and taking pity on the puffing,
purple colonel, he bore him off.

"Thank God! I'm just about winded! I'd have dropped in my tracks,"
complained the rescued man, breathing hard as they rounded the
shrubbery. In the corner two figures, half seen in the dark, leaned
toward each other an imperceptible moment. The colonel laughed
contentedly.

"When I see that sort of thing, I think we've made a mistake--eh,
Varian?" he said, half serious. "It's a poor job, getting old alone.
Live at the club, visit here and there, make yourself agreeable to
get asked again, nobody to care if you're sick, always play the other
fellow's game--little monotonous after a while, eh?"

Varian nodded. "Right enough," he said.

"Different ending to their route!" suggested the colonel, jerking his
elbow back toward the two in the shrubbery.

"That's it!" The answer was laconic, but the pictures that swept through
his brain took on a precision and color that half frightened him.

He had no idea how frequently he dropped in at the little court behind
the hedge after that. Sometimes he sat and mused alone there; more than
once he took a surreptitious afternoon nap. He developed a dormant fancy
for gardening, and walked with his new-old friend contentedly among the
deserted garden paths. He studied her hair especially, wondering why it
was that the little tender flecks of white attracted him so. At dinner
he secretly tried to rouse in himself the same desire to stroke the
gleaming silver fleece, high-dressed, puffed, and ornamented with jet,
of the woman opposite him, whose hair, somewhat prematurely turned
snowy, had won her a great vogue among her friends. But he never
succeeded. She was absolutely too effective. She turned the simplest
gathering to a fancy-dress ball, he decided.

He had supposed that it was the quaint privacy of their acquaintance
that charmed him particularly--the feeling of an almost double
existence; but when Mrs. Dud, who, he afterwards reflected, was of
course omniscient, restrained herself no longer, and thanked him with a
pretty sincerity for his delicate and appreciated courtesy, intimating
charmingly that she realized the personal motive, a veil suddenly
dropped. He gasped, shook himself, colored a little, and met her eye.

"I'm afraid I'm not so kind as you think," he said, a little awkwardly.
"I've been an old fool, I see. Do you think--is that the way _she_ looks
at it?"

"Mary?" said Mrs. Dud, wonderingly. "Yes, I suppose so. Why?"

The naive egotism of the answer only threw a softer light on the picture
that had grown to fill his thoughts. He smiled inscrutably.

"Because in that case it is due to her to undeceive her," he said. "I am
glad I have entertained her. I should like to have the opportunity to do
so indefinitely. Do you think there's a chance for me?"

"What on earth do you mean?" asked his hostess, in unassumed
stupefaction.

"I mean, do you think she would marry me?" Varian brought out plumply.
"Is there--was there ever anybody else?"

For one instant Mrs. Dud lost her poise; in her eyes he almost saw more
than she meant; the sheer, flat blow of it levelled her for a breath to
the plane of other and ordinary women. But even as he thought it, it was
gone. She put out her hand; she smiled; she shook her finger at him.

"I think, my friend, she would be a fool not to marry you," she answered
him, clear-eyed; "and there was never," her tone was too sweet, he
thought, to carry but one meaning--pleasure for him, "there was never
anybody else!"

Varian walked straight to the garden. She was training a fiery wall
of nasturtiums with firm white fingers. It occurred to him that he was
ready to give up the tally-ho, and the Berkshires, and the scramble
of pretty girls for the place beside him, to sit quietly and watch her
among her flowers.

"I'm getting old--old!" he said to himself, but he said it with a smile.

For he knew that no boy's heart ever beat more swiftly, no boy's tongue
ever sought more excitedly to find the right words. But when he faced
her a little doubt chilled him: she was so calm and complete, in
her sunny, busy, balanced life, that he feared to disturb that sweet
placidity. With an undercurrent of fear, a sudden realization that he
had no more the blessed egotism of youth to drive him on, he walked
beside her, outwardly content, at heart a little solitary. At some light
question he turned and faced her.

"You could not have all the greenhouses, but there could be plenty of
flowers," he said pleadingly.

"Flowers? Where?" she asked.

"Wherever we lived," he answered. "And oh, Mary, I think we could be
happy together! Don't say no!" as she shrank a little. "Don't, Mary, for
heaven's sake! I care too much--I care terribly. I am too old a man to
care so much and--lose.... There, there, my dear girl, never mind. I
can bear it, of course. Only I didn't know I'd planned it all out so,
and--But never mind. I was going to have a bay-window full of--"

He turned away from her for a moment. But her hand was on his arm.

"We can plan it out together," she said.

He knew how she would blush; he had even dared to think how directly her
clear gray eyes would meet his--her sky-ness was never hesitation--but
he had not dreamed how soft her hair could be.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Mrs. Dud's Sister, by Josephine Daskam

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MRS. DUD'S SISTER ***

***** This file should be named 23369.txt or 23369.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/6/23369/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
