The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Midnight Fantasy, by Thomas Bailey Aldrich

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Midnight Fantasy

Author: Thomas Bailey Aldrich

Release Date: November 6, 2007 [EBook #23363]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MIDNIGHT FANTASY ***




Produced by David Widger






A MIDNIGHT FANTASY

By Thomas Bailey Aldrich

Boston And New York Houghton Mifflin Company

Copyright, 1873, 1885, and 1901




I.

It was close upon eleven o'clock when I stepped out of the rear
vestibule of the Boston Theatre, and, passing through the narrow court
that leads to West Street, struck across the Common diagonally. Indeed,
as I set foot on the Tremont Street mall, I heard the Old South drowsily
sounding the hour.

It was a tranquil June night, with no moon, but clusters of sensitive
stars that seemed to shiver with cold as the wind swept by them;
for perhaps there was a swift current of air up there in the zenith.
However, not a leaf stirred on the Common; the foliage hung black and
massive, as if cut in bronze; even the gaslights appeared to be infected
by the prevailing calm, burning steadily behind their glass screens
and turning the neighboring leaves into the tenderest emerald. Here and
there, in the sombre row of houses stretching along Beacon Street, an
illuminated window gilded a few square feet of darkness; and now and
then a footfall sounded on a distant pavement. The pulse of the city
throbbed languidly.

The lights far and near, the fantastic shadows of the elms and maples,
the gathering dew, the elusive odor of new grass, and that peculiar hush
which belongs only to midnight--as if Time had paused in his flight and
were holding his breath--gave to the place, so familiar to me by day, an
air of indescribable strangeness and remoteness. The vast, deserted park
had lost all its wonted outlines; I walked doubtfully on the flagstones
which I had many a time helped to wear smooth; I seemed to be wandering
in some lonely unknown garden across the seas--in that old garden in
Verona where Shakespeare's ill-starred lovers met and parted. The white
granite facade over yonder--the Somerset Club--might well have been
the house of Capulet: there was the clambering vine reaching up like a
pliant silken ladder; there, near by, was the low-hung balcony, wanting
only the slight girlish figure--immortal shape of fire and dew!--to make
the illusion perfect.

I do not know what suggested it; perhaps it was something in the play
I had just witnessed--it is not always easy to put one's finger on the
invisible electric thread that runs from thought to thought--but as
I sauntered on I fell to thinking of the ill-assorted marriages I had
known. Suddenly there hurried along the gravelled path which crossed
mine obliquely a half-indistinguishable throng of pathetic men and
women: two by two they filed before me, each becoming startlingly
distinct for an instant as they passed--some with tears, some with
hollow smiles, and some with firm-set lips, bearing their fetters with
them. There was little Alice chained to old Bowlsby; there was Lucille,
"a daughter of the gods, divinely tall," linked forever to the dwarf
Perrywinkle; there was my friend Porphyro, the poet, with his delicate
genius shrivelled in the glare of the youngest Miss Lucifer's eyes;
there they were, Beauty and the Beast, Pride and Humility, Bluebeard and
Fatima, Prose and Poetry, Riches and Poverty, Youth and Crabbed Age--
Oh, sorrowful procession! All so wretched, when perhaps all might have
been so happy if they had only paired differently! I halted a moment to
let the weird shapes drift by. As the last of the train melted into the
darkness, my vagabond fancy went wandering back to the theatre and the
play I had seen--Romeo and Juliet. Taking a lighter tint, but still of
the same sober color, my reflections continued.

What a different kind of woman Juliet would have been if she had not
fallen in love with Romeo, but had bestowed her affection on some
thoughtful and stately signior--on one of the Delia Scalas, for example!
What Juliet needed was a firm and gentle hand to tame her high spirit
without breaking a pinion. She was a little too--vivacious, you might
say--"gushing" would perhaps be the word if you were speaking of a
modern maiden with so exuberant a disposition as Juliet's. She was
too romantic, too blossomy, too impetuous, too wilful; old Capulet had
brought her up injudiciously, and Lady Capulet was a nonentity. Yet in
spite of faults of training and some slight inherent flaws of character,
Juliet was a superb creature; there was a fascinating dash in her
frankness; her modesty and daring were as happy rhymes as ever touched
lips in a love-poem. But her impulses required curbing; her heart made
too many beats to the minute. It was an evil destiny that flung in the
path of so rich and passionate a nature a fire-brand like Romeo. Even if
no family feud had existed, the match would not have been a wise one. As
it was, the well-known result was inevitable. What could come of it but
clandestine meetings, secret marriage, flight, despair, poison, and
the Tomb of the Capulets? I had left the park behind, by this, and had
entered a thoroughfare where the street-lamps were closer together; but
the gloom of the trees seemed still to be overhanging me. The fact is,
the tragedy had laid a black finger on my imagination. I wished that the
play had ended a trifle more cheerfully. I wished--possibly because I
see enough tragedy all around me without going to the theatre for it,
or possibly it was because the lady who enacted the leading part was a
remarkably clean-cut little person, with a golden sweep of eyelashes--I
wished that Juliet could have had a more comfortable time of it. Instead
of a yawning sepulchre, with Romeo and Juliet dying in the middle
foreground, and that luckless young Paris stretched out on the left,
spitted like a spring-chicken with Montague's rapier, and Friar
Laurence, with a dark lantern, groping about under the melancholy
yews--in place of all this costly piled-up woe, I would have liked a
pretty, mediaeval chapel scene, with illuminated stained-glass windows,
and trim acolytes holding lighted candles, and the great green curtain
slowly descending to the first few bars of the Wedding March of
Mendelssohn.

Of course Shakespeare was true to the life in making them all die
miserably. Besides, it was so they died in the novel of Matteo Bandello,
from which the poet indirectly took his plot. Under the circumstances
no other climax was practicable; and yet it was sad business. There were
Mercutio, and Tybalt, and Paris, and Juliet, and Romeo, come to a bloody
end in the bloom of their youth and strength and beauty.

The ghosts of these five murdered persons seemed to be on my track as I
hurried down Revere Street to West Cedar. I fancied them hovering around
the corner opposite the small drug-store, where a meagre apothecary was
in the act of shutting up the fan-like jets of gas in his shop-window.

"No, Master Booth," I muttered in the imagined teeth of the tragedian,
throwing an involuntary glance over my shoulder, "you 'll not catch me
assisting at any more of your Shakespearean revivals. I would rather eat
a pair of Welsh rarebits or a segment of mince-pie at midnight than sit
through the finest tragedy that was ever writ."

As I said this I halted at the door of a house in Charles Place, and was
fumbling for my latch-key, when a most absurd idea came into my head. I
let the key slip back into my pocket, and strode down Charles Place into
Cambridge Street, and across the long bridge, and then swiftly forward.

I remember, vaguely, that I paused for a moment on the draw of the
bridge, to look at the semi-circular fringe of lights duplicating itself
in the smooth Charles in the rear of Beacon Street--as lovely a bit of
Venetian effect as you will get outside of Venice; I remember meeting,
farther on, near a stiff wooden church in Cambridgeport, a lumbering
covered wagon, evidently from Brighton and bound for Quincy Market; and
still farther on, somewhere in the vicinity of Harvard Square and the
college buildings, I recollect catching a glimpse of a policeman, who,
probably observing something suspicious in my demeanor, discreetly
walked off in an opposite direction. I recall these trifles
indistinctly, for during this preposterous excursion I was at no time
sharply conscious of my surroundings; the material world presented
itself to me as if through a piece of stained glass. It was only when
I had reached a neighborhood where the houses were few and the gardens
many, a neighborhood where the closely-knitted town began to fringe
out into country, that I came to the end of my dream. And what was the
dream? The slightest of tissues, madam; a gossamer, a web of shadows,
a thing woven out of starlight. Looking at it by day, I find that its
colors are pallid, and its threaded diamonds--they were merely the
perishable dews of that June night--have evaporated in the sunshine; but
such as it is you shall have it.




II.

The young prince Hamlet was not happy at Elsinore. It was not because
he missed the gay student-life of Wittenberg, and that the little
Danish court was intolerably dull. It was not because the didactic lord
chamberlain bored him with long speeches, or that the lord chamberlain's
daughter was become a shade wearisome. Hamlet had more serious cues for
unhappiness. He had been summoned suddenly from Wittenberg to attend his
father's funeral; close upon this, and while his grief was green, his
mother had married with his uncle Claudius, whom Hamlet had never liked.

The indecorous haste of these nuptials--they took place within two
months after the king's death, the funeral-baked meats, as Hamlet
cursorily remarked, furnishing forth the marriage-tables--struck the
young prince aghast. He had loved the queen his mother, and had nearly
idolized the late king; but now he forgot to lament the death of the one
in contemplating the life of the other. The billing and cooing of the
newly-married couple filled him with horror. Anger, shame, pity, and
despair seized upon him by turns. He fell into a forlorn condition,
forsaking his books, eating little save of the chameleon's dish, the
air, drinking deep of Rhenish, letting his long, black locks go unkempt,
and neglecting his dress--he who had hitherto been "the glass of fashion
and the mould of form," as Ophelia had prettily said of him.

Often for half the night he would wander along the ramparts of the
castle, at the imminent risk of tumbling off, gazing seaward and
muttering strangely to himself, and evolving frightful spectres out
of the shadows cast by the turrets. Sometimes he lapsed into a gentle
melancholy; but not seldom his mood was ferocious, and at such times the
conversational Polonius, with a discretion that did him credit, steered
clear of my lord Hamlet.

He turned no more graceful compliments for Ophelia. The thought of
marrying her, if he had ever seriously thought of it, was gone now.
He rather ruthlessly advised her to go into a nunnery. His mother
had sickened him of women. It was of her he spoke the notable words,
"Frailty, thy name is woman!" which, some time afterwards, an amiable
French gentleman had neatly engraved on the head-stone of his wife, who
had long been an invalid. Even the king and queen did not escape Hamlet
in his distempered moments. Passing his mother in a corridor or on a
staircase of the palace, he would suddenly plant a verbal dagger in
her heart; and frequently, in full court, he would deal the king such
a cutting reply as caused him to blanch, and gnaw his lip. If the
spectacle of Gertrude and Claudius was hateful to Hamlet, the presence
of

Hamlet, on the other hand, was scarcely a comfort to the royal lovers.
At first his uncle had called him "our chiefest courtier, cousin, and
our son," trying to smooth over matters; but Hamlet would have none of
it. Therefore, one day, when the young prince abruptly announced
his intention to go abroad, neither the king nor the queen placed
impediments in his way, though, some months previously, they had both
protested strongly against his returning to Wittenberg.

The small-fry of the court knew nothing of Prince Hamlet's determination
until he had sailed from Elsinore; their knowledge then was confined to
the fact of his departure. It was only to Horatio, his fellow-student
and friend, that Hamlet confided the real cause of his self-imposed
exile, though perhaps Ophelia half suspected it.

Polonius had dropped an early hint to his daughter concerning Hamlet's
intent. She knew that everything was over between them, and the night
before he embarked Ophelia placed in the prince's hand the few letters
and trinkets he had given her, repeating, as she did so, a certain
distich which somehow haunted Hamlet's memory for several days after he
was on shipboard:

     "Take these again; for to the noble mind
     Rich gifts wax poor when givers prove unkind."

"These could never have waxed poor," said Hamlet softly to himself, as
he leaned over the taffrail, the third day out, spreading the trinkets
in his palm, "being originally of but little worth. I fancy that that
allusion to 'rich gifts' was a trifle malicious on the part of the fair
Ophelia;" and he quietly dropped them into the sea.

It was as a Danish gentleman voyaging for pleasure, and for mental
profit also, if that should happen, that Hamlet set forth on his
travels. Settled destination he had none, his sole plan being to get
clear of Denmark as speedily as possible, and then to drift whither his
fancy took him. His fancy naturally took him southward, as it would
have taken him northward if he had been a Southron. Many a time while
climbing the bleak crags around Elsinore he had thought of the land of
the citron and the palm; lying on his couch at night, and listening to
the wind as it howled along the machicolated battlements of the castle,
his dreams had turned from the cold, blonde ladies of his father's court
to the warmer beauties that ripen under sunny skies. He was free now to
test the visions of his boyhood.

So it chanced, after various wanderings, all tending imperceptibly in
one direction, that Hamlet bent his steps towards Italy.

In those rude days one did not accomplish a long journey without having
wonderful adventures befall, or encountering divers perils by the way.
It was a period when a stout blade on the thigh was a most excellent
travelling companion. Hamlet, though of a philosophical complexion, was
not slower than another man to scent an affront; he excelled at feats
of arms, and no doubt his skill, caught of the old fencing-master at
Elsinore, stood him in good stead more than once when his wit would not
have saved him. Certainly, he had hair-breadth escapes while toiling
through the wilds of Prussia and Bavaria and Switzerland. At all events,
he counted himself fortunate the night he arrived at Verona with nothing
more serious than a two-inch scratch on his sword arm.

There he lodged himself, as became a gentleman of fortune, in a suite of
chambers in a comfortable palace overlooking the swift-flowing Adige--a
riotous yellow stream that cut the town into two parts, and was
spanned here and there by rough-hewn stone bridges, which it sometimes
sportively washed away. It was a brave old town that had stood sieges
and plagues, and was full of mouldy, picturesque buildings and a gayety
that has since grown somewhat mouldy. A goodly place to rest in for the
wayworn pilgrim! He dimly recollected that he had letters to one or two
illustrious families; but he cared not to deliver them at once. It was
pleasant to stroll about the city, unknown. There were sights to
see: the Roman amphitheatre, and the churches with their sculptured
sarcophagi and saintly relics--interesting joints and saddles of
martyrs, and enough fragments of the true cross to build a ship. The
life in the _piazze_ and on the streets, the crowds in the shops, the
pageants, the lights, the stir, the color, all mightily took the eye
of the young Dane. He was in a mood to be amused. Everything diverted
him--the faint pulsing of a guitar-string in an adjacent garden at
midnight, or the sharp clash of gleaming sword blades under his window,
when the Montecchi and the Cappelletti chanced to encounter each other
in the narrow footway.

Meanwhile, Hamlet brushed up his Italian. He was well versed in the
literature of the language, particularly in its dramatic literature, and
had long meditated penning a gloss to "The Murther of Gonzago," a play
which Hamlet held in deservedly high estimation.

He made acquaintances, too. In the same palace where he sojourned
lived a very valiant soldier and wit, a kinsman to Prince Escalus, one
Mercutio by name, with whom Hamlet exchanged civilities on the staircase
at first, and then fell into companionship.

A number of Verona's noble youths, poets and light-hearted
men-about-town, frequented Mercutio's chambers, and with these Hamlet
soon became on terms.

Among the rest were an agreeable gentleman, with hazel eyes, named
Benvolio, and a gallant young fellow called Romeo, whom Mercutio
bantered pitilessly and loved heartily. This Romeo, who belonged to one
of the first families, was a very susceptible spark, which the slightest
breath of a pretty woman was sufficient to blow into flame. To change
the metaphor, he fell from one love affair into another as easily and
logically as a ripe pomegranate drops from a bough. He was generally
unlucky in these matters, curiously enough, for he was a handsome youth
in his saffron satin doublet slashed with black, and his jaunty velvet
bonnet with its trailing plume of ostrich feather.

At the time of Hamlet's coming to Verona, Romeo was in a great despair
of love in consequence of an unrequited passion for a certain lady of
the city, between whose family and his own a deadly feud had existed for
centuries. Somebody had stepped on somebody else's lap-dog in the far
ages, and the two families had been slashing and hacking at each other
ever since. It appeared that Romeo had scaled a garden wall, one night,
and broken upon the meditations of his inamorata, who, as chance would
have it, was sitting on her balcony enjoying the moonrise. No lady could
be insensible to such devotion, for it would have been death to Romeo
if any of her kinsmen had found him in that particular locality. Some
tender phrases passed between them, perhaps; but the lady was flurried,
taken unawares, and afterwards, it seemed, altered her mind, and would
have no further commerce with the Montague. This business furnished
Mercutio's quiver with innumerable sly shafts, which Romeo received for
the most part in good humor.

With these three gentlemen--Mercutio, Benvolio, and Romeo--Hamlet saw
life in Verona, as young men will see life wherever they happen to be.
Many a time the nightingale ceased singing and the lark began before
they were abed; but perhaps it is not wise to inquire too closely into
this. A month had slipped away since Hamlet's arrival; the hyacinths
were opening in the gardens, and it was spring.

One morning, as he and Mercutio were lounging arm in arm on a bridge
near their lodgings, they met a knave in livery puzzling over a
parchment which he was plainly unable to decipher.

"Read it aloud, friend!" cried Mercutio, who always had a word to throw
away.

"I would I could read it at all. I pray, sir, can you read?"

"With ease--if it is not my tailor's score;" and Mercutio took the
parchment, which ran as follows:--

"_Signior Martino, and his wife and daughters; County Ansdmo, and his
beauteous sisters; the lady widow Vitrumo; Signior Placentio, and his
lovely nieces; Mercutio, and his brother Valentine; mine uncle Capulet,
his wife and daughters; my fair niece Rosaline; Livia; Signior Valentio,
and his cousin Tybalt; Lucio, and the lively Helena_."

"A very select company, with the exception of that rogue Mercutio," said
the soldier, laughing. "What does it mean?"

"My master, the Signior Capulet, gives a ball and supper to-night; these
the guests; I am his man Peter, and if you be not one of the house of
Montague, I pray come and crush a cup of wine with us. Rest you merry;"
and the knave, having got his billet deciphered for him, made off.

"One must needs go, being asked by both man and master; but since I am
asked doubly, I 'll not go singly; I 'll bring you with me, Hamlet. It
is a masquerade; I have had wind of it. The flower of the city will be
there--all the high-bosomed roses and low-necked lilies."

Hamlet had seen nothing of society in Verona, properly speaking, and
did not require much urging to assent to Mercutio's proposal, far from
foreseeing that so slight a freak would have a fateful sequence.

It was late in the night when they presented themselves, in mask and
domino, at the Capulet mansion. The music was at its sweetest and the
torches were at their brightest, as the pair entered the dancing-hall.
They had scarcely crossed the threshold when Hamlet's eyes rested upon
a lady clad in a white silk robe, who held to her features, as she moved
through the figure of the dance, a white satin mask, on each side of
which was disclosed so much of the rosy oval of her face as made one
long to look upon the rest. The ornaments this lady wore were pearls;
her fan and slippers, like the robe and mask, were white--nothing but
white. Her eyes shone almost black contrasted with the braids of warm
gold hair that glistened through a misty veil of Venetian stuff, which
floated about her from time to time and enveloped her, as the blossoms
do a tree. Hamlet could think of nothing but the almond-tree that stood
in full bloom in the little _cortile_ near his lodging. She seemed to
him the incarnation of that exquisite spring-time which had touched
and awakened all the leaves and buds in the sleepy old gardens around
Verona.

"Mercutio! who is that lady?"

"The daughter of old Capulet, by her stature."

"And he that dances with her?"

"Paris, a kinsman to Can Grande della Scala."

"Her lover?"

"One of them."

"She has others?"

"Enough to make a squadron; only the blind and aged are exempt."

Here the music ceased and the dancers dispersed. Hamlet followed the
lady with his eyes, and, seeing her left alone a moment, approached her.
She received him graciously, as a mask receives a mask, and the two
fell to talking, as people do who--have nothing to say to each other and
possess the art of saying it. Presently something in his voice struck
on her ear, a new note, an intonation sweet and strange, that made her
curious. Who was it? It could not be Valentine, nor Anselmo; he was too
tall for Signior Placentio, not stout enough for Lucio; it was not her
cousin Tybalt. Could it be that rash Montague who--Would he dare? Here,
on the very points of their swords? The stream of maskers ebbed and
flowed and surged around them, and the music began again, and Juliet
listened and listened.

"Who are you, sir," she cried, at last, "that speak our tongue with
feigned accent?"

"A stranger; an idler in Verona, though not a gay one--a black
butterfly."

"Our Italian sun will gild your wings for you. Black edged with gilt
goes gay."

"I am already not so sad-colored as I was."

"I would fain see your face, sir; if it match your voice, it needs must
be a kindly one."

"I would we could change faces."

"So we shall at supper!"

"And hearts, too?"

"Nay, I would not give a merry heart for a sorrowful one; but I will
quit my mask, and you yours; yet," and she spoke under her breath, "if
you are, as I think, a gentleman of Verona--a Montague--do not unmask."

"I am not of Verona, lady; no one knows me here;" and Hamlet threw back
the hood of his domino. Juliet held her mask aside for a moment, and the
two stood looking into each other's eyes.

"Lady, we have in faith changed faces, at least as I shall carry yours
forever in my memory."

"And I yours, sir," said Juliet, softly, "wishing it looked not so pale
and melancholy."

"Hamlet," whispered Mercutio, plucking at his friend's skirt, "the
fellow there, talking with old Capulet--his wife's nephew, Tybalt,
a quarrelsome dog--suspects we are Montagues. Let us get out of this
peaceably, like soldiers who are too much gentlemen to cause a brawl
under a host's roof."

With this Mercutio pushed Hamlet to the door, where they were joined by
Benvolio.

Juliet, with her eyes fixed upon the retreating maskers, stretched out
her hand and grasped the arm of an ancient serving-woman who happened to
be passing.

"Quick, good Nurse! go ask his name of yonder gentleman. Nay, not the
one in green, dear! but he that hath the black domino and purple mask.
What, did I touch your poor rheumatic arm? Ah, go now, sweet Nurse!"

As the Nurse hobbled off querulously on her errand, Juliet murmured to
herself an old rhyme she knew:--

               "If he be married,
     My grave is like to be my wedding bed!"

When Hamlet got back to his own chambers he sat on the edge of his couch
in a brown study. The silvery moonlight, struggling through the swaying
branches of a tree outside the window, drifted doubtfully into the room,
and made a parody of that fleecy veil which erewhile had floated about
the lissome form of the lovely Capulet. That he loved her, and must
tell her that he loved her, was a foregone conclusion; but how should
he contrive to see Juliet again? No one knew him in Verona; he had
carefully preserved his incognito; even Mercutio regarded him as simply
a young gentleman from Denmark, taking his ease in a foreign city.
Presented, by Mercutio, as a rich Danish tourist, the Capulets would
receive him courteously, of course; as a visitor, but not as a suitor.
It was in another character that he must be presented--his own.

He was pondering what steps he could take to establish his identity,
when he remembered the two or three letters which he had stuffed
into his wallet on quitting Elsi-nore. He lighted a taper, and began
examining the papers. Among them were the half dozen billet-doux which
Ophelia had returned to him the night before his departure. They were,
neatly tied together by a length of black ribbon, to which was attached
a sprig of rosemary.

"That was just like Ophelia!" muttered the young man, tossing the
package into the wallet again; "she was always having cheerful ideas
like that."

How long ago seemed the night she had handed him these love-letters, in
her demure little way! How misty and remote seemed everything connected
with the old life at Elsinore! His father's death, his mother's
marriage, his anguish and isolation--they were like things that had
befallen somebody else. There was something incredible, too, in his
present situation. Was he dreaming? Was he really in Italy, and in love?

He hastily bent forward and picked up a square folded paper lying half
concealed under the others.

"How could I have forgotten it!" he exclaimed.

It was a missive addressed, in Horatio's angular hand, to the Signior
Capulet of Verona, containing a few lines of introduction from Horatio,
whose father had dealings with some of the rich Lombardy merchants and
knew many of the leading families in the city. With this and several
epistles, preserved by chance, written to him by Queen Gertrude while
he was at the university, Hamlet saw that he would have no difficulty in
proving to the Capulets that he was the Prince of Denmark.

At an unseemly hour the next morning Mercutio was roused from his
slumbers by Hamlet, who counted every minute a hundred years until he
saw Juliet. Mercutio did not take this interruption too patiently, for
the honest humorist was very serious as a sleeper; but his equilibrium
was quickly restored by Hamlet's revelation.

The friends were long closeted together, and at the proper, ceremonious
hour for visitors they repaired to the house of Capulet, who did not
hide his sense of the honor done him by the prince. With scarcely any
prelude Hamlet unfolded the motive of his visit, and was listened to
with rapt attention by old Capulet, who inwardly blessed his stars that
he had not given his daughter's hand to the County Paris, as he was on
the point of doing. The ladies were not visible on this occasion; the
fatigues of the ball overnight, etc.; but that same evening Hamlet
was accorded an interview with Juliet and Lady Capulet, and a few days
subsequently all Verona was talking of nothing but the new engagement.

The destructive Tybalt scowled at first, and twirled his fierce
mustache, and young Paris took to writing dejected poetry; but they both
soon recovered their serenity, seeing that nobody minded them, and went
together arm in arm to pay their respects to Hamlet.

A new life began now for Hamlet---he shed his inky cloak, and came out
in a doublet of insolent splendor, looking like a dagger-handle newly
gilt. With his funereal gear he appeared to have thrown off something
of his sepulchral gloom. It was impossible to be gloomy with Juliet,
in whom each day developed some sunny charm un-guessed before. Her
freshness and coquettish candor were constant surprises. She had had
many lovers, and she confessed them to Hamlet in the prettiest way.
"Perhaps, my dear," she said to him one evening, with an ineffable
smile, "I might have liked young Romeo very well, but the family were so
opposed to it from the very first. And then he was so--so demonstrative,
don't you know?"

Hamlet had known of Romeo's futile passion, but he had not been aware
until then that his betrothed was the heroine of the balcony adventure.
On leaving Juliet he-went to look up the Montague; not for the purpose
of crossing rapiers with him, as another man might have done, but to
compliment him on his unexceptionable taste in admiring so rare a lady.

But Romeo had disappeared in a most unaccountable manner, and his family
were in great tribulation concerning him. It was thought that perhaps
the unrelenting Rosaline (who had been Juliet's frigid predecessor) had
relented, and Montague's man Abram was dispatched to seek Romeo at her
residence; but the Lady Rosaline, who was embroidering on her piazza,
placidly denied all knowledge of him. It was then feared that he had
fallen in one of the customary encounters; but there had been no fight,
and nobody had been killed on either side for nearly twelve hours.
Nevertheless, his exit had the appearance of being final. When Hamlet
questioned Mercutio, the honest soldier laughed and stroked his blonde
mustache.

"The boy has gone off in a heat, I don't know where--to the icy ends of
the earth, I believe, to cool himself."

Hamlet regretted that Romeo should have had any feeling in the matter;
but regret was a bitter weed that did not thrive well in the atmosphere
in which the fortunate lover was moving. He saw Juliet every day, and
there was not a fleck upon his happiness, unless it was the garrulous
Nurse, against whom Hamlet had taken a singular prejudice. He considered
her a tiresome old person, not too decent in her discourse at times, and
advised Juliet to get rid of her; but the ancient serving-woman had been
in the family for years, and it was not quite expedient to discharge her
at that late day.

With the subtile penetration of old age the Nurse instantly detected
Hamlet's dislike, and returned it heartily.

"Ah, ladybird," she cried one night, "ah, well-a-day! you know not how
to choose a man. An I could choose for you, Jule! By God's lady, there's
Signior Mercutio, a brave gentleman, a merry gentleman, and a virtuous,
I warrant ye, whose little finger-joint is worth all the body of this
blackbird prince, dropping down from Lord knows where to fly off with
the sweetest bit of flesh in Verona. Marry, come up!"

But this was only a ripple on the stream that flowed so smoothly. Now
and then, indeed, Hamlet felt called upon playfully to chide Juliet for
her extravagance of language, as when, for instance, she prayed that
when he died he might be cut out in little stars to deck the face of
night. Hamlet objected, under any circumstances, to being cut out
in little stars for any illuminating purposes whatsoever. Once she
suggested to her lover that he should come to the garden after the
family retired, and she would speak with him a moment from the balcony.
Now, as there was no obstacle to their seeing each other whenever they
pleased, and as Hamlet was of a nice sense of honor, and since his
engagement a most exquisite practicer of propriety, he did not encourage
Juliet in her thoughtlessness.

"What!" he cried, lifting his finger at her reprovingly, "romantic
again!"

This was their nearest approach to a lovers' quarrel. The next day
Hamlet brought her, as peace-offering, a slender gold flask curiously
wrought in niello, which he had had filled with a costly odor at an
apothecary's as he came along.

"I never saw so lean a thing as that same culler of simples," said
Hamlet, laughing; "a matter of ribs and shanks, a mere skeleton painted
black. It is a rare essence, though. He told me its barbaric botanical
name, but it escapes me."

"That which we call a rose," said Juliet, holding the perfumery to her
nostrils and inclining herself prettily towards him, "would smell as
sweet by any other name."

O Youth and Love! O fortunate Time!

There was a banquet almost every night at the Capulets', and the
Montagues, up the street, kept their blinds drawn down, and Lady
Montague, who had four marriageable, tawny daughters on her hands, was
livid with envy at her neighbor's success. She would rather have had two
or three Montagues prodded through the body than that the prince should
have gone to the rival house.

Happy Prince!

If Rosencrantz and Guildenstern and Laertes, and the rest of the dismal
people at Elsinore, could have seen him now, they would not have known
him. Where were his wan looks and biting speeches? His eyes were no
longer filled with mournful speculation. He went in glad apparel, and
took the sunshine as his natural inheritance. If he ever fell into
moodiness--it was partly constitutional with him--the shadow fled away
at the first approach of that "loveliest weight on lightest foot." The
sweet Veronese had nestled in his empty heart, and filled it with music.
The ghosts and visions that used to haunt him were laid forever by
Juliet's magic.

Happy Juliet!

Her beauty had taken a new gloss. The bud bad grown into a flower,
redeeming the promises of the bud. If her heart beat less wildly, it
throbbed more strongly. If she had given Hamlet of her superabundance of
spirits, he had given her of his wisdom and discretion. She had always
been a great favorite in society; but Verona thought her ravishing now.
The mantua-makers cut their dresses by her patterns, and when she wore
turquoise, garnets went ont of style. Instead of the groans and tears,
and all those distressing events which might possibly have happened if
Juliet had persisted in loving Romeo--listen to her laugh and behold her
merry eyes!

Every morning either Peter or Gregory might have been seen going up
Hamlet's staircase with a note from Juliet--she had ceased to send the
Nurse on discovering her lover's antipathy to that person--and some
minutes later either Gregory or Peter might have been observed coming
down the staircase with a missive from Hamlet. Juliet had detected his
gift for verse, and insisted, rather capriciously, on having all his
replies in that shape. Hamlet humored her, though he was often hard put
to it; for the Muse is a coy immortal, and will not always come when she
is wanted. Sometimes he was forced to fall back upon previous efforts,
as when he translated these lines into very choice Italian:--

     "Doubt thou the stars are fire,
          Doubt that the sun doth move;
     Doubt Truth to be a liar,
          But never doubt I love."

To be sure, he had originally composed this quatrain for Ophelia; but
what would you have? He had scarcely meant it then; he meant it now;
besides, a felicitous rhyme never goes out of fashion. It always fits.

While transcribing the verse his thoughts naturally reverted to Ophelia,
for the little poesy was full of a faint scent of the past, like a
pressed flower. His conscience did not prick him at all. How fortunate
for him and for her that matters had gone no further between them?
Predisposed to melancholy, and inheriting a not very strong mind from
her father, Ophelia was a lady who needed cheering up, if ever poor lady
did. He, Hamlet, was the last man on the globe with whom she should have
had any tender affiliation. If they had wed, they would have caught
each other's despondency, and died, like a pair of sick ravens, within a
fortnight. What had become of her? Had she gone into a nunnery? He would
make her abbess, if he ever returned to Elsinore.

After a month or two of courtship, there being no earthly reason to
prolong it, Hamlet and Juliet were privately married in the Franciscan
Chapel, Friar Laurence officiating; but there was a grand banquet
that night at the Capulets', to which all Verona went. At Hamlet's
intercession, the Montagues were courteously asked to this festival.
To the amazement of every one the Montagues accepted the invitation and
came, and were treated royally, and the long, lamentable feud--it would
have sorely puzzled either house to explain what it was all about--was
at an end. The adherents of the Capulets and the Montagues were
forbidden on the spot to bite any more thumbs at each other.

"It will detract from the general gayety of the town," Mercutio
remarked. "Signior Tybalt, my friend, I shall never have the pleasure of
running you through the diaphragm; a cup of wine with you!"

The guests were still at supper in the great pavilion erected in
the garden, which was as light as day with the glare of innumerable
flambeaux set among the shrubbery. Hamlet and Juliet, with several
others, had withdrawn from the tables, and were standing in the doorway
of the pavilion, when Hamlet's glance fell upon the familiar form of a
young man who stood with one foot on the lower step, holding his plumed
bonnet in his hand. His hose and doublet were travel-worn, but his
honest face was as fresh as daybreak.

"What! Horatio?"

"The same, my lord, and your poor servant ever."

"Sir, my good friend: I 'll change that name with you. What brings you
to Verona?"

"I fetch you news, my lord."

"Good news? Then the king is dead."

"The king lives, but Ophelia is no more."

"Ophelia dead!"

"Not so, my lord; she 's married."

"I pray thee, do not mock me, fellow-student."

"As I do live, my honored lord, 't is true."

"Married, say you?"

"Married to him that sent me hither--a gentleman of winning ways and
a most choice conceit, the scion of a noble house here in Verona--one
Romeo."

The oddest little expression flitted over Juliet's face. There was
never woman yet, even on her bridal day, could forgive a jilted lover
marrying.

"Ophelia wed!" murmured the bridegroom.

"Do you know the lady, dear?"

"Excellent well," replied Hamlet, turning to Juliet; "a most estimable
young person, the daughter of my father's chamberlain. She is rather
given to singing ballads of an elegiac nature," added the prince,
reflectingly, "but our madcap Romeo will cure her of that. Methinks I
see them now"--

"Oh, where, my lord?"

"In my mind's eye, Horatio, surrounded by their little ones--noble
youths and graceful maidens, in whom the impetuosity of the fiery Romeo
is tempered by the pensiveness of the fair Ophelia. I shall take it most
unkindly of them, love," toying with Juliet's fingers, "if they do not
name their first boy Hamlet."

It was just as my lord Hamlet finished speaking that the last horse-car
for Boston--providentially belated between Water-town and Mount
Auburn--swept round the curve of the track on which I was walking. The
amber glow of the car-lantern lighted up my figure in the gloom, the
driver gave a quick turn on the brake, and the conductor, making
a sudden dexterous clutch at the strap over his head, sounded the
death-knell of my fantasy as I stepped upon the rear platform.






End of Project Gutenberg's A Midnight Fantasy, by Thomas Bailey Aldrich

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MIDNIGHT FANTASY ***

***** This file should be named 23363.txt or 23363.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/3/6/23363/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
