The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Return Of The Soul, by Robert S. Hichens

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Return Of The Soul
       1896

Author: Robert S. Hichens

Release Date: November 8, 2007 [EBook #23419]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RETURN OF THE SOUL ***




Produced by David Widger






THE RETURN OF THE SOUL

By Robert S. Hichens

1896

    "I have been here before, But when, or how, I cannot tell!"

    Rossetti.




I.

_Tuesday Night, November 3rd_.

Theories! What is the good of theories? They are the scourges that lash
our minds in modern days, lash them into confusion, perplexity, despair.
I have never been troubled by them before. Why should I be troubled by
them now? And the absurdity of Professor Black's is surely obvious. A
child would laugh at it. Yes, a child! I have never been a diary writer.
I have never been able to understand the amusement of sitting down
late at night and scrawling minutely in some hidden book every paltry
incident of one's paltry days. People say it is so interesting to read
the entries years afterwards. To read, as a man, the _menu_ that I ate
through as a boy, the love-story that I was actor in, the tragedy that I
brought about, the debt that I have never paid--how could it profit me?
To keep a diary has always seemed to me merely an addition to the ills
of life. Yet now I have a hidden book, like the rest of the world, and I
am scrawling in it to-day. Yes, but for a reason.

I want to make things clear to myself, and I find, as others, that
my mind works more easily with the assistance of the pen. The actual
tracing of words on paper dispels the clouds that cluster round my
thoughts. I shall recall events to set my mind at ease, to prove to
myself how absurd a man who could believe in Professor Black would
be. "Little Dry-as-dust" I used to call him 'Dry'? He is full of wild
romance, rubbish that a school-girl would be ashamed to believe in. Yet
he is abnormally clever; his record proves that. Still, clever men are
the first to be led astray, they say. It is the searcher who follows the
wandering light. What he says can't be true. When I have filled these
pages, and read what I have written dispassionately, as one of the
outside public might read, I shall have done, once for all, with the
ridiculous fancies that are beginning to make my life a burden. To put
my thoughts in order will make a music. The evil spirit within me will
sleep, will die. I shall be cured. It must be so--it shall be so.

To go back to the beginning. Ah! what a long time ago that seems! As a
child I was cruel. Most boys are cruel, I think. My school companions
were a merciless set--merciless to one another, to their masters when
they had a chance, to animals, to birds. The desire to torture was
in nearly all of them. They loved to bully, and if they bullied only
mildly, it was from fear, not from love. They did not wish their
boomerang to return and slay them. If a boy were deformed, they twitted
him. If a master were kind, or gentle, or shy, they made his life as
intolerable as they could. If an animal or a bird came into their power,
they had no pity. I was like the rest; indeed, I think that I was worse.
Cruelty is horrible. I have enough imagination to do more than know
that--to feel it.

Some say that it is lack of imagination which makes men and women
brutes. May it not be power of imagination? The interest of torturing is
lessened, is almost lost, if we can not be the tortured as well as the
torturer.

As a child I was cruel by nature, by instinct. I was a handsome,
well-bred, gentlemanlike, gentle-looking little brute. My parents adored
me, and I was good to them. They were so kind to me that I was almost
fond of them. Why not? It seemed to me as politic to be fond of them as
of anyone else. I did what I pleased, but I did not always let them
know it; so I pleased them. The wise child will take care to foster
the ignorance of its parents. My people were pretty well off, and I was
their only child; but my chief chances of future pleasure in life were
centred in my grandmother, my mother's mother. She was immensely
rich, and she lived here. This room in which I am writing now was her
favourite sitting-room. On that hearth, before a log fire, such as is
burning at this moment, used to sit that wonderful cat of hers--that
horrible cat! Why did I ever play my childish cards to win this house,
this place? Sometimes, lately--very lately only--I have wondered, like a
fool perhaps. Yet would Professor Black say so? I remember, as a boy of
sixteen, paying my last visit here to my grandmother. It bored me very
much to come. But she was said to be near death, and death leaves great
houses vacant for others to fill. So when my mother said that I had
better come, and my father added that he thought my grandmother was
fonder of me than of my other relations, I gave up all my boyish plans
for the holidays with apparent willingness. Though almost a child, I was
not short-sighted. I knew every boy had a future as well as a present. I
gave up my plans, and came here with a smile; but in my heart I hated my
grandmother for having power, and so bending me to relinquish pleasure
for boredom. I hated her, and I came to her and kissed her, and saw her
beautiful white Persian cat sitting before the fire in this room, and
thought of the fellow who was my bosom friend, and with whom I longed
to be, shooting, or fishing, or riding. And I looked at the cat again.
I remember it began to purr when I went near to it. It sat quite still,
with its blue eyes fixed upon the fire, but when I approached it I
heard it purr complacently. I longed to kick it. The limitations of its
ridiculous life satisfied it completely. It seemed to reproduce in an
absurd, diminished way my grandmother in her white lace cap, with her
white face and hands. She sat in her chair all day and looked at the
fire. The cat sat on the hearthrug and did the same. The cat seemed to
me the animal personification of the human being who kept me chained
from all the sports and pleasures I had promised myself for the
holidays. When I went near to the cat, and heard it calmly purring at
me, I longed to do it an injury. It seemed to me as if it understood
what my grandmother did not, and was complacently triumphing at my
voluntary imprisonment with age, and laughing to itself at the pains
men--and boys--will undergo for the sake of money. Brute! I did not love
my grandmother, and she had money. I hated the cat utterly. It hadn't a
_sou!_

This beautiful house is not old. My grandfather built it himself. He had
no love for the life of towns, I believe, but was passionately in touch
with nature, and, when a young man, he set out on a strange tour through
England. His object was to find a perfect view, and in front of that
view he intended to build himself a habitation. For nearly a year, so I
have been told, he wandered through Scotland and England, and at last
he came to this place in Cumberland, to this village, to this very spot.
Here his wanderings ceased. Standing on the terrace--then uncultivated
forest--that runs in front of these windows, he found at last what he
desired. He bought the forest. He bought the windings of the river,
the fields upon its banks, and on the extreme edge of the steep gorge
through which it runs he built the lovely dwelling that to-day is mine.

This place is no ordinary place. It is characteristic in the highest
degree. The house is wonderfully situated, with the ground falling
abruptly in front of it, the river forming almost a horseshoe round it.
The woods are lovely. The garden, curiously, almost wildly, laid out, is
like no other garden I ever saw. And the house, though not old, is full
of little surprises, curiously shaped rooms, remarkable staircases,
quaint recesses. The place is a place to remember. The house is a house
to fix itself in the memory. Nothing that had once lived here could ever
come back and forget that it had been here. Not even an animal--not even
an animal.

I wish I had never gone to that dinnerparty and met the Professor. There
was a horror coming upon me then. He has hastened its steps. He has put
my fears into shape, my vague wondering into words. Why cannot men leave
life alone? Why will they catch it by the throat and wring its secrets
from it? To respect reserve is one of the first instincts of the
gentleman; and life is full of reserve.

It is getting very late. I thought I heard a step in the house just
now. I wonder--I wonder if _she_ is asleep. I wish I knew. Day after
day passed by. My grandmother seemed to be failing, but almost
imperceptibly. She evidently loved to have me near to her. Like most old
dying people, in her mind she frantically clutched at life, that could
give to her nothing more; and I believe she grew to regard me as the
personification of all that was leaving her. My vitality warmed her. She
extended her hands to my flaming hearthfire. She seemed trying to live
in my life, and at length became afraid to let me out of her sight.
One day she said to me, in her quavering, ugly voice--old voices are so
ugly, like hideous echoes:

"Ronald, I could never die while you were in the room. So long as you
are with me, where I can touch you, I shall live."

And she put out her white, corrugated hand, and fondled my warm boy's
hand.

How I longed to push her hand away, and get out into the sunlight and
the air, and hear young voices, the voices of the morning, not of the
twilight, and be away from wrinkled Death, that seemed sitting on the
doorstep of that house huddled up like a beggar, waiting for the door to
be opened!

I was bored till I grew malignant. I confess it. And, feeling malignant,
I began to long more and more passionately to vent myself on someone or
something. I looked at the cat, which, as usual, was sitting before the
fire.

Animals have intuitions as keen as those of a woman, keener than those
of a man. They inherit an instinct of fear of those who hate them from a
long line of ancestors who have suffered at the hands of cruel men.
They can tell by a look, by a motion, by the tone of a voice, whether
to expect from anyone kindness or malignity. The cat had purred
complacently on the first day of my arrival, and had hunched up her
white, furry back towards my hand, and had smiled with her calm,
light-blue eyes. Now, when I approached her, she seemed to gather
herself together and to make herself small. She shrank from me. There
was--as I fancied--a dawning comprehension, a dawning terror in her blue
eyes. She always sat very close to my grandmother now, as if she sought
protection, and she watched me as if she were watching for an intention
which she apprehended to grow in my mind.

And the intention came.

For, as the days went on, and my grandmother still lived, I began to
grow desperate. My holiday time was over now, but my parents wrote
telling me to stay where I was, and not to think of returning to school.
My grandmother had caused a letter to be sent to them in which she said
that she could not part from me, and added that my parents would never
have cause to regret interrupting my education for a time. "He will be
paid in full for every moment he loses," she wrote, referring to me.

It seemed a strange taste in her to care so much for a boy, but she had
never loved women, and I was handsome, and she liked handsome faces. The
brutality in my nature was not written upon my features. I had smiling,
frank brown eyes, a lithe young figure, a gay boy's voice. My movements
were quick, and I have always been told that my gestures were never
awkward, my demeanour was never unfinished, as is the case so often with
lads at school. Outwardly I was attractive; and the old woman, who had
married two husbands merely for their looks, delighted in feeling that
she had the power to retain me by her side at an age when most boys
avoid old people as if they were the pestilence.

And then I pretended to love her, and obeyed all her insufferably
tiresome behests. But I longed to wreak vengeance upon her all the same.
My dearest friend, the fellow with whom I was to have spent my holidays,
was leaving at the end of this term which I was missing. He wrote to
me furious letters, urging me to come back, and reproaching me for my
selfishness and lack of affection.

Each time I received one I looked at the cat, and the cat shrank nearer
to my grandmother's chair.

It never purred now, and nothing would induce it to leave the room where
she sat. One day the servant said to me:

"I believe the poor dumb thing knows my mistress can't last very much
longer, sir. The way that cat looks up at her goes to my heart. Ah! them
beasts understand things as well as we do, I believe."

I think the cat understood quite well. It did watch my grandmother in
a very strange way, gazing up into her face, as if to mark the changing
contours, the increasing lines, the down-droop of the features, that
bespoke the gradual soft approach of death. It listened to the sound of
her voice; and as, each day, the voice grew more vague, more weak and
toneless, an anxiety that made me exult dawned and deepened in its blue
eyes. Or so I thought.

I had a great deal of morbid imagination at that age, and loved to weave
a web of fancies, mostly horrible, around almost everything that entered
into my life. It pleased me to believe that the cat understood each new
intention that came into my mind, read me silently from its place
near the fire, tracked my thoughts, and was terror-stricken as they
concentrated themselves round a definite resolve, which hardened and
toughened day by day.

It pleased me to believe, do I say? I did really believe, and do believe
now, that the cat understood all, and grew haggard with fear as my
grandmother failed visibly. For it knew what the end would mean for it.

That first day of my arrival, when I saw my grandmother in her white
cap, with her white face and hands, and the big white cat sitting
near to her, I had thought there was a similarity between them. That
similarity struck me more forcibly, grew upon me, as my time in the
house grew longer, until the latter seemed almost a reproduction of
the former, and after each letter from my friend my hate for the two
increased. But my hate for my grandmother was impotent, and would always
be so. I could never repay her for the _ennui_, the furious, forced
inactivity which made my life a burden, and spurred my bad passions
while they lulled me in a terrible, enforced repose. I could repay her
favourite, the thing she had always cherished, her feline confidant,
who lived in safety under the shadow of her protection. I could wreak my
fury on that when the protection was withdrawn, as it must be at last.
It seemed to my brutal, imaginative, unfinished boy's mind that the
murder of her pet must hurt and wound my grandmother even after she was
dead. I would make her suffer then, when she was impotent to wreak a
vengeance upon me. I would kill the cat.

The creature knew my resolve the day I made it, and had even, I should
say, anticipated it.

As I sat day after day beside my grandmother's armchair in the dim room,
with the blinds drawn to shut out the summer sunlight, and talked to her
in a subdued and reverent voice, agreeing with all the old banalities
she uttered, all the preposterous opinions she propounded, all the
commands she laid upon me, I gazed beyond her at the cat, and the
creature was haggard with apprehension.

It knew, as I knew, that its day was coming. Sometimes I bent down and
took it up on my lap to please my grandmother, and praised its beauty
and its gentleness to her And all the time I felt its warm, furry body
trembling with horror between my hands. This pleased me, and I pretended
that I was never happy unless it was on my knees. I kept it there for
hours, stroking it so tenderly, smoothing its thick white coat, which
was always in the most perfect order, talking to it, caressing it.

And sometimes I took its head between my two hands, turned its face to
mine, and stared into its large blue eyes. Then I could read all its
agony, all its torture of apprehension: and in spite of my friend's
letters, and the dulness of my days, I was almost happy.

The summer was deepening, the glow of the roses flushed the garden ways,
the skies were clear above Scawfell, when the end at last drew near.
My grandmother's face was now scarcely recognizable. The eyes were sunk
deep in her head. All expression seemed to fade gradually away. Her
cheeks were no longer fine ivory white; a dull, sickening, yellow pallor
overspread them. She seldom looked at me now, but rested entombed in her
great armchair, her shrunken limbs seeming to tend downwards, as if she
were inclined to slide to the floor and die there. Her lips were thin
and dry, and moved perpetually in a silent chattering, as if her mind
were talking and her voice were already dead. The tide of life was
retreating from her body. I could almost see it visibly ebb away. The
failing waves made no sound upon the shore. Death is uncanny, like all
silent things.

Her maid wished her to stay entirely in bed, but she would get up,
muttering that she was well; and the doctor said it was useless to
hinder her. She had no specific disease. Only the years were taking
their last toll of her. So she was placed in her chair each day by the
fire, and sat there till evening, muttering with those dry lips. The
stiff folds of her silken skirts formed an angle, and there the cat
crouched hour after hour, a silent, white, waiting thing.

And the waves ebbed and ebbed away, and I waited too.

One afternoon, as I sat by my grandmother, the servant entered with
a letter for me just arrived by the post. I took it up. It was from
Willoughby, my school-friend. He said the term was over, that he had
left school, and his father had decided to send him out to America to
start in business in New York, instead of entering him at Oxford as he
had hoped. He bade me good-bye, and said he supposed we should not meet
again for years; "but," he added, "no doubt you won't care a straw, so
long as you get the confounded money you're after. You've taught me one
of the lessons of life, young Ronald--never to believe in friendship."

As I read the letter I set my teeth. All that was good in my nature
centred round Willoughby. He was a really fine fellow. I honestly and
truly loved him. His news gave me a bitter shock, and turned my heart to
iron and to fire. Perhaps I should never see him again; even if I did,
time would have changed him, seared him--my friend, in his wonderful
youth, with the morning in his eyes, would be no more. I hated myself in
that moment for having stayed; I hated still more her who had kept me.
For the moment I was carried out of myself. I crushed the letter up in
my burning hand. I turned fiercely round upon that yellow, enigmatic,
dying figure in the great chair. All the fury, locked within my heart
for so long, rose to the surface, and drove self-interest away. I turned
upon my grandmother with blazing eyes and trembling limbs. I opened my
mouth to utter a torrent of reproachful words, when--what was it?--what
slight change had stolen into the wrinkled, yellow face? I bent over
her. The eyes gazed at me, but so horribly! She sat so low in her chair;
she looked so fearful, so very strange. I put my fingers on her eyelids;
I drew them down over the eyeballs: they did not open again. I felt her
withered hands: they were ice. Then I knew, and I felt myself smiling. I
leaned over the dead woman. There, on the far side of her, crouched the
cat. Its white fur was all bristling; its blue eyes were dilated; on its
jaws there were flecks of foam.

I leaned over the dead woman and took it in my arms.

*****

That was nearly twenty years ago, and yet to-night the memory of that
moment, and what followed it, bring a fear to my heart which I must
combat. I have read of men who lived for long spaces of time haunted
by demons created by their imagination, and I have laughed at them and
pitied them. Surely I am not going to join in their folly, in their
madness, led to the gates of terror by my own fancies, half-confirmed,
apparently, by the chance utterances of a conceited Professor--a man of
fads, although a man of science.

That was twenty years ago. After to-night let me forget it. After
to-night, do I say? Hark! the birds are twittering in the dew outside.
The pale, early sun-shafts strike over the moors. And I am tired.
To-morrow night I will finish this wrestle with my own folly; I will
give the _coup de grace_ to my imagination.. But no more now. My brain
is not calm, and I will not write in excitement.




II.

_Wednesday Night, November 4th_.

Margot has gone to bed at last, and I am alone. This has been a horrible
day--horrible; but I will not dwell upon it.

After the death of my grandmother, I went back to school again. But
Willoughby was gone, and he could not forgive me. He wrote to me once or
twice from New York, and then I ceased to hear from him. He died out of
my life. His affection for me had evidently declined from the day when
he took it into his head that I was only a money-grubber, like the
rest of the world, and that the Jew instinct had developed in me at an
abnormally early age. I let him go. What did it matter? But I was always
glad that I had been cruel on the day my grandmother died. I never
repented of what I did--never. If I had, I might be happier now.

I went back to school. I studied, played, got into mischief and out of
it again, like other boys; but in my life there seemed to be an eternal
coldness, that I alone, perhaps, was conscious of. My deed of cruelty,
of brutal revenge on the thing that had never done me injury, had
seared my soul. I was not sorry, but t could not forget; and sometimes
I thought--how ridiculous it looks written down!--that there was a power
hidden somewhere which could not forget either, and that a penalty might
have to be paid. Because a creature is dumb, must its soul die when it
dies? Is not the soul, perhaps--as _he_ said--a wanderer through many
bodies?

But if I did not kill a soul, as I killed a body, the day my grandmother
died, where is that soul now? That is what I want to arrive at, that is
what I must arrive at, if I am to be happy.

I went back to school, and I passed to Oxford. I tasted the strange,
unique life of a university, narrow, yet pulsating, where the youth,
that is so green and springing, tries to arm itself for the battle with
the weapons forged by the dead and sharpened by the more elderly among
the living. I did well there, and I passed on into the world. And then
at last I began to understand the value of my inheritance; for all that
had been my grandmother's was now mine. My people wished me to marry,
but I had no desire to fetter myself. So I took the sponge in my strong,
young hands, and tried to squeeze it dry. And I did not know that I was
sad--I did not know it until, at the age of thirty-three, just seventeen
years after my grandmother died, I understood the sort of thing
happiness is. Of course, it was love that brought to me understanding.
I need not explain that. I had often played on love; now love began to
play on me. I trembled at the harmonies his hands evoked.

I met a young girl, very young, just on the verge of life and of
womanhood. She was seventeen when I first saw her, and she was valsing
at a big ball in London--her first ball. She passed me in the crowd
of dancers, and I noticed her. As she was a _debutante_ her dress was
naturally snow-white. There was no touch of colour about it--not a
flower, not a jewel. Her hair was the palest yellow I had almost ever
seen--the colour of an early primrose. Naturally fluffy, it nearly
concealed the white riband that ran through it, and clustered in
tendrils and tiny natural curls upon her neck. Her skin was whiter than
ivory--a clear, luminous white. Her eyes were very large and china-blue
in colour.

This young girl dancing passed and repassed me, and my glance rested
on her idly, even cynically. For she seemed so happy, and at that time
happiness won my languid wonder, if ingenuously exhibited. To be happy
seemed almost to be mindless. But by degrees I found myself watching
this girl, and more closely. Another dance began. She joined it with
another partner. But she seemed just as pleased with him as with her
former one. She would not let him pause to rest; she kept him dancing
all the time, her youth and freshness spoken in that gentle compelling.
I grew interested in her, even acutely so. She seemed to me like the
spirit of youth dancing over the body of Time. I resolved to know her. I
felt weary; I thought she might revive me. The dance drew to an end,
and I approached my hostess, pointed the girl out, and asked for an
introduction. Her name was Margot Magendie, I found, and she was an
heiress as well as a beauty.

I did not care. It was her humanity that drew me, nothing else.

But; strange to say, when the moment for the introduction arrived, and I
stood face to face with Miss Magendie, I felt an extraordinary shrinking
from her. I have never been able to understand it, but my blood ran
cold, and my pulses almost ceased to beat. I would have avoided her; an
instinct within me seemed suddenly to cry out against her. But it was
too late: the introduction was effected; her hand rested on my arm.

I was actually trembling. She did not appear to notice it. The band
played a valse, and the inexplicable horror that had seized me lost
itself in the gay music. It never returned until lately.

I seldom enjoyed a valse more. Our steps suited so perfectly, and her
obvious childish pleasure communicated itself to me. The spirit of youth
in her knocked on my rather jaded heart, and I opened to it. That was
beautiful and strange. I talked with her, and I felt myself younger,
ingenuous rather than cynical, inclined even to a radiant, though
foolish, optimism. She was very natural, very imperfect in worldly
education, full of fragmentary but decisive views on life, quite
unabashed in giving them forth, quite inconsiderate in summoning my
adherence to them.

And then, presently, as we sat in a dim corridor under a rosy hanging
lamp, in saying something she looked, with her great blue eyes, right
into my face. Some very faint recollection awoke and stirred in my mind.

"Surely," I said hesitatingly--"surely I have seen you before? It seems
to me that I remember your eyes."

As I spoke I was thinking hard, chasing the vagrant recollection that
eluded me.

She smiled.

"You don't remember my face?"

"No, not at all."

"Nor I yours. If we had seen each other, surely we should recollect it."

Then she blushed, suddenly realizing that her words implied, perhaps,
more than she had meant. I did not pay the obvious compliment. Those
blue eyes and something in their expression moved me strangely; but I
could not tell why. When I said good-bye to her that night, I asked to
be allowed to call.

She assented.

That was the beginning of a very beautiful courtship, which gave a
colour to life, a music to existence, a meaning to every slightest
sensation.

And was it love that laid to sleep recollection, that sang a lullaby to
awakening horror, and strewed poppies over it till it sighed itself into
slumber? Was it love that drowned my mind in deep and charmed waters,
binding the strange powers that every mind possesses in flowery garlands
stronger than any fetters of iron? Was it love that, calling up dreams,
alienated my thoughts from their search after reality?

I hardly know. I only know that I grew to love Margot, and only looked
for love in her blue eyes, not for any deed of the past that might be
mirrored there.

And I made her love me.

She gave her child's heart to my keeping with a perfect confidence
that only a perfect affection could engender. She did love me then. No
circumstances of to-day can break that fact under their hammers. She
did love me, and it is the knowledge that she did which gives so much of
fear to me now.

For great changes in the human mind are terrible. As we realize them we
realize the limitless possibilities of sinister deeds that lie hidden in
every human being. A little child that loves a doll can become an old,
crafty, secret murderer. How horrible!

And perhaps it is still more horrible to think that, while the human
envelope remains totally unchanged, every word of the letter within may
become altered, and a message of peace fade into a sentence of death.

Margot's face is the same face now as it was when I married
her--scarcely older, certainly not less beautiful. Only the expression
of the eyes has changed.

For we were married. After a year of love-making, which never tired
either of us, we elected to bind ourselves, to fuse the two into one.

We went abroad for the honeymoon, and, instead of shortening it to the
fashionable fortnight, we travelled for nearly six months, and were
happy all the time.

Boredom never set in. Margot had a beautiful mind as well as a beautiful
face. She softened me through my affection. The current of my life began
to set in a different direction. I turned the pages of a book of pity
and of death more beautiful than that of Pierre Loti. I could hear at
last the great cry for sympathy, which is the music of this strange
suffering world, and, listening to it, in my heart there rang an echo.
The cruelty in my nature seemed to shrivel up. I was more gentle than I
had been, more gentle than I had thought I could ever be.

At last, in the late spring, we started for home. We stayed for a week
in London, and then we travelled north. Margot had never seen her
future home, had never even been in Cumberland before. She was full
of excitement and happiness, a veritable child in the ready and ardent
expression of her feelings. The station is several miles from the house,
and is on the edge of the sea. When the train pulled up at the wayside
platform the day drew towards sunset, and the flat levels of the beach
shone with a rich, liquid, amber light. In the distance the sea was
tossing and tumbling, whipped into foam by a fresh wind. The Isle of Man
lay far away, dark, mysterious, under a stack of bellying white clouds,
just beginning to be tinged with the faintest rose.

Margot found the scene beautiful, the wind life-giving, the flat
sand-banks, the shining levels, even the dry, spiky grass that fluttered
in the breeze, fascinating and refreshing.

"I feel near the heart of Nature in a place like this," she said,
looking up at a seagull that hovered over the little platform, crying to
the wind on which it hung.

The train stole off along the edge of the sands, till we could see only
the white streamer of its smoke trailing towards the sun. We turned away
from the sea, got into the carriage that was waiting for us, and set
our faces inland. The ocean was blotted out by the low grass and
heather-covered banks that divided the fields. Presently we plunged into
woods. The road descended sharply. A village, an abruptly winding river
sprang into sight.

We were on my land. We passed the inn, the Rainwood Arms, named after
my grandfather's family. The people whom we met stared curiously and
saluted in rustic fashion.

Margot was full of excitement and pleasure, and talked incessantly,
holding my hand tightly in hers and asking a thousand questions. Passing
through the village, we mounted a hill towards a thick grove of trees.

"The house stands among them," I said, pointing.

She sprang up eagerly in the carriage to find it, but it was hidden.

We dashed through the gate into the momentary darkness of the drive,
emerged between great green lawns, and drew up before the big doorway of
the hall. I looked into her eyes, and said "Welcome!"

She only smiled in answer.

I would not let her enter the house immediately, but made her come with
me to the terrace above the river, to see the view over the Cumbrian
mountains and the moors of Eskdale.

The sky was very clear and pale, but over Styhead the clouds were
boiling up. The Screes that guard ebon Wastwater looked grim and sad.

Margot stood beside me on the terrace, but her chatter had been
succeeded by silence. And I, too, was silent for the moment, absorbed in
contemplation. But presently I turned to her, wishing to see how she was
impressed by her new domain.

She was not looking towards the river and the hills, but at the terrace
walk itself, the band of emerald turf that bordered it, the stone pots
full of flowers, the winding way that led into the shrubbery.

She was looking at these intently, and with a strangely puzzled, almost
startled expression.

"Hush! Don't speak to me for a moment," she said, as I opened my lips.
"Don't; I want to---- How odd this is!"

And she gazed up at the windows of the house, at the creepers that
climbed its walls, at the sloping roof and the irregular chimney-stacks.

Her lips were slightly parted, and her eyes were full of an inward
expression that told me she was struggling with forgetfulness and
desired recollection.

I was silent, wondering.

At last she said: "Ronald, I have never been in the North of England
before, never set foot in Cumberland; yet I seem to know this terrace
walk, those very flower-pots, the garden, the look of that roof, those
chimneys, even the slanting way in which that great creeper climbs. Is
it not--is it not very strange?"

She gazed up at me, and in her blue eyes there was an expression almost
of fear.

I smiled down on her. "It must be your fancy," I said.

"It does not seem so," she replied. "I feel as if I had been here
before, and often, or for a long time." She paused; then she said: "Do
let me go into the house. There ought to be a room there--a room--I seem
almost to see it. Come! Let us go in."

She took my hand and drew me towards the hall door. The servants were
carrying in the luggage, and there was a certain amount of confusion and
noise, but she did not seem to notice it. She was intent on something; I
could not tell what.

"Do show me the house, Ronald--the drawing-room, and--and--there is
another room I wish to see."

"You shall see them all, dear," I said. "You are excited. It is natural
enough. This is the drawing-room."

She glanced round it hastily.

"And now the others!" she exclaimed.

I took her to the dining-room, the library, and the various apartments
on the ground-floor.

She scarcely looked at them. When we had finished exploring, "Are these
all?" she asked, with a wavering accent of disappointment.

"All," I answered.

"Then--show me the rooms upstairs."

We ascended the shallow oak steps, and passed first into the apartment
in which my grandmother had died.

It had been done up since then, refurnished, and almost completely
altered. Only the wide fireplace, with its brass dogs and its heavy
oaken mantelpiece, had been left untouched.

Margot glanced hastily round. Then she walked up to the fireplace, and
drew a long breath.

"There ought to be a fire here," she said.

"But it is summer," I answered, wondering.

"And a chair there," she went on, in a curious low voice, indicating--I
think now, or is it my imagination?--the very spot where my grandmother
was wont to sit. "Yes--I seem to remember, and yet not to remember."

She looked at me, and her white brows were knit.

Suddenly she said: "Ronald, I don't think I like this room. There is
something--I don't know--I don't think I could sit here; and I seem to
remember--something about it, as I did about the terrace. What can it
mean?"

"It means that you are tired and overexcited, darling. Your nerves are
too highly strung, and nerves play us strange tricks. Come to your own
room and take off your things, and when you have had some tea, you will
be all right again."

Yes, I was fool enough to believe that tea was the panacea for an
undreamed-of, a then unimaginable, evil.

I thought Margot was simply an overtired and imaginative child that
evening. If I could believe so now!

We went up into her boudoir and had tea, and she grew more like
herself; but several times that night I observed her looking puzzled and
thoughtful, and a certain expression of anxiety shone in her blue eyes
that was new to them then.

But I thought nothing of it, and I was-happy. Two or three days
passed, and Mar-got did not again refer to her curious sensation of
pre-knowledge of the house and garden. I fancied there was a slight
alteration in her manner; that was all. She seemed a little restless.
Her vivacity flagged now and then. She was more willing to be alone than
she had been. But we were old married folk now, and could not be always
in each other's sight. I had a great many people connected with the
estate to see, and had to gather up the tangled threads of many affairs.

The honeymoon was over. Of course we could not always be together.

Still, I should have wished Margot to desire it, and I could not hide
from myself that now and then she scarcely concealed a slight impatience
to be left in solitude. This troubled me, but only a little, for she was
generally as fond as ever. That evening, however, an incident occurred
which rendered me decidedly uneasy, and made me wonder if my wife were
not inclined to that curse of highly-strung women--hysteria!

I had been riding over the moors to visit a tenant-farmer who lived at
some distance, and did not return until twilight. Dismounting, I let
myself into the house, traversed the hall, and ascended the stairs. As I
wore spurs, and the steps were of polished oak and uncarpeted, I walked
noisily enough to warn anyone of my approach. I was passing the door
of the room that had been my grandmother's sitting-room, when I noticed
that it stood open. The house was rather dark, and the interior was dim
enough, but I could see a figure in a white dress moving about inside.
I recognised Margot, and wondered what she was doing, but her movements
were so singular that, instead of speaking to her, I stood in the
doorway and watched her.

She was walking, with a very peculiar, stealthy step, around the room,
not as if she were looking for anything, but merely as if she were
restless or ill at ease. But what struck me forcibly was this, that
there was something curiously animal in her movements, seen thus in a
dim half-light that only partially revealed her to me. I had never
seen a woman walk in that strangely wild yet soft way before. There was
something uncanny about it, that rendered me extremely discomforted; yet
I was quite fascinated, and rooted to the ground.

I cannot tell how long I stood there. I was so completely absorbed in
the passion of the gazer that the passage of time did not concern me
in the least. I was as one assisting at a strange spectacle. This white
thing moving in the dark did not suggest my wife to me, although it
was she. I might have been watching an animal, vague, yet purposeful of
mind, tracing out some hidden thing, following out some instinct quite
foreign to humanity. I remember that presently I involuntarily clasped
my hands together, and felt that they were very cold. Perspiration broke
out on my face. I was painfully, unnaturally moved, and a violent desire
to be away from this white moving thing came over me. Walking as softly
as I could, I went to my dressing-room, shut the door, and sat down on a
chair. I never remember to have felt thoroughly unnerved before, but now
I found myself actually shaken, palsied. I could understand how deadly
a thing fear is. I lit a candle hastily, and as I did so a knock came to
the door.

Margot's voice said, "May I come in?" I felt unable to reply, so I got
up and admitted her.

She entered smiling, and looking such a child, so innocent, so tender,
that I almost laughed aloud. That I, a man, should have been frightened
by a child in a white dress, just because the twilight cast a phantom
atmosphere around her! I held her in my arms, and I gazed into her blue
eyes.

She looked down, but still smiled.

"Where have you been, and what have you been doing?" I asked gaily.

She answered that she had been in the drawing-room since tea-time.

"You came here straight from the drawing-room?" I said.

She replied, "Yes."

Then, with an indifferent air which hid real anxiety, I said:

"By the way, Margot, have you been into that room again--the room you
fancied you recollected?"

"No, never," she answered, withdrawing herself from my arms. "I
don't wish to go there. Make haste, Ronald, and dress. It is nearly
dinner-time, and I am ready." And she turned and left me.

She had told me a lie. All my feelings of uneasiness and discomfort
returned tenfold.

That evening was the most wretched one, the only wretched one, I had
ever spent with her.

*****

I am tired of writing. I will continue my task to-morrow. It takes me
longer than I anticipated. Yet even to tell everything to myself brings
me some comfort. Man must express himself; and despair must find a
voice.




III.

_Thursday Night, December 5th_.

That lie awoke in me suspicion of the child I had married. I began to
doubt her, yet never ceased to love her. She had all my heart, and must
have it till the end. But the calm of love was to be succeeded by love's
tumult and agony. A strangeness was creeping over Margot. It was as if
she took a thin veil in her hands, and drew it over and all around her,
till the outlines I had known were slightly blurred. Her disposition,
which had been so clear cut, so sharply, beautifully defined, standing
out in its innocent glory for all men to see, seemed to withdraw itself,
as if a dawning necessity for secrecy had arisen. A thin crust of
reserve began to subtly overspread her every act and expression. She
thought now before she spoke; she thought before she looked. It seemed
to me that she was becoming a slightly different person.

The change I mean to imply is very difficult to describe. It was not
abrupt enough to startle, but I could feel it, slight though it was.
Have you seen the first flat film of waveless water, sent by the
incoming tides of the sea, crawling silently up over the wrinkled brown
sand, and filling the tiny ruts, till diminutive hills and valleys are
all one smooth surface? So it was with Margot. A tide flowed over her
character, a waveless tide of reserve. The hills and valleys which I
loved disappeared from my ken. Behind the old sweet smile, the old frank
expression, my wife was shrinking down to hide herself, as one escaping
from pursuit hides behind a barrier. When one human being knows another
very intimately, and all the barricades that divide soul from soul have
been broken down, it is difficult to set them up again without noise and
dust, and the sound of thrust-in bolts, and the tap of the hammer that
drives in the nails. It is difficult, but not impossible. Barricades
can be raised noiselessly, soundless bolts--that keep out the soul--be
pushed home. The black gauze veil that blots out the scene drops, and
when it is raised--if ever--the scene is changed.

The real Margot was receding from me. I felt it with an impotence of
despair that was benumbing. Yet I could not speak of it, for at first I
could hardly tell if she knew of what was taking place. Indeed, at this
moment, in thinking it over, I do not believe that for some time she had
any definite cognisance of the fact that she was growing to love me
less passionately than of old. In acts she was not changed. That was the
strange part of the matter. Her kisses were warm, but I believed them
premeditated. She clasped my hand in hers, but now there was more
mechanism than magic in that act of tenderness. Impulse failed within
her; and she had been all impulse? Did she know it? At that time I
wondered. Believing that she did not know she was changing, I was at the
greatest pains to guard my conduct, lest I should implant the suspicion
that might hasten what I feared. I remained, desperately, the same as
ever, and so, of course, was not the same, for a deed done defiantly
bears little resemblance to a deed done naturally. I was always
considering what I should say, how I should act, even how I should
look. To live now was sedulous instead of easy. Effort took the place
of simplicity. My wife and I were gazing furtively at each other through
the eye-holes of masks. I knew it. Did she?

At that time I never ceased to wonder. Of one thing I was certain,
however--that Margot began to devise excuses for being left alone. When
we first came home she could hardly endure me out of her sight. Now she
grew to appreciate solitude. This was a terrible danger signal, and I
could not fail to so regard it.

Yet something within me held me back from speaking out. I made no
comment on the change that deepened day by day, but I watched my wife
furtively, with a concentration of attention that sometimes left me
physically exhausted. I felt, too, at length, that I was growing morbid,
that suspicion coloured my mind and caused me, perhaps, to put a wrong
interpretation on many of her actions, to exaggerate and misconstrue
the most simple things she did. I began to believe her every look
premeditated. Even if she kissed me, I thought she did it with a
purpose; if she smiled up at me as of old, I fancied the smile to be
only a concealment of its opposite. By degrees we became shy of each
other. We were like uncongenial intimates, forced to occupy the same
house, forced into a fearful knowledge of each other's personal habits,
while we knew nothing of the thoughts that make up the true lives of
individuals.

And then another incident occurred, a pendant to the incident of
Margot's strange denied visit to the room she affected to fear. It was
one night, one deep dark night of the autumn--a season to affect even a
cheerful mind and incline it towards melancholy. Margot and I were now
often silent when we were together. That evening, towards nine, a dull
steady rain set in. I remember I heard it on the window-panes as we sat
in the drawing-room after dinner, and remarked on it, saying to her that
if it continued for two or three days she might chance to see the floods
out, and that fishermen would descend upon us by the score.

I did not obtain much response from her. The dreariness of the weather
seemed to affect her spirits. She took up a book presently, and appeared
to read; but, once in glancing up suddenly from my newspaper, I thought
I caught her gaze fixed fearfully upon me. It seemed to me that she was
looking furtively at me with an absolute terror. I was so much affected
that I made some excuse for leaving the room, went down to my den, lit
a cigar, and walked uneasily up and down, listening to the rain on the
window. At ten Margot came in to tell me she was going to bed. I wished
her good-night tenderly, but as I held her slim body a moment in my arms
I felt that she began to tremble. I let her go, and she slipped from
the room with the soft, cushioned step that was habitual with her. And,
strangely enough, my thoughts recurred to the day, long ago, when I
first held the great white cat on my knees, and felt its body shrink
from my touch with a nameless horror. The uneasy movement of the woman
recalled to me so strongly and so strangely the uneasy movement of the
animal.

I lit a second cigar. It was near midnight when it was smoked out, and I
turned down the lamp and went softly up to bed. I undressed in the room
adjoining my wife's, and then stole into hers. She was sleeping in the
wide white bed rather uneasily, and as I leaned over her, shading the
candle flame with my outspread hand, she muttered some broken words that
I could not catch. I had never heard her talk in her dreams before. I
lay down gently at her side and extinguished the candle.

But sleep did not come to me. The dull, dead silence weighed upon
instead of soothing me. My mind was terribly alive, in a ferment;
and the contrast between my own excitement and the hushed peace of my
environment was painful, was almost unbearable. I wished that a wind
from the mountains were beating against the window-panes, and the
rain lashing the house in fury. The black calm around was horrible,
unnatural. The drizzling rain was now so small that I could not even
hear its patter when I strained my ears. Margot had ceased to mutter,
and lay perfectly still. How I longed to be able to read the soul hidden
in her sleeping body, to unravel the mystery of the mind which I had
once understood so perfectly! It is so horrible that we can never open
the human envelope, take out the letter, and seize with our eyes upon
its every word. Margot slept with all her secrets safeguarded, although
she was unconscious, no longer watchful, on the alert. She was so
silent, even her quiet breathing not reaching my ear, that I felt
impelled to stretch out my hand beneath the coverlet and touch hers ever
so softly. I did so.

Her hand was instantly and silently withdrawn. She was awake, then.

"Margot," I said, "did I disturb you?"

There was no answer.

The movement, followed by the silence, affected me very disagreeably.

I lit the candle and looked at her. She was lying on the extreme edge
of the bed, with her blue eyes closed. Her lips were slightly parted. I
could hear her steady breathing. Yet was she really sleeping?

I bent lower over her, and as I did so a slight, involuntary movement,
akin to what we call a shudder, ran through her body. I recoiled from
the bed. An impotent anger seized me. Could it be that my presence was
becoming so hateful to my wife that even in sleep her body trembled when
I drew near it? Or was this slumber feigned? I could not tell, but I
felt it impossible at that moment to remain in the room. I returned to
my own, dressed, and descended the stairs to the door opening on to the
terrace. I felt a longing to be out in the air. The atmosphere of the
house was stifling.

Was it coming to this, then? Did I, a man, shrink with a fantastic
cowardice from a woman I loved? The latent cruelty began to stir within
me, the tyrant spirit which a strong love sometimes evokes. I had been
Margot's slave almost. My affection had brought me to her feet, had
kept me there. So long as she loved me I was content to be her captive,
knowing she was mine. But a change in her attitude toward me might rouse
the master. In my nature there was a certain brutality, a savagery,
which I had never wholly slain, although Margot had softened me
wonderfully by her softness, had brought me to gentleness by her
tenderness. The boy of years ago had developed toward better things, but
he was not dead in me. I felt that as I walked up and down the terrace
through the night in a wild meditation. If my love could not hold
Margot, my strength should.

I drew in a long breath of the wet night air, and I opened my shoulders
as if shaking off an oppression. My passion for Margot had not yet drawn
me down to weakness; it had raised me up to strength. The faint fear
of her, which I had felt almost without knowing it more than once, died
within me. The desire of the conqueror elevated me. There was something
for me to win. My paralysis passed away, and I turned toward the house.

And now a strange thing happened. I walked into the dark hall, closed
the outer door, shutting out the dull murmur of the night, and felt in
my pocket for my matchbox. It was not there. I must inadvertently have
laid it down in my dressing-room and left it. I searched about in the
darkness on the hall table, but could find no light. There was nothing
for it, then, but to feel my way upstairs as best I could.

I started, keeping my hand against the wall to guide me. I gained the
top of the stairs, and began to traverse the landing, still with my hand
upon the wall. To reach my dressing-room I had to pass the apartment
which had been my grandmother's sitting-room.

When I reached it, instead of sliding along a closed door, as I had
anticipated, my hand dropped into vacancy.

The door was wide open. It had been shut, like all the other doors
in the house, when I had descended the stairs--shut and locked, as it
always was at night-time. Why was it open now?

I paused in the darkness. And then an impulse seized me to walk forward
into the room. I advanced a step; but, as I did so, a horrible low cry
broke upon my ears out of the darkness. It came from immediately in
front of me, and sounded like an expression of the most abject fear.

My feet rooted themselves to the ground.

"Who's there?" I asked.

There came no answer.

I listened for a moment, but did not hear the minutest sound. The desire
for light was overpowering. I generally did my writing in this room,
and knew the exact whereabouts of everything in it. I knew that on the
writing-table there was a silver box containing wax matches. It lay on
the left of my desk. I moved another step forward.

There was the sound of a slight rustle, as if someone shrank back as I
advanced.

I laid my hand quickly on the box, opened it, and struck a light. The
room was vaguely illuminated. I saw something white at the far end,
against the wall. I put the match to a candle.

The white thing was Margot. She was in her dressing-gown, and was
crouched up in an angle of the wall as far away from where I stood
as possible. Her blue eyes were wide open, and fixed upon me with an
expression of such intense and hideous fear in them that I almost cried
out.

"Margot, what is the matter?" I said. "Are you ill?"

She made no reply. Her face terrified me.

"What is it, Margot?" I cried in a loud, almost harsh voice, determined
to rouse her from this horrible, unnatural silence. "What are you doing
here?"

I moved towards her. I stretched out my hands and seized her. As I did
so, a sort of sob burst from her. Her hands were cold and trembling.

"What is it? What has frightened you?" I reiterated.

At last she spoke in a low voice.

"You--you looked so strange, so--so cruel as you came in," she said.

"Strange! Cruel! But you could not see me. It was dark," I answered.

"Dark!" she said.

"Yes, until I lit the candle. And you cried out when I was only in the
doorway. You could not see me there."

"Why not? What has that got to do with it?" she murmured, still
trembling violently.

"You can see me in the dark?"

"Of course," she said. "I don't understand what you mean. Of course I
can see you when you are there before my eyes."

"But----" I began; and then her obvious and complete surprise at my
questions stopped them. I still held her hands in mine, and their
extreme coldness roused me to the remembrance that she was unclothed.

"You will be ill if you stay here," I said. "Come back to your room."

She said nothing, and I led her back, waited while she got into bed, and
then, placing the candle on the dressing-table, sat down in a chair by
her side.

The strong determination to take prompt action, to come to an
explanation, to end these dreary mysteries of mind and conduct, was
still upon me.

I did not think of the strange hour; I did not care that the night was
gliding on towards dawn. I was self-absorbed. I was beyond ordinary
considerations.

Yet I did not speak immediately. I was trying to be quite calm, trying
to think of the best line for me to take. So much might depend upon our
mere words now. At length I said, laying my hand upon hers, which was
outside the coverlet:

"Margot, what were you doing in that room at such a strange hour? Why
were you there?"

She hesitated obviously. Then she answered, not looking at me:

"I missed you. I thought you might be there--writing."

"But you were in the dark."

"I thought you would have a light."

I knew by her manner that she was not telling me the truth, but I went
on quietly:

"If you expected me, why did you cry out when I came to the door?"

She tried to draw her hand away, but I held it fast, closing, my fingers
upon it with even brutal strength.

"Why did you cry out?"

"You--you looked so strange, so cruel."

"So cruel!"

"Yes. You frightened me--you frightened me horribly."

She began suddenly to sob, like one completely overstrained. I lifted
her up in the bed, put my arms round her, and made her lean against me.
I was strangely moved.

"I frightened you! How can that be?" I said, trying to control a passion
of mingled love and anger that filled my breast. "You know that I love
you. You must know that. In all our short married life have I ever been
even momentarily unkind to you? Let us be frank with one another. Our
lives have changed lately. One of us has altered. You cannot say that it
is I."

She only continued to sob bitterly in my arms. I held her closer.

"Let us be frank with one another," I went on. "For God's sake let us
have no barriers between us. Margot, look into my eyes and tell me--are
you growing tired of me?"

She turned her head away, but I spoke more sternly:

"You shall be truthful. I will have no more subterfuge. Look me in the
face. You did love me once?"

"Yes, yes," she whispered in a choked voice.

"What have I done, then, to alienate you? Have I ever hurt you, ever
shown a lack of sympathy, ever neglected you?"

"Never--never."

"Yet you have changed to me since--since----" I paused a moment, trying
to recall when I had first noticed her altered demeanour.

She interrupted me.

"It has all come upon me in this house," she sobbed. "Oh! what is it?
What does it all mean? If I could understand a little--only a little--it
would not be so bad. But this nightmare, this thing that seems such a
madness of the intellect----"

Her voice broke and ceased. Her tears burst forth afresh. Such mingled
fear, passion, and a sort of strange latent irritation, I had never seen
before.

"It is a madness indeed," I said, and a sense almost of outrage made my
voice hard and cold. "I have not deserved such treatment at your hands."

"I will not yield to it," she said, with a sort of desperation, suddenly
throwing her arms around me. "I will not--I will not!"

I was strangely puzzled. I was torn with conflicting feelings. Love and
anger grappled at my heart. But I only held her, and did not speak until
she grew obviously calmer. The paroxysm seemed passing away. Then I
said:

"I cannot understand."

"Nor I," she answered, with a directness that had been foreign to her
of late, but that was part and parcel of her real, beautiful nature. "I
cannot understand. I only know there is a change in me, or in you to
me, and that I cannot help it, or that I have not been able to help it.
Sometimes I feel--do not be angry, I will try to tell you--a physical
fear of you, of your touch, of your clasp, a fear such as an animal
might feel towards the master who had beaten it. I tremble then at
your approach. When you are near me I feel cold, oh! so cold and--and
anxious; perhaps I ought to say apprehensive. Oh, I am hurting you!"

I suppose I must have winced at her words, and she is quick to observe.

"Go on," I said; "do not spare me. Tell me everything. It is madness
indeed; but we may kill it, when we both know it."

"Oh, if we could!" she cried, with a poignancy which was heart-breaking
to hear. "If we could!"

"Do you doubt our ability?" I said, trying to be patient and calm. "You
are unreasoning, like all women. Be sensible for a moment. You do me a
wrong in cherishing these feelings. I have the capacity for cruelty in
me. I may have been--I have been--cruel in the past, but never to you.
You have no right to treat me as you have done lately. If you examine
your feelings, and compare them with facts, you will see their
absurdity."

"But," she interposed, with a woman's fatal quickness, "that will not do
away with their reality."

"It must. Look into their faces until they fade like ghosts, seen only
between light and darkness. They are founded upon nothing; they are bred
without father or mother; they are hysterical; they are wicked. Think a
little of me. You are not going to be conquered by a chimera, to allow a
phantom created by your imagination to ruin the happiness that has been
so beautiful. You will not do that! You dare not!"

She only answered:

"If I can help it."

A passionate anger seized me, a fury at my impotence against this child.
I pushed her almost roughly from my arms.

"And I have married this woman!" I cried bitterly. I got up.

Margot had ceased crying now, and her face was very white and calm; it
looked rigid in the faint candle-light that shone across the bed.

"Do not be angry," she said. "We are controlled by something inside of
us; there are powers in us that we cannot fight against."

"There is nothing we cannot fight against," I said passionately. "The
doctrine of predestination is the devil's own doctrine. It is the
doctrine set up by the sinner to excuse his sin; it is the coward's
doctrine. Understand me, Margot, I love you, but I am not a weak fool.
There must be an end of this folly. Perhaps you are playing with me,
acting like a girl, testing me. Let us have no more of it."

She said:

"I only do what I must."

Her tone turned me cold. Her set face frightened me, and angered me, for
there was a curious obstinacy in it. I left the room abruptly, and did
not return. That night I had no sleep.

I am not a coward, but I find that I am inclined to fear that which
fears me. I dread an animal that always avoids me silently more than an
animal that actually attacks me. The thing that runs from me makes me
shiver, the thing that creeps away when I come near wakes my uneasiness.
At this time there rose up in me a strange feeling towards Margot.
The white, fair child I had married was at moments--only at
moments--horrible to me. I felt disposed to shun her. Something within
cried out against her. Long ago, at the instant of our introduction, an
unreasoning sensation that could only be called dread had laid hold
upon me. That dread returned from the night of our explanation, returned
deepened and added to. It prompted me to a suggestion which I had no
sooner made than I regretted it. On the morning following I told
Margot that in future we had better occupy separate rooms. She assented
quietly, but I thought a furtive expression of relief stole for a moment
into her face.

I was deeply angered with her and with myself; yet, now that I knew
beyond question my wife's physical terror of me, I was-half afraid of
her. I felt as if I could not bring myself to lie long hours by her side
in the darkness, by the side of a woman who was shrinking from me, who
was watching me when I could not see her. The idea made my very flesh
creep.

Yet I hated myself for this shrinking of the body, and sometimes
hated her for rousing it. A hideous struggle was going on within me--a
struggle between love and impotent anger and despair, between the lover
and the master. For I am one of the old-fashioned men who think that a
husband ought to be master of his wife as well as of his house.

How could I be master of a woman I secretly feared? My knowledge of
myself spurred me through acute irritation almost to the verge of
madness.

All calm was gone. I was alternately gentle to my wife and almost
ferocious towards her, ready to fall at her feet and worship her or to
seize her and treat her with physical violence. I only restrained myself
by an effort.

My variations of manner did not seem to affect her. Indeed, it sometimes
struck me that she feared me more when I was kind to her than when I was
harsh.

And I knew, by a thousand furtive indications, that her horror of me was
deepening day by day. I believe she could hardly bring herself to be in
a room alone with me, especially after nightfall.

One evening, when we were dining, the butler, after placing dessert upon
the table, moved to leave us. She turned white, and, as he reached the
door, half rose, and called him back in a sharp voice.

"Symonds!" she said.

"Yes, ma'am?"

"You are going?"

The fellow looked surprised.

"Can I get you anything, ma'am?"

She glanced at me with an indescribable uneasiness. Then she leaned back
in her chair with an effort, and pressed her lips together.

"No," she said.

As the man went out and shut the door, she looked at me again from
under her eyelids; and finally her eyes travelled from me to a small,
thin-bladed knife, used for cutting oranges, that lay near her plate,
and fixed themselves on it. She put out her hand stealthily, drew it
towards her, and kept her hand over it on the table. I took an orange
from a dish in front of me.

"Margot," I said, "will you pass me that fruit-knife?"

She obviously hesitated.

"Give me that knife," I repeated roughly, stretching out my hand.

She lifted her hand, left the knife upon the table, and at the same
time, springing up, glided softly out of the room and closed the door
behind her.

That evening I spent alone in the smoking-room, and, for the first time,
she did not come to bid me good-night.

I sat smoking my cigar in a tumult of furious despair and love. The
situation was becoming intolerable. It could not be en-dured. I longed
for a crisis, even for a violent one. I could have cried aloud that
night for a veritable tragedy. There were moments when I would almost
have killed the child who mysteriously eluded and defied me. I could
have wreaked a cruel vengeance upon the body for the sin of the mind. I
was terribly, mortally distressed.

After a long and painful self-communion, I resolved to make another wild
effort to set things right before it was too late; and when the clock
chimed the half-hour after ten I went upstairs softly to her bedroom and
turned the handle of the door, meaning to enter, to catch Margot in my
arms, tell her how deep my love for her was, how she injured me by her
base fears, and how she was driving me back from the gentleness she had
given me to the cruelty, to the brutality, of my first nature.

The door resisted me: it was locked. I paused a moment, and then tapped
gently. I heard a sudden rustle within, as if someone hurried across the
floor away from the door, and then Margot's voice cried sharply:

"Who's that? Who is there?" "Margot, it is I. I wish to speak to you--to
say good-night."

"Good-night," she said. "But let me in for a moment." There was a
silence--it seemed to me a long one; then she answered:

"Not now, dear; I--I am so tired." "Open the door for a moment." "I
am very tired. Good-night." The cold, level tone of her voice--for the
anxiety had left it after that first sudden cry--roused me to a sudden
fury of action. I seized the handle of the door and pressed with all my
strength. Physically I am a very powerful man--my anger and despair
gave me a giant's might. I burst the lock, and sprang into the room. My
impulse was to seize Margot in my arms and crush her to death, it might
be, in an embrace she could not struggle against. The blood coursed like
molten fire through my veins. The lust of love, the lust of murder even,
perhaps, was upon me. I sprang impetuously into the room.

No candles were alight in it. The blinds were up, and the chill
moonbeams filtered through the small lattice panes. By the farthest
window, in the yellowish radiance, was huddled a white thing.

A sudden cold took hold upon me. All the warmth in me froze up.

I stopped where I was and held my breath.

That white thing, seen thus uncertainly, had no semblance to humanity.
It was animal wholly. I could have believed for the moment that a white
cat crouched from me there by the curtain, waiting to spring.

What a strange illusion that was! I tried to laugh at it afterwards, but
at the moment horror stole through me--horror, and almost awe.

All desire of violence left me. Heat was dead; I felt cold as stone. I
could not even speak a word.

Suddenly the white thing moved. The curtain was drawn sharply; the
moonlight was blotted out; the room was plunged in darkness--a darkness
in which that thing could see!

I turned and stole out of the room. I could have fled, driven by the
nameless fear that was upon me.

Only when the morning dawned did the man in me awake, and I cursed
myself for my cowardice.

*****

The following evening we were asked to dine out with some neighbours,
who lived a few miles off in a wonderful old Norman castle near the
sea. During the day neither of us had made the slightest allusion to
the incidents of the previous night. We both felt it a relief to go
into society, I think. The friends to whom we went--Lord and Lady
Melchester--had a large party staying with them, and we were, I believe,
the only outsiders who lived in the neighbourhood. One of their guests
was Professor Black, whose name I have already mentioned--a little,
dry, thin, acrid man, with thick black hair, innocent of the comb, and
pursed, straight lips. I had met him two or three times in London,
and as he had only just arrived at the castle, and scarcely knew his
fellow-visitors there, he brought his wine over to me when the ladies
left the dining-room, and entered into conversation. At the moment I
was glad, but before we followed the women I would have given a year--I
might say years--of my life not to have spoken to him, not to have heard
him speak that night.

How did we drift into that fatal conversation? I hardly remember. We
talked first of the neighbourhood, then swayed away to books, then to
people. Yes, that was how it came about. The Professor was speaking of
a man whom we both knew in town, a curiously effeminate man, whose every
thought and feeling seemed that of a woman. I said I disliked him,
and condemned him for his woman's demeanour, his woman's mind; but the
Professor thereupon joined issue with me.

"Pity the fellow, if you like," he uttered, in his rather strident
voice; "but as to condemning him, I would as soon condemn a tadpole for
not being a full-grown frog. His soul is beyond his power to manage, or
even to coerce, you may depend upon it."

Having sipped his port, he drew a little nearer to me, and slightly
dropped his voice.

"There would be less censure of individuals in this world," he said,
"if people were only a little more thoughtful. These souls are like
letters, and sometimes they are sealed up in the wrong envelope. For
instance, a man's soul may be put into a woman's body, or _vice versa_.
It has been so in D------'s case. A mistake has been made."

"By Providence?" I interrupted, with, perhaps, just a _soupcon_ of
sarcasm in my voice.

The Professor smiled.

"Suppose we imitate Thomas Hardy, and say by the President of the
Immortals, who makes sport with more humans than Tess," he answered.
"Mistakes may be deliberate, just as their reverse may be accidental.
Even a mighty power may condescend sometimes to a very practical joke.
To a thinker the world is full of apple-pie beds, and cold wet
sponges fall on us from at least half the doors we push open. The
soul-juggleries of the before-mentioned President are very curious, but
people will not realize that soul transference from body to body is
as much a plain fact as the daily rising of the sun on one half of the
world and its nightly setting on the other."

"Do you mean that souls pass on into the world again on the death of
the particular body in which they have been for the moment confined?" I
asked.

"Precisely: I have no doubt of it. Sometimes a woman's soul goes into
a man's body; then the man acts woman, and people cry against him for
effeminacy. The soul colours the body with actions, the body does not
colour the soul, or not in the same degree."

"But we are not irresponsible. We can command ourselves."

The Professor smiled dryly.

"You think so?" he said. "I sometimes doubt it."

"And I doubt your theory of soul transference."

"That shows me--pardon the apparent impertinence--that you have never
really examined the soul question with any close attention. Do you
suppose that D------ really likes being so noticeably different from
other men? Depend upon it,' he has noticed in himself what we have
noticed in him. Depend upon it, he has tried to be ordinary, and found
it impossible. His soul manages him as a strong nature manages a
weak one, and his soul is a female, not a male. For souls have sexes,
otherwise what would be the sense of talking about wedded souls? I have
no doubt whatever of the truth of reincarnation on earth. Souls go on
and on following out their object of development."

"You believe that every soul is reincarnated?"

"A certain number of times."

"That even in the animal world the soul of one animal passes into the
body of another?"

"Wait a minute. Now we are coming to something that tends to prove
my theory true. Animals have souls, as you imply. Who can know them
intimately and doubt it for an instant? Souls as immortal--or as
mortal--as ours. And their souls, too, pass on."

"Into other animals?"

"Possibly. And eventually, in the process of development, into human
beings."

I laughed, perhaps a little rudely. "My dear Professor, I thought that
old notion was quite exploded in these modern scientific days."

"I found my beliefs upon my own minute observations," he said rather
frigidly. "I notice certain animals masquerading--to some extent--as
human beings, and I draw my own conclusions. If they happen to fit in
at all with the conclusions of Pythagoras--or anyone else, for that
matter--well and good. If not, I am not much concerned. Surely
you notice the animal--and not merely the animal, but definite
animals--reproduced in man. There are men whose whole demeanour suggests
the monkey. I have met women who in manner, appearance, and even
character, were intensely like cats."

I uttered a slight exclamation, which did not interrupt him.

"Now, I have made a minute study of cats. Of all animals they interest
me the most. They have less apparent intensity, less uttered passion,
than dogs, but in my opinion more character. Their subtlety is
extraordinary, their sensitiveness wonderful. Will you understand me
when I say that all dogs are men, all cats women? That remark expresses
the difference between them."

He paused a moment.

"Go on--go on," I said, leaning forward, with my eyes fixed upon his
keen, puckered face.

He seemed pleased with my suddenly-aroused interest..

"Cats are as subtle and as difficult to understand as the most complex
woman, and almost as full of intuitions. If they have been well treated,
there is often a certain gracious, condescending suavity in their
demeanour at first, even towards a total stranger; but if that stranger
is ill disposed toward them, they seem instinctively to read his soul,
and they are in arms directly. Yet they dissemble their fears in a cold
indifference and reserve. They do not take action: they merely abstain
from action. They withdraw the soul that has peeped out, as they can
withdraw their claws into the pads upon their feet. They do not show
fight as a dog might, they do not become aggressive, nor do they whine
and put their tails between their legs. They are simply on guard,
watchful, mistrustful. Is not all this woman?"

"Possibly," I answered, with a painful effort to assume indifference.

"A woman intuitively knows who is her friend and who is her enemy--so
long, at least, as her heart is not engaged; then she runs wild, I
allow. A woman---- But I need not pursue the parallel. Besides, perhaps
it is scarcely to the point, for my object is not to bolster up an
absurd contention that all women have the souls of cats. No; but I have
met women so strangely like cats that their souls have, as I said before
souls do, coloured their bodies in actions. They have had the very look
of cats in their faces. They have moved like them. Their demeanour has
been patently and strongly feline. Now, I see nothing ridiculous in the
assumption that such women's bodies may contain souls--in process of
development, of course--that formerly were merely cat souls, but that
are now gaining humanity gradually, are working their way upwards in
the scale. After all, we are not so much above the animals, and in our
lapses we often become merely animals. The soul retrogrades for the
moment."

He paused again and looked at me. I was biting my lips, and my glass of
wine was untouched. He took my agitation as a compliment, I suppose, for
he smiled and said:

"Are you in process of conversion?"

I half shook my head. Then I said, with an effort: "It is a curious and
interesting idea, of course. But there is much to explain. Now, I should
like to ask you this: Do you--do you believe that a soul, if it passes
on as you think, carries its memory with it, its memory of former loves
and--and hates? Say that a cat's soul goes to a woman's body, and
that the cat has been--has been--well, tortured--possibly killed, by
someone--say some man, long ago, would the woman, meeting that man,
remember and shrink from him?"

"That is a very interesting and curious problem, and one which I do not
pretend to have solved. I can, therefore, only suggest what might be,
what seems to me reasonable.

"I do not believe that the woman would remember positively, but I think
she might have an intuition about the man. Our intuitions are, perhaps,
sometimes only the fragmentary recollections of our souls, of what
formerly happened to them when in other bodies. Why, otherwise, should
we sometimes conceive an ardent dislike of some stranger--charming to
all appearance--of whom we know no evil, whom we have never heard of nor
met before? Intuitions, so called, are often only tattered memories.
And these intuitions might, I should fancy, be strengthened, given
body, robustness, by associations--of place, for example. Cats become
intensely attached to localities, to certain spots, a particular house
or garden, a particular fireside, apart from the people who may be
there. Possibly, if the man and the woman of whom you speak could
be brought together in the very place where the torture arid death
occurred, the dislike of the woman might deepen into positive hatred.
It would, however, be always unreasoning hatred, I think, and even quite
unaccountable to herself. Still----"

But here Lord Melchester rose from the table. The conversations broke
into fragments. I felt that I was pale to the lips.

We passed into the drawing-room. The ladies were grouped together at one
end, near the piano. Margot was among them. She was, as usual, dressed
in white, and round the bottom of her gown there was an edging of
snow-white fur. As we came in, she moved away from the piano to a
sofa at some distance, and sank down upon it. Professor Black, who had
entered the room at my side, seized my arm gently.

"Now, that lady," he whispered in my ear--"I don't know who she may
be, but she is intensely cat-like. I observed it before dinner. Did you
notice the way she moved just then--the soft, yielding, easy manner in
which she sat down, falling at once, quite naturally, into a charming
pose? And her china-blue eyes are----"

"She is my wife, Professor," I interrupted harshly.

He looked decidedly taken aback.

"I beg your pardon; I had no idea. I did not enter the drawing-room
to-night till after you arrived. I believed that lady was one of
my fellow-guests in the house. Let me congratulate you. She is very
beautiful."

And then he mingled rather hastily in the group near the piano.

The man is mad, I know--mad as a hatter on one point, like so many
clever men. He sees the animal in every person he meets just because his
preposterous theory inclines him to do so. Having given in his adherence
to it, he sees facts not as they are, but as he wishes them to be; but
he shall not carry me with him. The theory is his, not mine. It does not
hold water for a moment. I can laugh at it now, but that night I confess
it did seize me for the time being. I could scarcely talk; I found
myself watching Margot with a terrible intentness, and I found myself
agreeing with the Professor to an extent that made me marvel at my own
previous blindness.

There was something strangely feline about the girl I had married--the
soft, white girl who was becoming terrible to me, dear though she still
was and must always be. Her movements had the subtle, instinctive and
certain grace of a cat's. Her cushioned step, which had often struck me
before, was like the step of a cat. And those china-blue eyes! A sudden
cold seemed to pass over me as I understood why I had recognised
them when I first met Margot. They were the eyes of the animal I
had tortured, the animal I had killed. Yes, but that proved nothing,
absolutely nothing. Many people had the eyes of animals--the soft eyes
of dogs, the furtive, cruel eyes of tigers. I had known such people. I
had even once had an affair with a girl who was always called the shot
partridge, because her eyes were supposed to be like those of a dying
bird. I tried to laugh to myself as I remembered this. But I felt cold,
and my senses seemed benumbed as by a great horror. I sat like a stone,
with my eyes fixed upon Margot, trying painfully to read into her all
that the words of Professor Black had suggested to me--trying, but
with the wish not to succeed. I was roused by Lady Melchester, who came
toward me asking me to do something, I forget now what. I forced myself
to be cheerful, to join in the conversation, to seem at my ease; but I
felt like one oppressed with nightmare, and I could scarcely withdraw
my eyes from the sofa where my wife was sitting. She was talking now
to Professor Black, who had just been introduced to her; and I felt a
sudden fury in my heart as I thought that he was perhaps dryly, coldly,
studying her, little knowing what issues--far-reaching, it might be,
in their consequences--hung upon the truth or falsehood of his strange
theory. They were talking earnestly, and presently it occurred to me
that he might be imbuing Margot with his pernicious doctrines, that he
might be giving her a knowledge of her own soul which now she lacked.
The idea was insupportable. I broke off abruptly the conversation in
which I was taking part, and hurried over to them with an impulse which
must have astonished anyone who took note of me. I sat down on a chair,
drew it forward almost violently, and thrust myself in between them.

"What are you two talking about?" I said, roughly, with a suspicious
glance at Margot.

The Professor looked at me in surprise.

"I was instructing your wife in some of the mysteries of
salmon-fishing," he said. "She tells me you have a salmon-river running
through your grounds."

I laughed uneasily.

"So you are a fisherman as well as a romantic theorist!" I said, rather
rudely. "How I wish I were as versatile! Come, Margot, we must be going
now. The carriage ought to be here."

She rose quietly and bade the Professor good-night; but as she glanced
up at me, in rising, I fancied I caught a new expression in her eyes.
A ray of determination, of set purpose, mingled with the gloomy fire of
their despair.

As soon as we were in the carriage I spoke, with a strained effort at
ease and the haphazard tone which should mask furtive cross-examination.

"Professor Black is an interesting man," I said.

"Do you think so?" she answered from her dark corner.

"Surely. His intellect is really alive. Yet, with all his scientific
knowledge and his power of eliciting facts and elucidating them, he is
but a feather headed man." I paused, but she made no answer. "Do you not
think so?"

"How can I tell?" she replied. "We only talked about fishing. He managed
to make that topic a pleasant one."

Her tone was frank. I felt relieved.

"He is exceedingly clever," I said, heartily, and we relapsed into
silence.

When we reached home, and Margot had removed her cloak, she came up to
me and laid her hand on my arm.

So unaccustomed was her touch now that I was startled. She was looking
at me with a curious, steady smile--an unwavering smile that chilled
instead of warming me.

"Ronald," she said, "there has been a breach between us. I have been the
cause of it. I should like to--to heal it. Do you still love me as you
did?"

I did not answer immediately; I could not. Her voice, schooled as it
was, seemed somehow at issue with the words she uttered. There was a
desperate, hard note in it that accorded with that enigmatic smile of
the mouth.

It roused a cold suspicion within me that I was close to a masked
battery. I shrank physically from the touch of her hand.

She waited with her eyes upon me. Our faces were lit tremblingly by the
flames of the two candles we held.

At last I found a voice.

"Can you doubt it?" I asked.

She drew a step nearer.

"Then let us resume our old relations," she said.

"Our old relations?"

"Yes."

I shuddered as if a phantom stole by me. I was seized with horror.

"To-night? It is not possible!"

"Why?" she said, still with that steady smile of the mouth.

"Because--because I don't know--I---- To-morrow it shall be as of old,
Margot--to-morrow. I promise you."

"Very well. Kiss me, dear."

I forced myself to touch her lips with mine.

Which mouth was the colder?

Then, with that soft, stealthy step of hers, she vanished towards her
room. I heard the door close gently.

I listened. The key was not turned in the lock.

This sudden abandonment by Margot of the fantastic precautions I had
almost become accustomed to filled me with a nameless dread.

That night I fastened my door for the first time.




IV.

_Friday Night, November 6th_.

I fastened my door, and when I went to bed lay awake for hours
listening. A horror was upon me then which has not left me since for a
moment, which may never leave me. I shivered with cold that night, the
cold born of sheer physical terror. I knew that I was shut up in the
house with a soul bent on unreasoning vengeance, the soul of the animal
which I had killed prisoned in the body of the woman I had married. I
was sick with fear then. I am sick with fear now.

To-night I am so tired. My eyes are heavy and my head aches. No wonder.
I have not slept for three nights. I have not dared to sleep.

This strange revolution in my wife's conduct, this passionless
change--for I felt instinctively that warm humanity had nothing to do
with the transformation--took place three nights ago. These three last
days Mar-got has been playing a part. With what object?

When I sat down to this gray record of two souls--at once dreary and
fantastic as it would seem, perhaps, to many--I desired to reassure
myself, to write myself into sweet reason, into peace.

I have tried to accomplish the impossible. I feel that the wildest
theory may be the truest, after all--that on the borderland of what
seems madness, actuality paces.

Every remembrance of my mind confirms the truth first suggested to me by
Professor Black.

I know Margot's object now.

The soul of the creature that I tortured, that I killed, has passed into
the body of the woman whom I love; and that soul, which once slept in
its new cage, is awake now, watching, plotting perhaps. Unconsciously to
itself, it recognises me. It stares out upon me with eyes in which
the dull terror deepens to hate; but it does not understand why it
fears--why, in its fear, it hates. Intuition has taken the place of
memory. The Change of environment has killed recollection, and has left
instinct in its place.

Why did I ever sit down to write? The recalling of facts has set the
seal upon my despair.

Instinct only woke in Margot when I brought her to the place the soul
had known in the years when it looked out upon the world from the body
of an animal.

That first day on the terrace instinct stirred in its sleep, opened its
eyes, gazed forth upon me wonderingly, inquiringly.

Margot's faint remembrance of the terrace walk, of the flower-pots, of
the grass borders where the cat had often stretched itself in the sun,
her eagerness to see the chamber of death, her stealthy visits to that
chamber, her growing uneasiness, deepening to acute apprehension,
and finally to a deadly malignity--all lead me irresistibly to one
conclusion.

The animal's soul within her no longer merely shrinks away in fear of
me. It has grown sinister. It lies in ambush, full of a cold, a stealthy
intention.

That curious, abrupt change in Margot's demeanour from avoidance to
invitation marked the subtle, inward development of feeling, the silent
passage from sensation only towards action.

Formerly she feared me. Now I must fear her.

The soul, Crouching in its cage, shows its teeth. It is compassing my
destruction.

The woman's body twitches with desire to avenge the death of the
animal's.

I feel that it is only waiting the moment to spring; and the inherent
love of life breeds in me a physical fear of it as of a subtle enemy.
For even if the soul is brave, the body dreads to die, and seems at
moments to possess a second soul, purely physical, that cries out
childishly against pain, against death.

Then, too, there is a cowardice of the imagination that can shake the
strongest heart, and this resurrection from the dead, from the murdered,
appals my imagination. That what I thought I had long since slain should
have companioned me so closely when I knew it not!

I am sick with fear, physical and mental.

Two days ago, when I unlocked my bedroom door in the morning, and saw
the autumn sunlight streaming in through the leaded panes of the hall
windows, and heard the river dancing merrily down the gully among the
trees that will soon be quite bare and naked, I said to myself: "You
have been mad. Your mind has been filled with horrible dreams, that have
transformed you into a coward and your wife into a demon. Put them away
from you."

I looked across the gully. A clear, cold,-thin light shone upon the
distant mountains. The cloud stacks lay piled above the Scawfell
range. The sky was a sheet of faded turquoise. I opened the window for
a moment. The air was dry and keen. How sweet it was to feel it on my
face!

I went down to the breakfast-room. Mar-got was moving about it softly,
awaiting me. In her white hands were letters. They dropped upon the
table as she stole up to greet me. Her lips were set tightly together,
but she lifted them to kiss me.

How close I came to my enemy as our mouths touched! Her lips were colder
than the wind.

Now that I was with her, my momentary sensation of acute relief deserted
me. The horror that oppressed me returned.

I could not eat--I could only make a pretence of doing so; and my hand
trembled so excessively that I could scarcely raise my cup from the
table.

She noticed this, and gently asked me if I was ill.

I shook my head.

When breakfast was over, she said in a low, level voice:

"Ronald, have you thought over what I said last night?"

"Last night?" I answered, with an effort.

"Yes, about the coldness between us. I think I have been unwell,
unhappy, out of sorts. You know that--that women are more subject to
moods than men, moods they cannot always account for even to themselves.
I have hurt you lately, I know. I am sorry. I want you to forgive
me, to--to"--she paused a moment, and I heard her draw in her breath
sharply--"to take me back into your heart again."

Every word, as she said it, sounded to me like a sinister threat, and
the last sentence made my blood literally go cold in my veins.

I met her eyes. She did not withdraw hers; they looked into mine. They
were the blue eyes of the cat which I had held upon my knees years ago.
I had gazed into them as a boy, and watched the horror and the fear dawn
in them with a malignant triumph.

"I have nothing to forgive," I said in a broken, husky voice.

"You have much," she answered firmly. "But do not--pray do not bear
malice."

"There is no malice in my heart--now," I said; and the words seemed like
a cowardly plea for mercy to the victim of the past.

She lifted one of her soft white hands to my breast.

"Then it shall all be as it was before? And to-night you will come back
to me?"

I hesitated, looking down. But how could I refuse? What excuse could I
make for denying the request? Then I repeated mechanically:

"To-night I will come back to you."

A terrible, slight smile travelled over her face. She turned and left
me.

I sat down immediately. I felt too unnerved to remain standing. I was
giving way utterly to an imaginative horror that seemed to threaten my
reason. In vain I tried to pull myself together. My body was in a cold
sweat. All mastery of my nerves seemed gone.

I do not know how long I remained there, but I was aroused by the
entrance of the butler. He glanced towards me in some obvious surprise,
and this astonishment of a servant acted upon me almost like a scourge.
I sprang up hastily.

"Tell the groom to saddle the mare," I said. "I am going for a ride
immediately."

Air, action, were what I needed to drive this stupor away. I must get
away from this house of tears. I must be alone. I must wrestle with
myself, regain my courage, kill the coward in me.

I threw myself upon the mare, and rode out at a gallop towards the moors
of Eskdale along the lonely country roads.

All day I rode, and all day I thought of that dark house, of that
white creature awaiting my return, peering from the windows, perhaps,
listening for my horse's hoofs on the gravel, keeping still the long
vigil of vengeance.

My imagination sickened, fainted, as my wearied horse stumbled along
the shadowy roads. My terror was too great now to be physical. It was a
terror purely of the spirit, and indescribable.

To sleep with that white thing that waited me! To lie in the dark by it!
To know that it was there, close to me!

If it killed me, what matter? It was to live and to be near it, with it,
that appalled me.

The lights of the house gleamed out through the trees. I heard the sound
of the river.

I got off my horse and walked furtively into the hall, looking round me.

Margot glided up to me immediately, and took my whip and hat from me
with her soft, velvety white hands. I shivered at her touch.

At dinner her blue eyes watched me.

I could not eat, but I drank more wine than usual.

When I turned to go down to the smoking-room, she said: "Don't be very
long, Ronald."

I muttered I scarcely know what words in reply. It was close on midnight
before I went to bed. When I entered her room, shielding the light of
the candle with my hand, she was still awake.

Nestling against the pillows, she stretched herself curiously and smiled
up at me.

"I thought you were never coming, dear," she said.

I knew that I was very pale, but she did not remark it. I got into bed,
but left the candle still burning.

Presently she said:

"Why don't you put the candle out?"

I looked at her furtively. Her face seemed to me carved in stone, it was
so rigid, so expressionless. She lay away from me at the extreme edge of
the bed, sideways, with her hands toward me.

"Why don't you?" she repeated, with her blue eyes on me.

"I don't feel sleepy," I answered slowly.

"You never will while there is a light in the room," she said.

"You wish me to put it out?"

"Yes. How odd you are to-night, Ronald! Is anything the matter?"

"No," I answered; and I blew the light out.

How ghastly the darkness was!

I believed she meant to smother me in my sleep. I knew it. I determined
to keep awake.

It was horrible to think that, as we lay there, she could see me all the
time as if it were daylight.

The night wore on. She was quite silent and motionless. I lay listening.

It must have been towards morning when I closed my eyes, not because I
was sleepy, but because I was so tired of gazing at blackness.

Soon after I had done this there was a stealthy movement in the bed.

"Margot, are you awake?" I instantly cried out sharply.

The movement immediately ceased. There was no reply.

When the light of dawn stole in at the window she seemed to be sleeping.

*****

Last night I did not close my eyes once. She did not move.

She means to tire me out, and she has the strength to do it. To-night I
feel so intensely heavy. Soon I must sleep, and then----

Shall I seek any longer to defend myself? Everything seems so
inevitable, so beyond my power, like the working of an inexorable
justice bent on visiting the sin of the father upon the child. For was
not the cruel boy the father of the man?

And yet, is this tragedy inevitable? It cannot be. I will be a man. I
will rise up and combat it. I will take Margot away from this house
that her soul remembers, in which its body so long ago was tortured and
slain, and she will--she must forget.

Instinct will sleep once more. It shall be so. I will have it so. I will
strew poppies over her soul. I will take her far away from here, far
away, to places where she will be once more as she has been.

To-morrow we will go. To-morrow----

*****

Ah, that cry! Was it my own? I am suffocating! What was that? The horror
of it! The pen has fallen from my hand. I must have slept; and I have
dreamed. In my dream she stole upon me, that white thing! Her velvety
hands were on my throat. The soul stared out from her eyes, the soul of
the cat! Even her body, her woman's body, seemed to change at the moment
of vengeance. She slowly strangled me, and as the breath died from me,
and my failing eyes gazed at her, she was no longer woman at all, but
something lithe and white and soft. Fur enveloped my throat. Those hands
were claws. That breath on my face was the breath of an animal. The body
had come back to companion the soul in its vengeance, the body of----

Ah, it was too horrible!

Can vengeance for the dead bring with it resurrection of the dead?

Hark! There is a voice calling to me from upstairs.

"Ronald, are you never coming? I am tired of waiting for you. Ronald!"

"Yes."

"Come to me!"

"And I must go."

*****

Just at the glimmer of dawn the first pale shaft of the sun struck
across a bed upon which lay the huddled and distorted corpse of a man.
His head was sunk down in the pillows. His eyes, that could not see,
stared towards the rising light. And from the open window of the chamber
of death a woman in a white wrapper leaned out, watching eagerly with
wide blue eyes the birds as they darted to and fro, rested on the
climbing creepers, or circled above the gorge through which the river
ran. Her set lips smiled. She looked like one calm, easy, and at peace.
Presently an unwary sparrow perched on the trellis beneath the window
just within her reach. Her white hand darted down softly, closed on the
bird. She vanished from the window.

Can the dead hear? Did he catch the sound of her faint, continuous
purring as she crouched with her prey upon the floor?






End of Project Gutenberg's The Return Of The Soul, by Robert S. Hichens

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RETURN OF THE SOUL ***

***** This file should be named 23419.txt or 23419.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/4/1/23419/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
