The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Phantom Of Bogue Holauba, by 
Charles Egbert Craddock    (AKA Mary Noailles Murfree)

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Phantom Of Bogue Holauba
       1911

Author: Charles Egbert Craddock    (AKA Mary Noailles Murfree)

Release Date: November 19, 2007 [EBook #23552]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHANTOM OF BOGUE HOLAUBA ***




Produced by David Widger






THE PHANTOM OF BOGUE HOLAUBA

By Charles Egbert Craddock

1911


Gordon never forgot the sensation he experienced on first beholding
it. There was no mist in the midnight. The moon was large and low. The
darkness of the dense, towering forests on either hand impinged in no
wise on the melancholy realm of wan light in which the Mississippi lay,
unshadowed, solitary, silent as always, its channel here a mile or more
in breadth.

He had been observing how the mighty water-course was sending out its
currents into a bayou, called Bogue Holauba, as if the larger stream
were a tributary of the lesser. This peculiarity of the river in the
deltaic region, to throw off volume instead of continually receiving
affluents, was unaccustomed to him, being a stranger to the locality,
and for a moment it focussed his interest The next, his every faculty
was concentrated on a singular phenomenon on the bank of the bogue.

He caught his breath with a gasp; then, without conscious volition, he
sought to explain it to his own shocked senses, to realize it as some
illusion, some combination of natural causes, the hour, the pallor
pervading the air, the distance, for his boat was near the middle of the
stream,--but the definiteness of the vision annulled his efforts.

There on the broad, low margin, distinct, yet with a coercive conviction
of unreality, the figure of a man drawn in lines of vague light paced
slowly to and fro; an old man, he would have said, bent and wizened,
swaying back and forth, in expressive contortions, a very pantomime of
woe, wringing gaunt hands and arms above his head, and now and again
bowing low in recurrent paroxysms of despair. The wind held its breath,
and the river, mute as ever, made no sign, and the encompassing alluvial
wilderness stood for a type of solitude. Only the splashing of the
paddle of the "dug-out" gave token of the presence of life in all the
land.

Gordon could not restrain his wonder. "What--what--is--that Thing--over
there on the bank of the bogue?" he called out to the negro servant who
was paddling the canoe.

He was all unprepared for the effect of his words. Indeed, he was fain
to hold hard to the gunwales. For the negro, with a sudden galvanic
start, let slip the paddle from his hand, recovering it only by a mighty
lunge in a mechanical impulse of self-preservation. The dug-out,
the most tricksy craft afloat, rocked violently in the commotion and
threatened to capsize. Then, as it finally righted, its course was
hastily changed, and under the impetus of panic terror it went shooting
down the river at a tremendous speed.

"Why, what does all this meant" demanded Gordon.

"Don't ye talk ter me, boss!" the boatman, with chattering teeth,
adjured his passenger. "Don't ye talk ter me, boss! Don't tell me ye
seed somepin over dar on Bogue Holauba--'kase ef ye _do_ I'se gwine ter
turn dis dug-out upside down an' swim out ter de Arkansas side. I ain't
gwine ter paddle dis boat fur no ghost-seer, sure 's ye are born. I
ain't gwine ter have no traffickin' wid ghosts nur ghost-seers nuther.
I'd die 'fore de year's out, sure!"

The sincerity of the servant's fright was attested by the change in
his manner. He had been hitherto all cheerful, though respectful,
affability, evidently bidding high for a tip. Now he crouched
disconsolate and sullen in his place, wielding the paddle with all his
might, and sedulously holding down his head, avoiding the stranger's
eye.

Gordon felt the whole situation in some sort an affront to his dignity,
and the apparition being withdrawn from view by the changed direction,
he was in better case to take account of this,--to revolt at the uncouth
character of the craft and guide sent for him; the absence of any
member of his entertainers family to welcome the visitor, here at their
instance and invitation; the hour of the night; the uncanny incident of
the inexplicable apparition,--but when that thought recurred to him he
sheered off precipitately from the recollection.

It had the salutary effect of predisposing him to make the best of the
situation. Being to a degree a man of the world and of a somewhat large
experience, he began to argue within himself that he could scarcely
have expected a different reception in these conditions. The great
river being at the stage known as "dead low water," steamboat travel
was practically suspended for the season, or he could have reached his
destination more directly than by rail. An accident had delayed the
train some seven hours, and although the gasoline launch sent to meet
him at the nearest way-station had been withdrawn at nightfall, since
he did not arrive, as his sable attendant informed him, the dug-out had
been substituted, with instructions to wait all night, on the remote
chance that he might come, after all.

Nevertheless, it was with an averse, disaffected gaze that he silently
watched the summit-line of foliage on either bank of the river glide
slowly along the sky, responsive to the motion of the boat. It seemed
a long monotony of this experience, as he sat listless in the canoe,
before a dim whiteness began to appear in a great, unbroken expanse in
the gradually enlarging riparian view--the glister of the moon on the
open cotton-bolls in the fields. The forests were giving way, the region
of swamp and bayou. The habitations of man were at hand, and when at
last the dug-out was run in to a plantation landing, and Kenneth Gordon
was released from his cramped posture in that plebeian craft, he felt
so averse to his mission, such a frivolous, reluctant distaste that he
marvelled how he was to go through with it at all, as he took his way
along the serpentine curves of the "dirt road," preceded by his guide,
still with eyes averted and sullen mien, silently bearing his suit-case.

A few turns, and suddenly a large house came into view, rearing its
white facade to the moonlight in the midst of a grove of magnolia trees,
immense of growth, the glossy leaves seeming a-drip with lustre as with
dew. The flight of steps and the wide veranda were here cumbered
with potted ferns and foliage plants as elsewhere, and gave the first
suggestion of conformity to the ways of the world that the adventure
had yet borne. The long, broad, silent hall into which he was ushered,
lighted only by a kerosene hand-lamp which the servant carried as he led
the way, the stairs which the guest ascended in a mansion of unconscious
strangers, all had teerie intimations, and the comfort and seclusion of
the room assigned to Gordon was welcome indeed to him; for, argue as he
might, he was conscious of a continuous and acute nervous strain. He had
had a shock, he was irritably aware, and he would be glad of rest and
quiet.

It was a large, square, comfortable room in one of the wings,
overlooking a garden, which sent up a delectable blend of fragrance
and dew through the white muslin curtains at the long, broad windows,
standing open to the night. On a table, draped with the inevitable
"drawn-work" of civilization, stood a lamp of finer fashion, but no
better illuminating facilities, than the one carried off by the darky,
who had made great haste to leave the room, and who had not lifted his
eyes toward the ill-omened "ghost-seer" nor spoken a word since Gordon
had blurted out his vision on Bogue Holauba. This table also bore a tray
with crackers and sandwiches and a decanter of sherry, which genially
intimated hospitable forethought. The bed was a big four-poster, which
no be-dizenment could bring within the fashion of the day. Gordon had
a moment's poignant recoil from the darkness, the strangeness, the
recollection of the inexplicable apparition he had witnessed, as his
head sank on the pillow, embroidered after the latest fads.

He could see through the open window that the moon was down at last and
the world abandoned to gloom. He heard from out some neighboring swamp
the wild lamenting cry of the crane; and then, listen as he might, the
night had lapsed to silence, and the human hearts in this house, all
unknown to him, were as unimagined, as unrelated, as unresponsive, as
if instead of a living, breathing home he lay in some mute city of the
dead.

The next moment, as it seemed, a sky as richly azure as the boasted
heavens of Italy filled his vision as he lifted himself on his elbow.
A splendid, creamy, magnolia bloom was swaying in the breeze, almost
touching the window-sill. There was a subdued, respectful knocking at
the door, which Gordon had a vague idea that he had heard before this
morning, preceding the announcement that breakfast was waiting. Tardily
mindful of his obligations as guest, he made all the speed possible in
his toilet, and soon issued into the hall, following the sound of voices
through the open doors, which led him presently to the threshold of the
breakfast-room.

There were two ladies at the table, one of venerable aspect, with short,
white curls, held from her face by side-combs, a modish breakfast-cap,
and a morning-gown of thin gray silk. The other was young enough to
be her daughter, as indeed she was, dressed in deep mourning. Rising
instantly from her place as hostess behind the silver service, she
extended her hand to the stranger.

"Mr. Gordon, is it not? I was afraid you would arrive during the night.
Mercy! So uncomfortable! How good of you to come--yes, indeed."

She sank into her chair again, pressing her black-bordered handkerchief
to her dark eyes, which seemed to Gordon singularly dry, round, and
glossy--suggestive of chestnuts, in fact. "So good of you to come," she
repeated, "to the house of mourning! Very few people have any talent for
woe, Mr. Gordon. These rooms have housed many guests, but not to weep
with us. The stricken deer must weep alone."

She fell to hysterical sobbing, which her mother interrupted by a
remonstrant "My dear, my dear!" A blond young man with a florid cheek
and a laughing blue eye, who sat in an easy posture at the foot of the
table, aided the diversion of interest "Won't you introduce me, Mrs.
Keene?--or must I take the opportunity to tell Mr. Gordon that I am Dr.
Rigdon, very much at his service."

"Mercy! yes, yes, indeed!" Mrs. Keene acceded as the two young men shook
hands; then, evidently perturbed by her lack of ceremony, she exclaimed
pettishly, "Where is Geraldine? She always sees to it that everybody
knows everybody, and that everybody is served at a reception or a tea. I
never have to think of such things if _she_ is in the house."

The allusions seemed to Gordon a bit incongruous with the recent heavy
affliction of the household. The accuracy with which the waves of red
hair, of a rich tint that suggested chemicals, undulated about the brow
of the widow, the art with which the mourning-gown brought out all the
best points and subdued the defects of a somewhat clumsy figure, the
suspicion of a cosmetic's aid in a dark line, scarcely perceptible
yet amply effective, under the prominent eyes, all contributed to the
determination of a lady of forty-five years of age to look thirty.

"Geraldine is always late for breakfast, but surely she ought to be down
by this time," Mrs. Brinn said, with as much acrimony as a mild old lady
could well compass.

"Oh, Geraldine reads half the night," explained Mrs. Keene. "Such an
injurious habit! Don't you think so, Mr. Gordon?"

"Oh, _she_ is all right," expostulated the young physician.

"Geraldine has a constitution of iron, I know," Mrs. Keene admitted.
"But, mercy!--to live in books, Mr. Gordon. Now, _I_ always wanted
to live in life,--in the world! I used to tell Mr. Keene"--even she
stumbled a trifle in naming the so recent dead. "I used to tell him that
he had buried the best years of my life down here in the swamp on the
plantation."

"Pleasant for Mr. Keene," Gordon thought.

"I wanted to live in life," reiterated Mrs. Keene. "What is a glimpse of
New Orleans or the White Sulphur Springs once in a great while!"

"'This world is but a fleeting show,'" quoted Rigdon, with a palpable
effort to laugh off the inappropriate subject.

"Oh, that is what people always tell the restricted, especially when
they are themselves drinking the wine-cup to the bottom."

"And finding the lees bitter," said Rigdon.

The widow gave an offhand gesture. "You learned that argument from
Geraldine--he is nothing but an echo of Geraldine, Mr. Gordon--now,
isn't he, Mamma?" she appealed directly to Mrs. Brinn.

"He seems to have a great respect for Geraldine's opinion," said Mrs.
Brinn primly.

"If I may ask, who is this lady who seems to give the law to the
community?" inquired Gordon, thinking it appropriate to show, and really
beginning to feel, an interest in the personnel of the entourage. "Am I
related to her, as well as to Mr. Keene?"

"No; Geraldine is one of the Norris family--intimate friends of ours,
but not relatives. She often visits here, and in my affliction and
loneliness I begged her to come and stay for several weeks."

Not to be related to the all-powerful Geraldine was something of a
disappointment, for although Gordon had little sentiment or ideality in
his mental and moral system, one of his few emotional susceptibilities
lay in his family pride and clannish spirit He felt for his own, and he
was touched in his chief altruistic possibility in the appeal that had
brought him hither. To his amazement, Mr. Keene, a second cousin whom he
had seldom even seen, had named him executor of his will, without bond,
and in a letter written in the last illness, reaching its destination
indeed after the writer's death, had besought that Gordon would be
gracious enough to act, striking a crafty note in urging the ties of
consanguinity.

But for this plea Gordon would have doubtless declined on the score
of pressure of business of his own. There were no nearer relatives,
however, and with a sense of obligation at war with a restive
indisposition, Gordon had come in person to this remote region to offer
the will for probate, and to take charge of the important papers and
personal property of the deceased. A simple matter it would prove,
he fancied. There was no great estate, and probably but few business
complications.

"Going home, Dr. George?" his hostess asked as the young physician made
his excuses for quitting the table before the conclusion of the meal.

"Dr. Bigdon is not staying in the house, then?" Gordon queried as the
door closed upon him, addressing the remark to the old lady by way of
politely including her in the conversation.

"No, he is a neighbor of ours--a close and constant friend to us." Mrs.
Brinn spoke as with grateful appreciation.

Mrs. Keene took a different view. "He just hangs about here on
Geraldine's account," she said. "He happens to be here today because
last night she took a notion that he must go all the way to Bogue
Holauba to meet you, if the train should stop at the station above; but
he was called off to attend a severe case of ptomaine poisoning."

"And did the man die?" Mrs. Brinn asked, with a sort of soft awe.

"Mercy! I declare I forgot to ask him if the man died or not," exclaimed
Mrs. Keene. "But that was the reason that only a servant was sent to
meet you, Mr. Gordon. The doctor looked in this morning to learn if you
had arrived safely, and we made him stay to breakfast with us."

Gordon was regretting that he had let him depart so suddenly.

"I thought perhaps, as he seems so familiar with the place he might
show me where Mr. Keene kept his papers. I ought to have them in hand at
once." Mrs. Keene remembered to press her handkerchief to her eyes,
and Gordon hastily added, "Since Dr. Big-don is gone, perhaps this
lady--what is her name?--Geraldine--could save you the trouble."

"Mercy, yes!" she declared emphatically. "For I really do not know where
to begin to look. Geraldine will know or guess. I'll go straight and
rouse Geraldine out of bed."

She preceded Gordon into the hall, and, flinging over her shoulder the
admonition, "Make yourself at home, I beg," ran lightly up the stairs.

Meantime Gordon strolled to the broad front door that stood open from
morning to night, winter and summer, and paused there to light his
cigar. All his characteristics were accented in the lustre of the vivid
day, albeit for the most part they were of a null, negative tendency,
for he had an inexpressive, impersonal manner and a sort of aloof,
reserved dignity. His outward aspect seemed rather the affair of his
up-to-date metropolitan tailor and barber than any exponent of his
character and mind. He was not much beyond thirty years of age, and
his straight, fine, dark hair was worn at the temples more by the
fluctuations of stocks than the ravages of time. He was pale, of medium
height, and slight of build; he listened with a grave, deliberate
attention and an inscrutable gray eye, very steady, coolly observant, an
appreciable asset in the brokerage business. He was all unaccustomed to
the waste of time, and it was with no slight degree of impatience that
he looked about him.

The magnolia grove filled the space to the half-seen gate in front of
the house, but away on either side were long vistas. To the right the
river was visible, and, being one of the great bends of the stream, it
seemed to run directly to the west, the prospect only limited by the
horizon line. On the other side, a glare, dazzlingly white in the
sun, proclaimed the cotton-fields. Afar the gin-house showed, with its
smoke-stack, like an obeliscal column, from which issued heavy coils
of vapor, and occasionally came the raucous grating of a screw, telling
that the baler was at work. Interspersed throughout the fields were the
busy cotton-pickers, and now and again rose snatches of song as they
heaped the great baskets in the turn-rows.

Within the purlieus of the inclosure about the mansion there was no
stir of industry, no sign of life, save indeed an old hound lying on the
veranda steps, looking up with great, liquid, sherry-tinted eyes at the
stranger, and, though wheezing a wish to lick his hand, unable to muster
the energy to rise.

After an interval of a few moments Gordon turned within. He felt that he
must forthwith get at the papers and set this little matter in order.
He paused baffled at the door of the parlor, where satin damask and
rosewood furniture, lace curtains and drawn shades, held out no promise
of repositories of business papers. On the opposite side of the hall was
a sitting-room that bore evidence of constant use. Here was a desk
of the old-fashioned kind, with a bookcase as a superstructure, and a
writing-table stood in the centre of the floor, equipped with a number
of drawers which were all locked, as a tentative touch soon told. He
had not concluded its examination when a step and rustle behind him
betokened a sudden entrance.

"Miss Geraldine Norris!" a voice broke upon the air,--a voice that he
had not before heard, and he turned abruptly to greet the lady as she
formally introduced herself.

A veritable Titania she seemed as she swayed in the doorway. She was
a little thing, delicately built, slender yet not thin, with lustrous
golden hair, large, well-opened, dark blue eyes, a complexion daintily
white and roseate,--a fairy-like presence indeed, but with a prosaic,
matter-of-fact manner and a dogmatic pose of laying down the law.

Gordon could never have imagined himself so disconcerted as when she
advanced upon him with the caustic query, "Why did you not ask Mrs.
Keene for her husband's keys? Surely that is simple enough!" She flung
a bunch of keys on a steel ring down upon the table. "Heavens! to be
roused from my well-earned slumbers at daybreak to solve this problem!
'Hurryf Hurry! Hurry!'" She mimicked Mrs. Keene's urgency, then broke
out laughing.

"Now," she demanded, all unaffected by his mien of surprised and
offended dignity, "do you think yourself equal to the task of fitting
these keys,--or shall I lend you my strong right arm!"

It is to be doubted if Gordon had ever experienced such open ridicule
as when she came smiling up to the table, drawing back the sleeve of her
gown from her delicate dimpled wrist. She wore a white dress, such as
one never sees save in that Southern country, so softly sheer, falling
in such graceful, floating lines, with a deep, plain hem and no touch of
garniture save, perhaps, an edge of old lace on the surplice neck. The
cut of the dress showed a triangular section of her soft white chest and
all the firm modelling of her throat and chin. It was evidently not a
new gown, for a rent in one of the sleeves had been sewed up somewhat
too obviously, anil there was a darn on the shoulder where a rose-bush
had snagged the fabric. A belt of black velvet, with long, floating
sash-ends, was about her waist, and a band of black velvet held in place
her shining hair.

"I am sorry to have been the occasion of disturbing you," he said with
stiff formality, "and I am very much obliged, certainly," he added, as
he took up the keys.

"I may consider myself dismissed from the presence?" she asked saucily.
"Then, I will permit myself a cup of chocolate and a roll, and be ready
for any further commands."

She frisked out of the door, and, frowning heavily, he sat down to the
table and opened the top-drawer, which yielded instantly to the first
key that he selected.

The first paper, too, on which he laid his hand was the will, signed and
witnessed, regularly executed, all its provisions seeming, as he glanced
through it, reasonable and feasible. As he laid it aside, he experienced
the business man's satisfaction with a document duly capable of the
ends desired. Then he opened with a sudden flicker of curiosity a bulky
envelope placed with the will and addressed to himself. He read it
through, the natural interest on his face succeeded by amazement,
increasing gradually to fear, the chill drops starting from every pore.
He had grown ghastly white before he had concluded the perusal, and for
a long time he sat as motionless as if turned to stone.

The September day glowed outside in sumptuous splendor. A glad wind
sprang up and sped afield. Geraldine, her breakfast finished, a broad
hat canted down over her eyes, rushed through the hall as noisily as a
boy, prodded up the old hound, and ran him a race around the semicircle
of the drive. A trained hound he had been in his youth, and he was
wont to conceal and deny certain ancient accomplishments. But even
he realized that it was waste of breath to say nay to the persistent
Geraldine. He resigned himself to go through all his repertoire,--was a
dead dog, begged, leaped a stick back and forth, went lame, and in his
newly awakened interest performed several tricks of which she had
been unaware. Her joyful cries of commendation--"Played an encore! _an
encore!_ He did, he did! Cutest old dog in the United States!" caught
Mrs. Keene's attention.

"Geraldine," she screamed from an upper window, "come in out of the sun!
You will have a sun-stroke--and ruin your complexion besides! You know
you ought to be helping that man with those papers,--he won't be able
to do anything without you!" Her voice quavered on the last words, as if
she suddenly realized "that man" might overhear her,--as indeed he did.
But he made no sign. He sat still, stultified and stony, silently gazing
at the paper in his hands.

When luncheon was announced, Gordon asked to have something light sent
in to him, as he wished not to be disturbed in his investigation of the
documents. He had scant need to apprehend interruption, however, while
the long afternoon wore gradually away. The universal Southern siesta
was on, and the somnolent mansion was like the castle of Sleeping
Beauty. The ladies had sought their apartments and the downy couches;
the cook, on a shady bench under the trellis, nodded as she seeded the
raisins for the frozen pudding of the six-o'clock dinner; the waiter had
succumbed in clearing the lunch-table and made mesmeric passes with the
dish-rag in a fantasy of washing the plates; the stable-boy slumbered
in the hay, high in the loft, while the fat old coachman, with a
chamois-skin in his hand, dozed as he sat on the step of the surrey,
between the fenders; the old dog snored on the veranda floor, and Mrs.
Keene's special attendant, who was really more a seamstress than a
ladies' maid, dreamed that for some mysterious reason she could not
thread a needle to fashion in a vast hurry the second mourning of her
employer, who she imagined would call for it within a week!

Outside the charmed precincts of this Castle Indolence, the busy
cotton-pickers knew no pause nor stay. The steam-engine at the gin
panted throughout all the long hot hours, the baler squealed and rasped
and groaned, as it bound up the product into marketable compass, but
there was no one waking near enough to note how the guest of the mansion
was pacing the floor in a stress of nervous excitement, and to comment
on the fact.

Toward sunset, a sudden commotion roused the slumbrous place. There had
been an accident at the gin,--a boy had been caught in the machinery and
variously mangled. Dr. George Eigdon had been called and had promptly
sewed up the wounds. A runner had been sent to the mansion for bandages,
brandy, fresh clothing, and sundry other collateral necessities of the
surgery, and the news had thrown the house into unwonted excitement.

"The boy won't die, then?" Geraldine asked of a second messenger, as he
stood by the steps of the veranda, waiting for the desired commodities.

"Lawdy,--_no_, ma'am! He is as good as new! Doc' George, _he_ fix him
up."

Gordon, whom the tumult had summoned forth from his absorptions, noted
Geraldine's triumphant laugh as she received this report, the toss of
her spirited little head, the light in her dark blue eyes, deepening
to sapphire richness, her obvious pride in the skill, the humanitarian
achievement, of her lover. Dr. George must be due here this evening, he
fancied. For she was all freshly bedight; her gown was embellished with
delicate laces, and its faint green hue gave her the aspect of some
water-sprite, posed against that broad expanse of the Mississippi River,
that was itself of a jade tint reflected from a green and amber sky;
at the low horizon line the vermilion sun was sinking into its swirling
depths.

Gordon perceived a personal opportunity in the prospect of this guest
for the evening. He must have counsel, he was thinking. He could not act
on his own responsibility in this emergency that had suddenly confronted
him. He was still too overwhelmed by the strange experience he had
encountered, too shaken. This physician was a man of intelligence, of
skill in his chosen profession, necessarily a man worth while in many
ways. He was an intimate friend of the Keene family, and might the more
heartily lend a helping hand. The thought, the hope, cleared Gordon's
brow, but still the impress of the stress of the afternoon was so marked
that the girl was moved to comment in her brusque way as they stood
together on the cool, fern-embowered veranda.

"Why, Mr. Gordon," she exclaimed in surprise, "you have no idea how
strange you look! You must have overworked awfully this afternoon. Why,
you look as if you had seen a ghost!"

To her amazement, he recoiled abruptly. Involuntarily, he passed his
hand over his face, as if seeking to obliterate the traces she had
deciphered. Then, with an obvious effort, he recovered a show of
equanimity; he declared that it was only because he was so tousled in
contrast with her fresh finery that she thought he looked supernaturally
horrible! He would go upstairs forthwith and array himself anew.

Gordon proved himself a true prophet, for Rigdon came to dine. With the
postprandial cigars, the two gentlemen, at Gordon's suggestion, repaired
to the sitting-room to smoke, instead of joining their hostess on the
veranda, where tobacco was never interdicted. Indeed, they did not come
forth thence for nearly two hours, and were palpably embarrassed when
Geraldine declared in bewilderment, gazing at them in the lamplight
that fell from within, through one of the great windows, that now _both_
looked as if they had seen a ghost!

Despite their efforts to sustain the interest of the conversation,
they were obviously distrait, and had a proclivity to fall into sudden
silences, and Mrs. Keene found them amazingly unresponsive and dull.
Thus it was that she rose as if to retire for the night while the hour
was still early. In fact, she intended to utilize the opportunity to
have some dresses of the first mourning outfit tried on, for which the
patient maid was now awaiting her.

"I leave you a charming substitute," she said in making her excuses.
"Geraldine need not come in yet--it is not late."

Her withdrawal seemed to give a fresh impetus to some impulse with which
Rigdon had been temporizing. He recurred to it at once. "You contemplate
giving it to the public," he said to Gordon; "why not try its effect on
a disinterested listener first, and judge from that?"

Gordon assented with an extreme gravity that surprised Geraldine; then
Rigdon hesitated, evidently scarcely knowing how to begin. He looked
vaguely at the moon riding high in the heavens above the long, broad
expanse of the Mississippi and the darkling forests on either hand.
Sometimes a shaft of light, a sudden luminous glister, betokened the
motion of the currents gliding in the sheen. "Last night," he said in
a tense, bated voice--"last night Mr. Gordon saw the phantom of Bogue
Holauba, Stop! Hush!"--for the girl had sprung half screaming from her
chair. "This is important." He laid his hand on her arm to detain her.
"We want you to help us!"

"Help you! Why, you scare me to death!" She had paused, but stood
trembling from head to foot.

"There is something explained in one of Mr. Keene's papers,--addressed
to Mr. Gordon; and we have been much startled by the coincidence of
his--his vision."

"Did he see--really----?" Geraldine had sunk back in her chair, her face
ghastly pale.

"Of course it must be some illusion," said Rigdon. "The effect of the
mist, perhaps----"

"Only, there was no mist," said Gordon.

"Perhaps a snag waving in the wind."

"Only, there was no wind."

"Perhaps a snag tossing in the motion of the water,--at all events,
you can't say there was no water." Dr. Rigdon glanced at Gordon with a
genial smile.

"Mighty little water for the Mississippi," Gordon sought to respond in
the same key.

"You know the record of these apparitions." Leaning forward, one arm on
his knee, the document in question in his hand, Rigdon looked up into
Geraldine's pale face. "In the old days there used to be a sort of
water-gypsy, with a queer little trading-boat that plied the region
of the bends--a queer little old man, too--Polish, I think, foreign
certainly--and the butt of all the wags alongshore, at the stores and
the wood-yards, the cotton-sheds and the wharf-boats. By some accident,
it was thought, the boat got away when he was befuddled with drink in a
wood-chopper's cabin--a stout, trig little craft it was! When he
found it was gone, he was wild, for although he saw it afloat at a
considerable distance down the Mississippi, it suddenly disappeared near
Bogue Holauba, cargo and all. No trace of its fate was ever discovered.
He haunted these banks then--whatever he may have done since--screaming
out his woes for his losses, and his rage and curses on the miscreants
who had set the craft adrift--for he fully believed it was done in
malice--beating his breast and tearing his hair. The Civil War came on
presently, and the man was lost sight of in the national commotions.
No one thought of him again till suddenly something--an apparition, an
illusion, the semblance of a man--began to patrol the banks of Bogue
Holauba, and beat its breast and tear its hair and bewail its woes in
pantomime, and set the whole country-side aghast, for always disasters
follow its return."

"And how do you account for that phase?" asked Gordon, obviously
steadying his voice by an effort of the will.

"The apparition always shows up at low water,--the disasters are usually
typhoid," replied the physician.

"Mr. Keene died from malaria,"

Geraldine murmured musingly.

The two men glanced significantly at each other. Then Rigdon resumed:
"I mustered the hardihood on one occasion to row up to the bank of Bogue
Holauba for a closer survey. The thing vanished on my approach. There
was a snag hard by, fast anchored in the bottom of the Bogue. It played
slackly to and fro with the current, but I could not see any way by
which it or its shadow could have produced the illusion."

"Is this what you had to tell me?" demanded Geraldine pertinently. "I
knew all that already."

"No, no," replied the Doctor reluctantly. "Will you tell it, Mr. Gordon,
or shall I?"

"You, by all means, if you will," said Gordon gloomily. "God knows I
should be glad never to speak of it."

"Well," Rigdon began slowly, "Mr. Gordon was made by his cousin Jasper
Keene not only the executor of his will, but the repository of a certain
confession, which he may destroy or make public as he sees proper. It
seems that in Mr. Keene's gay young days, running wild in his vacation
from college on a secluded plantation, he often lacked congenial
companionship, and he fell in with an uncouth fellow of a lower
social grade, who led him into much detrimental adventure. Among other
incidents of very poor fun, the two were notable in hectoring and guying
the old Polish trader, who, when drunk on mean whisky as he often was,
grew violent and antagonistic. He went very far in his denunciations one
fatal night, and by way of playing him a trick in return, they set his
boat adrift by cutting the rope that tied the craft to a tree on the
bank. The confession states that they supposed the owner was then aboard
and would suffer no greater hardship than having to use the sweeps
with considerable energy to row her in to a landing again. They were
genuinely horrified when he came running down the bank, both arms
out-stretched, crying out that his all, _his all_ was floating away on
that tumultutius, merciless tide. Before any skiff could be launched,
before any effort could be made to reach the trading-boat, she suddenly
disappeared. The Mississippi was at flood height, and it was thought
that the boat struck some drifting obstruction, swamped, and went down
in deep water. The agents in this disaster were never suspected, but as
soon as Jasper Keene had come of age, and had command of any means of
his own, his first act was to have an exhaustive search made for the
old fellow, with a view of financial restitution. But the owner of the
trading-boat had died, spending his last years in the futile effort to
obtain the insurance money. As the little he had left was never claimed,
no representative could profit by the restitution that Jasper Keene had
planned, and he found what satisfaction he could in giving it secretly
to an old man's charity. Then the phantom began to take his revenge. He
appeared on the banks of Bogue Holauba, and straightway the only child
of the mansion sickened and died. Mr. Keene's first wife died after the
second apparition. Either it was the fancy of an ailing man, or perhaps
the general report, but he notes that the spectre was bewailing its woes
along the banks of Bogue Holauba when Jasper Keene himself was stricken
by an illness which from the first he felt was fatal."

"I remember--I remember it was said at the time," Geraldine barely
whispered.

"And now to the question: he leaves it to Mr. Gordon as his kinsman,
solicitous of the family repute, to judge whether this confession
should be made public or destroyed."

"Does he state any reasons for making it public?" demanded Geraldine,
taking the document and glancing through its pages.

"Yes; as an expiation of his early misdeeds toward this man and, if any
such thing there be, to placate the spirit of his old enemy; and lastly
better to secure his peace with his Maker."

"And which do you say!" Geraldine turned an eager, spirited face toward
Gordon, his dejected attitude and countenance distinctly seen in the
light from the lamp within the parlor, on a table close to the window.

"I frankly admit that the publication of that confession would humiliate
me to the ground, but I fear that it _ought_ to be given to the public,
as he obviously desires!"

"And which do _you_ say!" Geraldine was standing now, and swiftly
whirled around toward Dr. Bigdon.

"I agree with Mr. Gordon--much against my will--but an honest confession
is good for the soul!" he, replied ruefully.

"You infidels!" she exclaimed tumultuously. "You have not one atom of
Christian faith between you! To imagine that _you_ can strike a bargain
with the good God by letting a sick theory of expiation of a dying,
fever-distraught creature besmirch his repute as a man and a gentleman,
make his whole life seem like a whited sepulchre, and bring his name
into odium,--as kind a man as ever lived,--and you know it!--as honest,
and generous, and whole-souled, to be held up to scorn and humiliation
because of a boyish prank forty years ago, that precipitated a disaster
never intended,--bad enough, silly enough, even wicked enough, but not
half so bad and silly and wicked as _you_, with your morbid shrinking
from moral responsibility, and your ready contributive defamation of
character. Tell me, you men, is this a testamentary paper, and you think
it against the law to destroy it!"

"No, no, not that," said Bigdon.

"No, it is wholly optional," declared Gordon.

"Then, I will settle the question for you once for all, you wobblers!"
She suddenly thrust the paper into the chimney of the lamp on the table
just within the open window, and as it flared up she flung the document
forth, blazing in every fibre, on the bare driveway below the veranda.
"And now you may find, as best you can, some other means of exorcising
the phantom of Bogue Holauba!"






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Phantom Of Bogue Holauba, by 
Charles Egbert Craddock    (AKA Mary Noailles Murfree)

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PHANTOM OF BOGUE HOLAUBA ***

***** This file should be named 23552.txt or 23552.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/5/5/23552/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
