The Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventures in Africa, by W.H.G. Kingston

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Adventures in Africa
       By an African Trader

Author: W.H.G. Kingston

Release Date: November 21, 2007 [EBook #23575]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES IN AFRICA ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Adventures in Africa, by W.H.G. Kingston.

________________________________________________________________________
In this book the hero, fresh from school, arrives from England, and
joins his uncle, who is a trader with the people of central Africa,
bringing the goods obtained down to the south.  On this occasion they
have been attacked soon after they set out by natives led by Boers.  In
order to complete their journey to central Africa they decide to return
with the few animals left to them, horses and an ox, over the Kalahari
Desert.  Unfortunately they encamp one night in a place infested with
the tsetse flies, which kills the horses.  Shortage of water and attacks
by various wild beasts such as elephants and a hippopotamus, are some of
the adventures described.

Adventures they have in plenty, almost too many, for one of their number
is killed.  They also kill far too many animals, as was the custom in
Victorian times.

It is a short book, that won't take long to listen to, or to read.

________________________________________________________________________
ADVENTURES IN AFRICA, BY W.H.G. KINGSTON.



CHAPTER ONE.

"How many more days, Jan, will it be before we get across this
abominable desert?"  I asked of our black guide, as we trudged along, he
leading our sole remaining ox, while my uncle, Mr Roger Farley, and I
led our two horses laden with the remnants of our property.

"May be ten days, may be two ten," answered Jan Jigger, whose knowledge
of numerals was somewhat limited.

I gave a groan, for I was footsore and weary, and expected to have had a
more satisfactory answer.  We were making our way over a light-coloured
soft sand, sprinkled in some places with tall grass, rising in tufts,
with bare spots between them.  In other parts were various creeping
plants, and also--though I called the region a desert--there were
extensive patches of bushes, above which here and there rose clumps of
trees of considerable height.  This large amount of vegetation, however,
managed to exist without streams or pools, and for miles and miles
together we had met with no water to quench our own thirst or that of
our weary beasts.  My uncle was engaged in the adventurous and not
unprofitable occupation of trading with the natives in the interior of
Africa.  He had come down south some months before to dispose of the
produce of his industry at Graham's Town, where I had joined him, having
been sent for from England.  After purchasing a fresh supply of goods,
arms, powder, and shot, and giving a thorough repair to his waggons, he
had again set off northward for the neighbourhood of lake Ngami, where
he was to meet his partner, Mr Welbourn, who had with him his son
Harry, with whom I had been at school, and who was about my own age.  We
had, beyond the borders of the colony, been attacked by a party of
savages, instigated by the Boers, two or three of whom indeed led them.
They had deprived us of our cattle and men, we having escaped with a
small portion only of our goods, two of our horses, a single ox and our
one faithful Bechuana.  To get away from our enemies we had taken a
route unusually followed across the Kalahari desert.  We were aware of
the dangers and difficulties to be encountered, but the road was much
shorter than round either to the east or west; and though we knew that
wild animals abounded, including elephants, rhinoceroses, lions,
leopards, and hyaenas, yet we believed that we should be able to contend
with them, and that we should not be impeded by human savages.  Day
after day we trudged forward.  The only water we could obtain was by
digging into certain depressions in the ground which our guide pointed
out, when, having scraped out the sand with the single spade we
possessed and our hands, we arrived at a hard stratum, beyond which he
advised us not to go.  In a short time the water began to flow in
slowly, increasing by degrees until we had enough for ourselves and our
cattle.

We had now, however, been travelling sixty miles or more, without
finding one of these water-holes; and though we had still a small
quantity of the precious liquid for ourselves, our poor horses and ox
had begun to suffer greatly.  Still Jan urged us to go forward.

"Water come soon, water come soon!" he continued saying, keeping his eye
ranging about in every direction in search of the expected hole.

Trusting to Jan's assurances, thirst compelled us to consume the last
drop of our water.  Still, hour after hour went by, and we reached no
place at which we could replenish it.  Our sufferings became terrible.
My throat felt as if seared by a hot iron.  Often I had talked of being
thirsty, but I had never before known what thirst really was.  My uncle,
I had no doubt, was suffering as much as I was, but his endurance was
wonderful.

We had seen numbers of elands sporting round us in every direction, but
as soon as we approached them, off they bounded.

"Surely those deer do not live without water; it cannot be far away," I
observed.

"They are able to pass days and weeks without tasting any," said my
uncle.  "They can besides quickly cover thirty or forty miles of ground
if they wish to reach it.  We must try to shoot one of them for supper,
which may give us both meat and drink.  See, in the wood yonder we can
leave our horses and the ox under Jan's care, and you and I will try to
stalk one of the animals."

On reaching the wood, my uncle and I, with our guns in our hands, took a
direction which would lead us to leeward of the herd, so that we might
not be scented as we approached.

By creeping along under the shelter of some low bushes as we neared
them, the elands did not see us.  Hunger and thirst made us unusually
cautious and anxious to kill one.  My uncle told me to reserve my fire,
in case he should fail to bring the eland down; but as he was a much
better shot than I was, I feared that should he miss, I also should
fail.  Presently I saw him rise from among the grass.  Lifting his rifle
to his shoulder he fired; the eland gave a bound, but alighting on its
feet was scampering off, when I eagerly raised my rifle and pulled the
trigger.  As the smoke cleared off, to my infinite delight I saw the
eland struggling on the grass.  We both rushed forward, and my uncle's
knife quickly deprived it of life.  It was a magnificent animal, as big
as an ox, being the largest of the South African antelopes.

On opening its stomach we discovered water, which, on being allowed to
cool, was sufficiently pure to quench our burning thirst.  We secured a
portion of it for Jan, and loading ourselves with as much meat as we
could carry, we returned to where we had left him.  A fire was soon
lighted, and we lost no time in cooking a portion of the flesh.  With
our thirst partially relieved we were able to eat.  We had made our fire
at some distance from the shrubs for fear of igniting them, while we
tethered our horses and ox among the longest grass we could find.  In
that dry region no shelter was required at night, so we lay down to
sleep among our bales, with our saddles for pillows, and our rifles by
our sides.  I had been sleeping soundly, dreaming of purling streams and
babbling fountains, when I awoke to find my throat as dry and parched as
ever.  Hoping to find a few drops of water in my bottle, I sat up to
reach for it; when, as I looked across the fire, what was my dismay to
see a large tiger-like animal stealthily approaching, and tiger I fully
believed it to be.  On it came, exhibiting a pair of round bright
shining eyes.  I expected every moment to see it spring upon us.  I was
afraid that by crying out I might only hasten its movements, so I felt
for my rifle and, presenting at the creature's head shouted--

"A tiger, uncle; a tiger, Jan!"

"A tiger!" exclaimed my uncle, springing up in a moment.  "That's not a
tiger, it's a leopard, but if pressed by hunger may prove as ugly a
customer.  Don't fire until I tell you, for if wounded it will become
dangerous."

All this time the leopard was crawling on, though it must have heard the
sound of our voices; perhaps the glare of the fire in its eyes prevented
it from seeing us, for it still cautiously approached.  I saw my uncle
lift his rifle; he fired, but though his bullet struck the creature,
instead of falling as I expected, it gave a bound and the next instant
would have been upon us.  Now was my time.  As it rose, I fired, and my
bullet must have gone through its heart, for over it rolled without a
struggle, perfectly dead.

"Bravo!  Fred," exclaimed my uncle.  "This is the second time within a
few hours your rifle has done good service.  You'll become a first-rate
hunter if you go on as you've begun.  How that leopard came here it's
difficult to say, unless it was driven from the hills, and has been
wandering over the desert in search of prey; those creatures generally
inhabit a high woody country."

Jan exhibited great delight at our victory, and having made up the fire,
we spent some time in skinning the beast.  Its fur was of great beauty,
and although it would add to the load of our ox, we agreed to carry it
with us, as it would be a welcome present to any chief who might render
us assistance.

Having flayed the animal and pegged down the skin, we returned to our
beds, hoping to finish the night without interruption.  As soon as there
was light sufficient to enable us to see our way, we pushed forward,
earnestly praying that before the sun was high in the heavens, we might
fall in with water.  Notwithstanding that Jan repeatedly exclaimed,
"Find water soon!  Find water soon!" not a sign of it could we see.  A
glare from a cloudy sky was shed over the whole scene; clumps of trees
and bushes looking so exactly alike, that after travelling several
miles, we might have fancied that we had made no progress.  At length
even the trees and bushes became scarcer, and what looked like a
veritable desert appeared before us.

I had gone on a short distance ahead, when to my delight I saw in front
a large lake, in the centre of which the waves were dancing and
sparkling in the sunlight, the shadows of the trees being vividly
reflected on the mirror-like surface near the shores, while beyond I saw
what I took to be a herd of elephants flapping their ears and
intertwining their trunks.

"Water, water!"  I shouted; "we shall soon quench our thirst.  We must
take care to avoid those elephants, however," I added, pointing them out
to my uncle.  "It would be a fearful thing to be charged by them."

The horses and ox lifted up their heads and pressed forward.  Jan to my
surprise said nothing, though I knew he was suffering as well as my
uncle and I were.  I was rushing eagerly forward, when suddenly a haze
which hung over the spot, broke and dispelled the illusion.  A vast
salt-pan lay before us.  It was covered with an effervescence of lime,
which had produced the deceptive appearance.  Our spirits sank lower
than ever.  To avoid the salt-pan, we turned to the right, so as to
skirt its eastern side.  The seeming elephants proved to be zebras,
which scampered off out of reach.  We now began to fear that our horses
would give in, and that we should have to push forward with our ox
alone, abandoning everything it could not carry.  Still my uncle cried
"Forward!"  Jan had evidently mistaken the road, and passed the spot
where he had expected to find water.  Still he observed that we need
have no fear of pursuing our course.  Evening was approaching and we
must again camp: without water we could scarcely expect to get through
the night.

Presently Jan looking out ahead, darted forward and stopped at where a
small plant grew with linear leaves and a stalk not thicker than a
crow's quill.  Instantly taking a spade fastened to the back of the ox,
he began eagerly digging away; and after he had got down to the depth of
a foot, he displayed to us a tuber, the size of an enormous turnip.  On
removing the rind, he cut it open with his axe, and showed us a mass of
cellular tissue filled up with a juicy substance which he handed to us,
and applying a piece to his own mouth ate eagerly away at it.  We
imitated his example, and were almost immediately much refreshed.  We
found several other plants of the same sort, and digging up the roots
gave them to the horses and ox, who crunched them up with infinite
satisfaction.

Our thirst was relieved in a way I could scarcely have supposed
possible.  The animals too, trudged forward with far lighter steps than
before.  Relieved of our thirst and in the hopes of finding either water
or more tubers next morning, we lay down thankful that we had escaped
the fearful danger we had apprehended.  As we advanced we looked out
anxiously for the tuber-bearing plants, but not one could we see.  I had
gone on some little distance ahead, when I caught sight of a round
object some way off, which, as the rays of sun fell on it, appeared of
scarlet hue.  I ran towards it, when I saw what looked like a small
oblong red melon.

"Here's something worth having!"  I exclaimed, cutting into it with my
knife.  When I applied it to my mouth, to my disappointment I found
that, although juicy in the extreme, it was perfectly bitter.  I threw
it down in disgust.  Jan soon afterwards, on coming near, said:

"Dis no good, but find oders presently!"

Hurrying along, he struck one after another, and quickly handed me one
perfectly sweet; when he collected many more, with which we returned to
where my uncle had halted with the animals.

The fruit was far more gratifying to the taste than the tubers.  We
allowed the animals to eat as many as they wished, and, loading them
with a supply in case we should fail to find others further on, we
continued our journey.

Those melons lasted us another whole day and a night, and afforded the
only liquid which passed our mouths.  As we were on foot our view over
the level desert was limited.

I was walking alongside my uncle, discussing our future plans, having
begun to hope that, in spite of the difficulties we had to contend
against, we should get through, when I saw some objects moving rapidly
in the distance.  They were coming towards us.

"They are ostriches!" cried my uncle; "we must try and kill a few to
obtain their plumes."

We halted, and remained perfectly still, hoping that the birds might
approach us.  Now they ran as fleet as a race-horse, now they stopped
and went circling round.  Two or three odd-looking birds, as they
seemed, were moving at a much slower rate.

"Those Bosjeemen!" cried Jan.

We at length saw that the latter were human beings, their legs covered
with white pigment and carrying the head and feathers of an ostrich on
their backs, while each had in his hand a bow and a number of arrows.
Presently they cautiously approached the ostriches to leeward, stopping
every now and then and pretending to be feeding.  The ostriches would
look at the strange birds, but, not suspecting danger, allowed them to
approach.  One of the Bosjeemen then shot an arrow, when the wounded
bird and his companions ran off; the former, however, quickly dropped,
when the other birds stopped to see what was the matter, and thus
allowed their enemy to draw near enough to shoot another arrow.

In this way three little yellow-skinned fellows each shot, in a short
time, four magnificent ostriches.  They had seen us in the distance, but
instead of running away, as we feared they would do, one of them,
guessing we were traders, came forward to bargain for the sale of the
feathers, and Jan acting as interpreter, my uncle expressed a
willingness to trade.  The Bosjeemen then produced a number of reeds,
scarcely the thickness of my little finger.  Having plucked off the
feathers, they pushed them into the reeds; and, thus preserved, the
feathers were fit to travel any distance without being spoilt.

It was late by the time the whole operation was performed, and we had
given the articles they had agreed to take in exchange.  As the reeds
weighed but little, the loads were considerably lightened.

Jan now explained to our new friends that they would be further rewarded
if they would conduct us to water.  They at once agreed to do so, and
one of them, hurrying away to a spot at a distance where they had left
their travelling equipage, returned with a dozen ostriches' eggs in a
net at his back; he then made a sign to us to follow him, while his
companions remained with the ostriches they had shot.  Sooner than we
expected he reached a hole, into which he rapidly dug with his hand;
then, inserting a long reed, he began to suck away with might and main.
In a short time the water flowed, and was led down by another reed into
a hole at the end of an ostrich egg, which was soon filled with water.
As we had a leathern bucket we were enabled to give our animals a drink,
though we could not allow them as much as they would have liked.

The Bosjeeman then, refilling the egg-shells, returned with us to where
we had left his companions.  We found that they had built themselves a
hut, if so it could be called, in a thick mimosa bush, by bending the
boughs so as to form a roof, covered by reeds lightly fastened together.
The inside was lined with dried leaves, grass, and the coarser feathers
of the ostrich.  When they saw that we were encamped, the three hunters
lighted a fire and sat themselves down before it to enjoy a sumptuous
repast of ostrich flesh.  Though unattractive in appearance, they were
honest little fellows, and we slept in perfect security, knowing that
they would give us timely notice of the approach of an enemy.

Jan assured us that we might trust them, as it was a high mark of
confidence on their part to show us where we could procure water, for
they are always careful to hide such spots from those they think
unfriendly.

They accompanied us the following day, and led us to a pool, the only
one we had met with while crossing the desert.  Probably in many seasons
that also would have been empty.  Here our animals got as much water as
they could drink, and we filled our water-bottles.  We then parted from
our yellow friends, who said that, as they were ignorant of the country
to the northward, they could not venture farther.  Trusting to Jan's
sagacity to find water, we proceeded in good spirits.

We had hoped to trade largely with the natives, but as we had lost the
greater part of our goods, we should have to depend upon our own
exertions to obtain the ivory and skins which would repay us for the
difficulties and dangers of our journey.  We had fortunately saved the
greater part of our ammunition, which would enable us to hunt for some
months to come.

Of course we knew Mr Welbourn would be much disappointed at seeing us
arrive with so slender an equivalent for the skins and ivory my uncle
had taken south, instead of the waggon full of goods which he had
expected.

"He is a sensible, good-natured fellow, and will know that it was from
no fault of ours we were plundered," observed my uncle.  "We shall still
do well, and shall probably encounter more adventures than we should
have met with had we confined ourselves to simple trading with the
natives.  I should, however, have preferred that to undergoing the
fatigues of hunting; besides which we might the sooner have returned
with our cargo of ivory to the coast."

Several more days passed by during which we came to three spots where we
were able to obtain a sufficient amount of water to satisfy ourselves
and our thirsty animals.  Sometimes for miles together not a drop could
be procured, and had it not been for the tubers, and the little red
melons I have described, the horses and our patient ox must have
perished.  At length the sheen of water in the bright sunlight was seen
in the distance.  This time we were convinced that it was not a mirage.
We pushed forward, hoping that our sufferings from thirst were at an
end.  Trees of greater height than any we had yet met with since leaving
the colony fringed the banks of a fine river.  On examining the current
we found that it was flowing to the north-east, and we therefore hoped
that by following it up we should reach the lake for which we were
bound.  Our black guide, however, advised that we should cross the
river, which was here fordable, and by steering north, considerably
shorten the journey.  On wading through the water we looked out sharply
for crocodiles and hippopotami, lest one of those fresh-water monsters
should venture to attack us; we got over, however, without accident.
Having allowed our animals to drink their full of water, and replenished
our bottles, we encamped for the night under a magnificent _baobab_ tree
with a trunk seventy feet in girth as high as we could reach, while our
animals found an abundance of rich grass on which to satisfy their
hunger.

What pigmies we felt as we stood beneath that giant tree.  An army might
have found shelter from the sun under its wide-spreading boughs.  We
thought the spot a perfect paradise after our long journey across the
plain.

We had not long been seated round our camp-fire, when Jan made a dart at
his foot and caught a fly which had settled on it; and, exhibiting it to
my uncle, exclaimed--

"No good, no good!"

It was of a brownish colour with three yellow bars across the body, and
scarcely larger than a common house-fly.  We soon saw others buzzing
about in considerable numbers.

I asked Jan what he meant.

"Das de _tsetse_: when bite horse or ox den dey die," he answered.

As, however, neither my uncle nor I felt any ill effects from the bites
of the flies, we thought that Jan must be mistaken, and at all events it
was now too late to shift our encampment.  We therefore, having made up
a blazing fire to scare off any wild beasts, lay down to sleep, without
thinking more of the flies, which did not cause us any annoyance.

The next morning we saw some of the creatures on the legs of our horses
and the ox; but we soon brushed them away, and, loading up, we continued
our journey.  They went on as usual.  Jan, however, looked much
disconcerted, and I saw him continually brushing off the flies.

"No good, no good!" he said, "hope soon get through, for de horses not
go far."

I asked my uncle what Jan meant.  He replied that he had often heard of
the tsetse fly, but never having passed through a country infested by
it, he was disinclined to believe the stories told of the deadly effects
of its bite on cattle and horses.



CHAPTER TWO.

We soon passed through the tsetse district, which was not more than a
couple of miles wide, and, as our animals showed no appearance of
suffering, we hoped that they had escaped injury.

We had determined to encamp early in the day near a pool fed by a
rivulet which fell into the main stream, in order that we might shoot
some game for our supper.  Leaving Jan in charge of the camp, my uncle
and I set off, believing that we could easily find our way back to the
fire.  We had gone some distance when we caught sight of a herd of
antelopes.  In order that we might have a better chance of killing one
of them, my uncle told me to make a wide circuit, keeping to leeward of
the deer towards a clump of trees, whence I might be able to get a
favourable shot, while he lay down concealed by the brushwood near where
we then were.

Taking advantage of all the bushes and trunks of trees on the way, I
approached the antelopes without disturbing them.  Looking out from the
cover I had gained, I watched the beautiful creatures, hoping that one
of them would come within range of my rifle.  It was tantalising to see
them feeding so quietly just out of my reach.  Still, though I might not
get a shot, I hoped that they might go off towards where my uncle was
lying hid.  Presently, however, they bounded towards me; and, thinking
it possible that they might again turn, I fired at one of the leading
animals, which, notwithstanding its wound, still went on, though at
slackened speed.  Instead of reloading, as I ought to have done, I
dashed forward to secure it.  Scarcely, however, had I left my cover
than what was my surprise, and I must confess my dismay, to see a huge
lion!  Should I attempt to escape by flight, the savage brute would, I
knew, follow me.  I fixed my eyes as steadily as I could upon him, while
I attempted to reload.  At the same time I knew that, even should I
fire, I might only wound him, when he would become more fierce.  There
were trees near, up which it was possible I might climb should he give
me time, but it was not likely that he would do that.  I wondered that
he did not pursue the antelope; but probably he had lately had his
dinner, or he certainly would have done so.  I continued loading, he
lashing his tail and roaring furiously.  I expected every moment that he
would spring upon me.  To escape by any other way than by shooting him
dead seemed impossible.

I finished loading, and brought my gun up ready to fire.  Should I miss
or only wound him, he would be upon me in a moment.  I had hitherto
remained quite silent, but it occurred to me that if I should shout
loudly enough my uncle would hear my cry for help.  I thought, too, that
I might scare the lion.  When once I had made up my mind to shout, I did
so with might and main.

I was answered by a distant "hollo!" by which I knew that my uncle was
still a long way off.  He would, however, understand that I was in
danger, and come to my assistance; or, if too late to help me, would
provide for his own safety.

The lion seemed as undecided how to act as I was.  As I shouted he
roared, and again lashed his tail, but did not advance a step.  This
gave me courage; but, although the monarch of the forest did not appear
in a combative mood, I felt very sure that, should I wound him, his rage
would be excited.  I dared not for a moment withdraw my eye from him,
and thus we stood regarding each other.  To me it seemed a prodigiously
long time.  At last he seemed to lose patience, for his roars became
more frequent and louder and louder, and he lashed his tail more
furiously.  I raised my rifle to my shoulder.  He came on at a cat-like
pace, evidently ignorant of the power of the weapon I held in my hands.
In another instant he would spring at me.  I pulled the trigger.  To my
horror, the cap failed to ignite the powder.  I saw the monstrous brute
in the act of springing, but at the same moment I heard the crack of a
rifle close to me; the next, a tremendous roar rent the air.  I was
felled to the earth, and felt myself weighed down by a vast body, unable
to breathe or move.  It was some time before I came to myself, when,
looking up, I saw my uncle kneeling by my side.

"The lion very nearly did for you, Fred," he said; "but cheer up, lad.
I don't think you're mortally hurt, though you've had a narrow squeak
for it.  Had your gun not missed fire, you might have shot the lion
yourself.  Here he lies, and there's the springbok."

While my uncle was talking, he was examining my hurts.  The lion had
given me a fearful blow with his paw, and had injured one of my
shoulders.  It was a wonder indeed that he did not kill me.

"We must get you to the camp somehow," said my uncle; "I cannot leave
you here while I bring the ox, so the sooner we set off the better."

Taking me up in his arms, he began to stagger on with me; but, though he
was a strong man, I was no slight weight, and he had great difficulty in
getting along.  I asked him to let me walk, as I thought that I could do
so with his support.  When I tried, however, I found that I could not
move one foot before the other.  As we got within hail of the camp he
shouted to Jan to come and help him; and together they carried me along
the remainder of the distance.

"Now that we have you safe here, though I am unwilling to leave you, I
must go back and fetch the antelope, for we cannot do without food," he
said.

Telling Jan to collect materials for building a hut, as it was evident
that I should be unable to move for some time, and also charging him to
keep an eye on me, he started off.

I felt a great deal of pain, but I retained my senses, and tried to
divert my thoughts by watching Jan, who was busily employed in cutting
long sticks and branches for the hut.

It seemed to me that my uncle had been gone for more than an hour, and I
began to fear that some accident might have happened to him.  Where
there was one lion it was probable that there were others, and they
might revenge themselves on the slayer of their relative.

Jan, however, kept working away as if satisfied that all was right, now
and then taking a look at me, and throwing a few sticks on the fire to
get it to burn brightly.  He then began to prepare for roasting the
expected venison by placing some uprights, with cross pieces to serve as
spits, close to the fire.

"Hurrah! here am de Cap'n!" he at length shouted, such being the title
he usually bestowed on my uncle.  "He bring springbok, an' someting else
too."

I felt greatly relieved when I saw my uncle throw down his heavy load,
consisting not only of the antelope which I had shot, but of the lion's
skin.

"I brought this," he said, "to make a bed for you.  You want it, though
it is not fit at present to serve the purpose."

I thanked him for his offer, but declared that I would rather just then
be left where I was, as any movement pained me.

Jan lost no time in cutting off some pieces of venison, and placing them
to roast.  My uncle also put on a pot with a small portion to make some
soup, which he said would suit me better than the roast.  Hungry as I
was, though I tried to eat some of the latter as soon as Jan declared it
sufficiently done, I could not manage to get it down.  My thirst became
excessive, and it was fortunate that we were near water, or I believe I
should otherwise have died.

The hut was soon finished, and some leaves and grass placed in it for me
to lie upon.  The soup did me some good, but I suffered so much pain
that I could scarcely sleep all the night, and in the morning was in so
fevered a condition, that I was utterly unfit to travel.  I was very
sorry to delay my uncle, but it could not be helped, and he bore the
detention with his usual good temper.  Nothing could exceed his
kindness.  He sat by my side for hours together; he dressed my wounds
whenever he thought it necessary, and indeed tended me with the greatest
care.

Day after day, however, went by, and I still remained in the same
helpless state.  He would not have left me for a moment, I believe, but
it was necessary to go out and procure more game.

Jan had undertaken to scrape and prepare the lion's skin.  He was thus
employed near the stream at a little distance from the camp when I was
startled by hearing a loud snort; and, looking up, what was my horror to
see him rushing along, with a huge hippopotamus following him!  In
another minute I expected to see him seized by its formidable jaws and
trampled to death, and then I thought that the savage brute would make
at me.  In vain I attempted to rise and get my gun, but my uncle, when
he went out, had forgotten to place it near me.  I tried to cry out and
frighten the brute, but I could not raise my voice sufficiently high.
Poor Jan shrieked loud enough, but his cries had no effect on the
monster.  He was making for a tree, up which he might possibly have
climbed, when his feet slipped, and over he rolled on the ground.  He
was now perfectly helpless, and in a few minutes the hippopotamus would
trample him to death.  It seemed as if all hope was gone; but, at the
very instant that I thought poor Jan's death was certain, my uncle
suddenly appeared, when, aiming behind the ear of the hippopotamus, he
fired, and the monster fell.  Jan narrowly escaped being crushed, which
he would have been had he not by a violent effort rolled out of the way.

Suffering as I was, I could scarcely help laughing at Jan's face, as,
getting up on his knees, he looked with a broad grin at the
hippopotamus, still uncertain whether it was dead or not.  At length,
convinced that his enemy could do him no further harm, he rose to his
feet, exclaiming--

"Tankee, tankee, cap'n!  If de gun not go off, Jan no speak 'gain."

Then, hurrying on, he examined the creature, to be certain that no life
remained in it.

"What we do wid dis?" he asked, giving the huge body a kick with his
foot.

"As it will shortly become an unpleasant neighbour, we must manage to
drag him away from the camp," observed my uncle.  "If the stream were
deep enough, I would drag it in, and let it float down with the current;
but, as it would very likely get stranded close to us, we must haul it
away with the ox and the horses, though I doubt if the animals will like
being thus employed."

I thought the plan a good one; and my uncle told Jan to catch the horses
and ox, while he contrived some harness with the ropes and straps used
for securing their cargoes.  The ox showed perfect indifference to the
dead hippopotamus, but the horses were very unwilling to be harnessed.
They submitted, however, to act as leaders, while the ox had the
creature's head, round which a rope was passed, close to its heels.
Even then the animals found it no easy task to drag the huge body along
over the rough ground.

"We shall not be long gone, Fred," said my uncle, placing a rifle and a
brace of pistols close to me.  "I hope that no other hippopotamus or
lion or leopard will pay you a visit while we are away.  If they do, you
must use these, and I trust that you'll be able to drive off the
creatures, whatever they may be."

I felt rather uncomfortable at being left alone in the camp, but it
could not be helped; and I could only pray that another hippopotamus
might not make its appearance.  This one, in all probability, came up
the stream far from its usual haunts.

I kept my rifle and pistols ready for instant use.  The time seemed very
long.  As I listened to the noises in the forest, I fancied that I could
hear the roaring and mutterings of lions, and the cries of hyaenas.
Several times I took my rifle in my hand, expecting to see a lion
stealing up to the camp.  I caught sight in the distance of the tall
necks of a troop of giraffes stalking across the country, followed soon
afterwards by a herd of bounding blesboks, but no creatures came near
me.  At last my uncle and Jan returned with our four-footed attendants.

"We have carried the monster's carcase far enough off to prevent it from
poisoning us by its horrible odour when it putrifies, which it will in a
few hours," he observed.  "But I am afraid that it will attract the
hyaenas and jackals in no small numbers, so that we shall be annoyed by
their howls and screechings.  I am sorry to say also that the horses
seem ill able to perform their work, and I greatly fear that they have
been injured by the tsetse fly.  If we lose them we shall have a
difficulty in getting along.  However, we won't despair until the evil
day comes."

I should have said that my uncle, just before he rescued Jan from the
hippopotamus, had shot another antelope, which he had brought to the
camp, so that we were in no want of food.

Several days went by.  Though I certainly was not worse, my recovery was
very slow, and I was scarcely better able to travel than I was at first;
though I told my uncle that I would try and ride if he wished to move
on.

"I doubt if either of the horses can carry you," he answered.  "Both are
getting thin and weak, and have a running from their nostrils, which Jan
says is the result of the tsetse poison.  If you are better in a day or
two we will try and advance to the next stream or water-hole; and
perhaps we may fall in with natives, from whom we may purchase some oxen
to replace our horses.  It will be a great disappointment to lose the
animals, for I had counted on them for hunting."

That night we were entertained by a concert of hideous howlings and
cries, produced we had no doubt by the hyaenas and jackals; but by
keeping up a good fire, and occasionally discharging our rifles, we
prevented them from approaching the camp.

At the end of two days I fancied myself better.  We accordingly
determined the next morning to recommence our journey.  At daybreak we
breakfasted on the remains of the last deer shot, and my uncle having
placed me on his horse, which was the stronger of the two, put part of
its cargo on the other.  Pushing on, we soon left behind the camp we had
so long occupied.

On starting I bore the movement pretty well, and fancied that I should
be able to perform the journey without difficulty.  For the first two
days, indeed, we got on better than I had expected, though I was
thankful when the time for camping arrived.  On the third morning I
suffered much, but did not tell my uncle how ill I felt, hoping that I
should recover during the journey.  We had a wild barren tract to cross,
almost as wild as the desert.  The ox trudged on as patiently as ever,
but the horses were very weak, and I had great difficulty in keeping
mine on its legs.  Several times it had stumbled, but I was fortunately
not thrown off.  Our pace, however, was necessarily very slow, and we
could discover no signs of water, yet water we must reach before we
could venture to camp.

Jan generally led the ox, while my uncle walked by my side, holding the
rein of the other horse.  Again and again my poor animal had stumbled;
when, as my uncle was looking another way, down it came, and I was
thrown with considerable violence to the ground.

My uncle, having lifted me up, I declared that I was not much hurt, and
begged him to replace me on the horse.  The poor animal was unable to
rise.  In vain Jan and he tried to get it on its legs.  He and Jan took
off the saddle and the remaining part of the load, but all was of no
use.  At last we came to the melancholy conclusion that its death was
inevitable.  Our fears were soon realised: after it had given a few
struggles, its head sinking on the sand, it ceased to move.  We had
consequently to abandon some more of our heavier things, and having
transferred the remaining cargo to the ox, my uncle put me on the back
of the other horse.  Scarcely, however, had we proceeded a mile than
down it came, and I was again thrown to the ground, this time to be more
hurt than at first.

I bore the suffering as well as I could, and made no complaint, while my
uncle and Jan tried to get the horse up.  It was soon apparent, however,
that its travelling days were done, and that we had now the ox alone to
depend upon.

"I wish that I could walk," I said, but when I made the attempt I could
not proceed a dozen paces.  Had not my uncle supported me I should have
sunk to the ground.  We could not stay where we were, for both we and
our poor ox required water and food.

"We must abandon our goods," said my uncle; "better to lose them than
our lives.  We will, however, if we can find a spot near here, leave
them _en cache_, as the Canadian hunters say; and if we soon fall in
with any friendly natives, we can send and recover them."

He had just observed, he said, a small cave, and he thought that by
piling up some stones in front of it the things would remain uninjured
from the weather or wild beasts for a considerable time.

As it was only a short distance off, while Jan remained with me, he led
the ox to the spot.  The cave, fortunately, had no inhabitant; and,
having placed the goods within, and piled some stones so as completely
to block up the entrance, he returned, retaining only the powder and
shot, the ostrich feathers, three or four skins, our cooking utensils, a
few packages of tea, coffee, sugar, pepper, and similar articles
weighing but little.  Unfortunately, in building up the wall, one of the
larger stones had dropped, and severely injured his foot.  He found it
so painful that he was unable to walk.  He, therefore, mounting the ox,
took me up before him.  I, indeed, by this time could not even hold on
to the saddle, so had not he carried me I should have been unable to
travel.  We now once more went on.  It was already late in the day, and
before long darkness overtook us; still we could not stop without water,
which we hoped, however, to find before long.  In a short time the moon
rose and enabled us to see our way.

The prospect was dreary in the extreme.  Here and there a few trees
sprang out of the arid soil, while on every side were rocks with little
or no vegetation round them.  We looked out eagerly for water, but mile
after mile was passed over and not a pool nor stream could we see.  I
suffered greatly from thirst, and sometimes thought that I should
succumb.  My uncle cheered me up, and Jan declared that we should soon
reach water and be able to camp.  Still on and on we went.  At length
Jan cried out--

"Dare water, dare water!"

I tried to lift up my head, but had not strength to move.  I heard my
uncle exclaim--

"Thank heaven! there's water, sure enough.  I see the moonbeams playing
on the surface of a pool."

I believe I fainted, for I remember no more until I found him splashing
water over my face; and, opening my eyes.  I saw him kneeling by my
side.  Jan was busily engaged in lighting a fire, while the ox was
feeding not far off.  A hut was then built for me, and as soon as I was
placed in it I fell asleep.  In the morning I awoke greatly revived.  My
uncle said he was determined to remain at the spot until I was
sufficiently recovered to travel, and I promised to get well as soon as
I could.  When breakfast was over he started off with his gun to try and
shoot a deer, for we had just exhausted the last remnant of venison we
possessed.

As, sheltered from the rays of the sun, I lay in my hut, which was built
on a slight elevation above the lakelet, I could enjoy a fine view of
the country in front of me.

Jan, having just finished cleaning my gun, was engaged a little way
below me in cutting up the wood for the fire, singing in a low voice one
of his native songs.

Presently I caught sight of my uncle in the far distance advancing
towards a rounded hillock which rose out of the plain below.  Almost at
the same moment, I saw still further off several animals which I at once
knew to be deer coming on at a rapid rate towards our camp.  They were
taking a direction which would lead them close to where my uncle lay in
ambush.  They were followed by others in quick succession, until a vast
herd came scampering and bounding across the plain like an army, two or
three abreast, following each other.  Twice I heard the report of my
uncle's rifle.  On each occasion a deer fell to the ground.

Jan cried out that they were blesboks, one of the finest deer in South
Africa.  They had long twisting horns, and were of a reddish colour, the
legs being much darker, with a blaze of white on the face.

I never saw a more beautiful sight.  Jan was all eagerness, and, taking
my gun, he went in chase; but before he could get near enough to obtain
a shot, the whole herd was scampering away across the plain, laughing at
his puny efforts to overtake them.

In a short time my uncle appeared, carrying a portion of one of the
animals on his back, and immediately sent off Jan with the ox to fetch
in the remainder.

Here was wood and water, and game in abundance, so that we could not
have chosen a better spot for remaining in until I was myself again.  As
we had plenty of meat he was able to concoct as much broth as I could
consume.  It contributed greatly to restore my strength; and, judging by
the progress I was making, I hoped that we should be able shortly to
resume our journey.



CHAPTER THREE.

In a few days I was able to stroll a short distance from the camp,
always taking my gun with me.  Though I still walked with some
difficulty, I every hour found my strength returning.  Had we possessed
a waggon we might have loaded it with skins, so abundant was the game;
but, although we prepared a few of the most valuable, we could not
venture to add much to the cargo of our poor ox.  At last my uncle,
seeing that I was strong enough to undertake the fatigue of the journey,
announced his intention of setting off, and I determined that it should
not be my fault if I broke down again.

In order to try my strength, I accompanied him on a short shooting
excursion from the camp, where we left Jan to look after the ox and our
goods.  I found that I got along far better than I had expected; the
satisfaction of once more finding myself able to move about greatly
raising my spirits.  We had gone but a short distance when looking over
the bushes we saw some objects moving up and down which, as we crept
nearer, turned out to be a pair of elephant's ears.

"We must have that fellow," said my uncle; "we can carry his tusks, and
one of his feet will afford us a substantial meal."  The elephant, we
fancied, did not see us; and keeping ourselves concealed by the
underwood, we cautiously advanced.  Presently we found ourselves on the
borders of an open glade, a few low bushes only intervening between
ourselves and the elephant.  He now saw us clearly enough, and not
liking our appearance, I suppose, lifted up his trunk and began
trumpeting loudly.

"If he comes on, don't attempt to run," whispered my uncle, "but face
him for a moment, and fire at his shoulder; then leap on one side or
behind a tree, or if you can do so, climb up it with your rifle.  I will
look out for myself."  As he spoke the elephant began to advance towards
us.  I fired, as did my uncle, the moment afterwards; but, though we
both hit him, the huge beast, after approaching a few paces nearer,
instead of charging, turned away to the left, and went crashing through
the wood.

We having reloaded were about to follow him, when the heads of nearly a
dozen other elephants appeared from the direction where we had seen the
first; and, advancing rapidly through the shrubs which they trampled
under foot, with trunks and tail stuck out, and uttering loud
trumpetings, they came rushing like a torrent down upon us.

"Come behind these bushes!" cried my uncle, "and don't move thence if
you value your life."

I felt as if my life was of very little value just then, for I could not
see how we were to escape being crushed by the huge monsters as they
rushed over us.  My uncle fortunately possessed all the coolness
required by an elephant hunter.

"Fire at that fellow opposite," he cried.  "I'll take the next, and
they'll probably turn aside."

We almost at the same moment pulled our triggers.  The elephant at which
my uncle fired stopped short, then down it came with a crash on its
knees; while the one I aimed at rushed by with its companions, very
nearly giving me an ugly kick with its feet.

We had both dropped behind the bush the moment we had delivered our
fire.  On went the creatures trumpeting with rage, and disappointed at
not finding us.

We were not free from danger, for it was possible that they might
return.  As soon, therefore, as their tails had disappeared among the
brushwood, we reloaded and ran towards some trees, the trunks of which
would afford us some protection.  Here we waited a short time in sight
of the elephant which lay dead on the ground.  We could hear the
trumpeting of the others grow less distinct as they made their way
through the forest, either influenced by fear or excited by rage,
fancying they were still following us up.

"They will not come back for the present," said my uncle at length as we
issued out from among the trees, when he at once began to cut out the
tusks from the dead elephant.  These he calculated weighed together
fully a hundred and ten pounds.  This, however, was a greater weight
than he could carry, and he would not allow me to attempt to help him.

"You shall convey one of the feet to the camp, and we will try our skill
in cooking it," he said, dexterously cutting it off.

Taking a stick he ran it through the foot so that I could the more
easily carry it.  He then having shouldered one of the tusks, we set out
for the camp, well satisfied with our day's sport.

As soon as we arrived we sent off Jan for the other tusk, as he could
easily find the way by the track we had made; while my uncle dug a hole
close to the fire, into which he raked a quantity of ashes, and then
covered it up.  After some time he again scraped out the ashes, and
having wrapt the foot up in leaves, he put it into the hole, and covered
it up with hot earth.  On the top of all he once more lit a fire, and
kept it blazing away for some time.

The fire had well-nigh burnt out when Jan returned with the other tusk.
He told us that on his way back he had seen the spoors of the elephants,
and that if we chose to follow them, he was sure that we should come up
with them, and should most probably find those we had wounded.

We now uncovered our elephant's foot, which Jan pronounced to be as
satisfactorily cooked as his own countrymen could have done it.  The
flesh was soft and gelatinous, greatly resembling calves-head, and was
so tender that we could scoop it out with a spoon.  I don't know that I
ever enjoyed a meal more.  Although we could not venture to load our ox
with more than the two tusks we had already obtained, my uncle, hoping
soon to fall in with Mr Welbourn, determined to try and obtain the
tusks from the other two elephants we had wounded, and to leave them
concealed, until we could send for them.  There was the risk, of course,
of their being discovered by the natives, as we were now approaching an
inhabited part of the country.  We had still a couple of hours of
day-light, and as I did not feel myself fatigued with my previous
exertions, my uncle agreed to allow me to accompany him, while Jan was
left to clean the tusks and to prepare straps for carrying them on the
back of the ox.

We soon discovered the elephants' spoor, and followed it for some
distance, the splashes of blood we found here and there showing that the
wounded animal had stopped to rest.  It would be necessary, as we
approached them, to be cautious, as they would be on the alert and ready
to revenge themselves for the injury they had received.

We now every moment expected to come upon them.  We stopped to listen;
no sound could we hear to indicate that they were near us.  We,
therefore, went on until, reaching the top of a hillock, we caught sight
of some water glittering among the trees.  Advancing a little further a
small lakelet opened out before us, in the shallow part of which, near
the shore, stood an elephant, sucking up the water with his trunk and
throwing it over his neck and shoulders.

My uncle remarked that he was sure it was the animal we had wounded, but
that he was still too far off to give us a chance of killing him.  We
were making our way among the trees, hoping to got near without being
perceived--though that was no easy matter as he kept his sharp eyes
turning about in every direction--when, from behind the grove which had
before concealed them, several more rushed out.

"They see us!" cried my uncle.  "We must get up among the branches and
shoot them as they pass, for they will not let us escape as easily as
before."

Fortunately, near at hand was a tree, up which, without much difficulty,
we could make our way.  My uncle, going up first, helped me to follow
him.

Scarcely had we secured ourselves when the elephants came up with their
trunks sticking out and trumpeting as loudly as before.  As they kept
their eyes on the ground, they did not see us.  We fired at them as they
passed.

We remained for some time expecting the wounded elephant to follow its
companions, but as it did not we began to hope that it had succumbed,
and that we might find it dead in the neighbourhood.  We were about to
descend to look for it, when the heads of three giraffes, or
camelopards, as they are sometimes called, appeared among the trees; the
animals lifting up their tall necks to crop the leaves as they advanced.
As they were coming in our direction we agreed to wait.  By descending
we might frighten them.  In a short time one separated from the others,
and got so close that my uncle could not resist the temptation of
firing.  As the shot entered its neck the graceful animal sank down to
the ground, and lay perfectly dead.  The other two trotted off to a
short distance, alarmed by the report; but, seeing no human foe and not
knowing what had happened to their companion, they stopped and continued
browsing on the leaves as before.

"The chances are that they will soon come this way, and so we cannot do
better than remain where we are," observed my uncle.

We sat some time watching the graceful creatures as they stretched up
their long necks to a remarkable height, in search of the young shoots
and leaves.  Presently we saw one of them turn its head and look towards
its dead companion.  The next moment a lion burst out from among the
bushes and sprang towards the giraffe on the ground.  I had fancied that
lions never condescended to feast on a dead animal; but probably there
was still some little life in the giraffe, or, at all events, having
only just been killed, the carcase could have had no savoury odour.
Directly afterwards we heard a roar, and another lion sprang from the
cover, the first replying with a roar which made the welkin ring.  If we
could not kill the lions, it was evident that we should soon have none
of the meat to carry back with us.  Instead, however, of beginning to
tear the giraffe to pieces, the lions began walking round and round it
and roaring lustily, possibly thinking that it was the bait to a trap,
as they are taught by experience to be wary, many of their relatives
having been caught in traps set by the natives.  So occupied were the
brutes with this matter that they did not discover us though we were at
no great distance from them.

The two giraffes, on hearing the first lion roar, had trotted off, or
they would probably have soon been attacked.

"Stay here, Fred!" whispered my uncle to me: "I will descend and get a
shot at one of those fellows--don't be alarmed.  If I kill him, the
chances are the other runs off.  At all events, I will retreat to the
tree, and do you keep ready to fire, should he follow me, while I
reload.  In the meantime there is no real danger."

I felt somewhat nervous at hearing this, though my uncle knew so well
what he was about that I need not have been alarmed for his safety.
Before I could reply he had descended the tree.  Holding his rifle
ready, he advanced towards the lions, but even then, as he was to
leeward they did not discover him.

He was within fifteen paces of them, when he stopped and levelled his
rifle.  Just then they both saw him, and looked up as if greatly
astonished at his audacity.  He fired, and the first lion, giving a
spring in the air, fell over on the body of the giraffe.

The second stopped, hesitating whether to leap on his enemy or to take
to flight.  This gave my uncle time to reload when he slowly stepped
back towards the tree, facing the lion, which advanced at the same pace.

"Now, Fred! let me see what you can do," he shouted out as he found that
the brute had got within range of my rifle.

I obeyed him, earnestly trusting that my shot would take effect.  I felt
sure that I had hit the animal, though, when the smoke cleared off, to
my dismay I saw it about to spring at my uncle.  He stood as calm as if
the creature had been a harmless sheep.  Just as the lion rose from the
ground, I heard the crack of his rifle, and it fell back, shot through
the heart.  I quickly scrambled down to the ground to survey the giraffe
and the two lions.  My uncle seemed in no way elated by his victory.
"If we had had our waggon we might have secured the skins," he observed;
"but as it is, we must content ourselves with some of the giraffe's
flesh, which we shall find palatable enough for want of better."

Drawing his knife, he at once commenced operations on the giraffe.  We
soon, having secured as much of the meat as we could require, ran a
couple of sticks through it and started off to return to the camp.

Darkness, however, came down upon us before we had gone far; still, we
hoped to be able to find our way.  Scarcely, however, had the sun set,
when the mutterings and roars of lions saluted our ears; and of course
we had the uncomfortable feeling that at any moment one of them might
spring out on us.  We cast many an anxious glance round, and kept our
rifles in our hands ready for instant use, hoping that we should have
time to see a lion before he was upon us.  We had no fear at present of
human foes, as the country through which we were travelling was
uninhabited; though we might fall in with hunting parties, who were,
however, likely to prove friendly.  Besides lions, there was a
possibility of our encountering hyaenas, leopards, and wolves, which,
when hunting in packs, are as dangerous as in other parts of the world.

My uncle made me go ahead, while he kept five or six paces behind, so
that, should a lion spring out at me, he might be ready to come to my
assistance.  We kept shouting too, to scare away any of the brutes we
most dreaded; for, savage as is the lion, he is a cowardly animal except
when pressed by hunger.  Fortunately the sky was clear, and the stars
shining out brightly enabled us to steer our course by them; but we went
on and on, and I began to fear that we had already passed our camp.  I
expressed my apprehensions to my uncle.

"No!" he answered, "we are all right.  We shall see the fire in a short
time, unless Jan has let it out, which is not likely."

"But perhaps a lion may have carried him off, and killed our ox also,
and we shall then be in a sad plight," I remarked.

"Nonsense, Fred!" he answered; "you are overtired with your long walk,
and allow gloomy apprehensions to oppress you.  I wish that I had not
brought you so far."

After this I said no more, but exerted myself to the utmost; though I
could scarcely drag one foot after the other, and had it become
necessary to run for our lives, I do not think I could have moved.  I
looked about, now on one side now on the other, and fancied that I could
see the vast heads and shaggy manes of huge lions watching us from among
the trees.  I did not fear their roars as long as they were at a
distance.  At length I heard what I took to be the mutterings of
half-a-dozen, at least, close to us.  I shouted louder than ever, to try
and drive them off.  As soon as I stopped shouting I listened for my
uncle's voice, dreading lest one of the brutes should have seized him.
I could not stop, to look round, and I was most thankful when I again
heard him shout--

"Go on, Fred; go on, my boy.  We shall see Jan's camp-fire before long.
I don't believe there's a lion within half a mile of us.  During the
night we hear their voices a long distance off."

At length I saw, right ahead, a glare cast on the trunks and branches of
the trees.  It was I hoped produced by our camp-fire.  Again, again, we
shouted; should any lions be stalking us, they were very likely to
follow our footsteps close up to our camp, and might pounce down upon us
at the last moment, fearful of losing their prey.  I felt greatly
relieved on hearing Jan's shout in reply to ours; and pushing eagerly
on, we saw him sitting close to a blazing fire which he had made up.  He
was delighted to see us, for he had become very anxious at our long
absence; especially as a troop of elephants, he said, had passed close
to the camp; and, as one of them was wounded, he knew that they had been
met with by us, and he feared might possibly have trampled us to death.
He had heard, too, the roar of lions near at hand.  We found the
giraffe's flesh more palatable than I had expected.  As soon as we had
eaten a hearty supper we lay down to rest, Jan promising to remain awake
and keep up a blazing fire so as to scare away the lions.

Every now and then I awoke, and could hear the roarings and mutterings
of the monarchs of the forest, which I heartily wished were sovereigns
of some other part of the world.

Greatly to my disappointment, after the fatigue I had gone through I was
unable to travel the next morning, and we had to put off our departure
for another day.

My uncle went out for a short time, to shoot an antelope or any other
species of deer he could come across for provisions, as what he killed
for food one day was unfit for eating the next.

He had been absent for some time, and as I felt that a short walk would
do me good, I took my gun, intending not to go far from the camp.  I had
some hopes that I might come across an antelope or deer during my short
excursion.  I of course took good care to keep a look-out on either
side, lest I should be surprised by a lion or a leopard, the animals
mostly to be feared in that region.  It was not impossible that I might
fall in with an elephant, but I had no intention of attacking one if I
did, and should have ample notice of its approach, so that I might keep
out of its way.  I had gone about a quarter of a mile or so from the
camp, and was thinking of turning back when I reached a tree which I
found I could easily climb, as the remains of branches stuck out almost
close to the ground.  I got up for the sake of taking a survey of the
country around, and especially over that part of it we had to travel the
next morning.  I found my lofty seat very pleasant, for I was well
shaded by the thick foliage over head, while a light breeze played among
the leaves, which was refreshing in the extreme.  I had some difficulty
in keeping awake, but I endeavoured to do so fearful of letting go my
gun, or, perhaps, of falling to the ground myself.  I did my best not to
fall asleep, by singing and by occasionally getting up and looking
around me.

The tree grew, I should have said, on the side of a bank, with a wide
extent of level ground to the eastward, dotted over with thick clumps of
trees, some large enough to be called woods; while nearer at hand, on
either side of me, the vegetation was more scattered, here and there two
or three trees only growing together.  In some places single trees alone
could be seen, rising in solitary grandeur from the soil.  I had just
got up when I caught sight of an elephant, which had come out from one
of the clumps I have mentioned, where it had probably been spending the
hot hours of the day, and advanced slowly towards me, now plucking a
bunch of leaves with its trunk, now pulling up a shrub or plant.
Presently I caught sight of a man with a gun in his hand coming out from
the forest to the left and making his way towards where the elephant was
feeding.  He apparently did not see the animal, which was hidden from
him by an intervening clump.  When he got closer I recognised my uncle.
Wishing to warn him of the neighbourhood of the elephant, I shouted as
loudly as I could bawl; but, from the distance we were apart, he could
not hear me.  The elephant also took no notice of my voice, but went on
feeding as before.

Presently my uncle came in sight of the monstrous beast, which must have
seen him at the same time, for it ceased feeding and turned its head in
the direction he was coming.  Nothing daunted, my uncle continued to
advance, keeping, however, more to the right, which would bring him
towards the tree on which I was perched.  The elephant began to move
towards him.  He quickened his pace--he was now in the open ground, over
which he was making his way, exposed to great danger.  He was aware of
this and kept his gun ready to fire, though should he miss, he would be
at the mercy of the brute.  I considered how I could help him, but saw
it would be madness to descend the tree to fire, and therefore remained
where I was, praying that, should my uncle fire, his shot might be
successful.

Presently, up went the elephant's trunk; and, trumpeting loudly, he went
at a fast trot directly towards my uncle, who, stopping for a moment,
levelled his rifle and fired; but, although the shot took effect, it did
not stop the elephant's progress.

He had not a moment to reload--flight was his only resource.  Happily
not far off was a tree, but whether its branches grew low down enough to
enable him to climb up it, I could not see, and I trembled for his
safety.  I shouted and shrieked, hoping to divert the attention of the
elephant.  It appeared to me that its trunk was not a dozen yards from
my uncle.  Should it once encircle him, his fate would be sealed.  I
never felt more anxious in my life.  I might still stop its course I
hoped, and, raising my rifle, I fired at its head, but my bullet seemed
to make not the slightest impression.  I shrieked with alarm.  The next
moment I saw my uncle seize the bough of a tree which had appeared to me
above his head, when, exerting all his strength, he drew himself up.
The elephant, elevating its trunk, actually touched his foot, but he
drew it beyond its reach, and quickly clambered up into a place of
safety.  The elephant stood for a moment, its trunk raised as if
expecting him to fall, and then made a furious dash at the tree in a
vain endeavour to batter it down.  The tree trembled from the shock but
stood firm.

The elephant then, taking my uncle's cap which had fallen off, trampled
it under foot, going round and round the tree and trumpeting loudly.  It
was evidently a rogue elephant, an ill-tempered brute who had been
driven from the herd to spend a solitary existence.  Such are always the
most dangerous, as they appear to have a greater hatred of man and to be
more cunning than the elephants found in herds.  It seemed to have made
up its mind to besiege us.  Our position was unpleasant in the extreme,
for while it remained we dared not descend, and for what we could tell,
we might be kept up our respective trees all night, and perhaps the
following day, or still longer.



CHAPTER FOUR.

My uncle and I felt far from happy up our trees.  He had had nothing to
eat since he left camp in the morning, and I too was getting _very_
hungry.  An hour or more went by, and yet the old "rogue" elephant
showed no inclination to take its departure.  Fortunately it had not
discovered my uncle's rifle, which lay concealed in the grass close to
the foot of the tree.

He now shouted to me to try to shoot the brute.  This was no easy matter
perched as I was high up; and as I was not likely to hit any vital part,
I feared that any shot would only contribute to increase its rage
without bringing it to the ground or driving it off.  I had but five
more bullets in my pouch, but I determined to do my best and not throw a
shot away.  I waited until the animal presented its side to me, when I
fired, and the bullet struck it on the neck; but, though the blood
flowed, it seemed to take no notice of the wound.  The next I planted
just below the shoulder.  The elephant uttered several loud trumpetings
and rushing again at the tree, seized the stem with its trunk, and
endeavoured to pull it down.  It shook violently, compelling my uncle to
hold on with arms and legs.

I quickly reloaded and fired another shot directly behind the creature's
ear.  I saw the blood spouting forth and flowing down until it formed a
pool dyeing the surrounding grass.  Gradually the elephant's trunk
unwound and hung down from its vast head.

"You've done for it," shouted my uncle; "send another shot into its neck
and we shall be free."

I was reloading while he spoke, and before the elephant altered its
favourable position I again fired.

Less than a minute elapsed, then down it sank on its knees.  It made
several efforts to rise but without success--its strength was fast
failing.  I had one more bullet remaining, but I wished to save it for
any emergency which might occur.  We had not long to wait before the
elephant fell over on its side and lay an inanimate mass.

My uncle quickly descended the tree and I followed his example.  His
first act was to pick up and examine his gun.  It having escaped injury
he at once reloaded, and then, shaking hands, we surveyed our fallen
foe.

"I wish that we could carry these magnificent tusks with us, but that is
out of the question," observed my uncle.  "We will, however, try to
secure them.  Help me to cut them out."

We set to work; and having fastened all the straps we could muster round
one of them, he ascended the tree in which I had taken refuge, and I
assisting him, we hauled up one of the tusks, and deposited it safely
among the branches.  The other was hauled up in the same fashion, and
pretty hard work it was, as each tusk was considerably above half a
hundredweight.

"I hope that we shall be able to send for these some day or other, and
we are not likely to forget this spot in a hurry," remarked my uncle.

Having cut off one of the elephant's feet we ran a stick through it and
started off for the camp.  The day, however, was not to pass without
another adventure.  We had not gone half the distance when we saw, above
the bushes, the head and neck of a giraffe.  It did not appear to be
alarmed; but influenced by curiosity, instead of cantering away, it drew
nearer, coming round the end of the clump, evidently wondering what
strange creatures we could be.  So interested was it that it did not
notice another and more formidable enemy which had been creeping up
close behind.  This was a lion, which, engaged in stalking its prey, did
not discover us.  We, therefore, could watch at a safe distance what was
taking place.  The lion kept creeping on, cautious as a cat, and with
movements very similar, when, believing that it had got near enough for
its purpose, with a rush and a tremendous bound, it leapt on the back of
the giraffe before the latter could use its heels to drive off its foe.
With fearful tenacity the savage creature hung on to the shoulders of
the terrified giraffe, which bounded forward, and leapt and sprang from
side to side in a vain endeavour to shake off its foe.  Not a sound did
it utter, but dashed on, with head erect; while the lion was tearing
away with its teeth and claws at its shoulders and neck.  There was no
doubt from the first which of the two would gain the victory.  Blood was
streaming from the neck and flanks of the poor giraffe, which very
quickly slackened its pace and then down it came, unable longer to
endure the pain it was suffering.  The lion at once began tearing away
at the flesh.  Still it kicked, and struggled, but its efforts were
useless, and it very quickly ceased to move.

"We must have that lion," said my uncle.

Having examined our rifles we hurried towards the spot where the savage
brute was enjoying its banquet, so busily employed that it did not see
us.  When at length it was aware of our approach it ceased feeding, and
gazed at us with its fore paws on the body of its victim, presenting a
truly magnificent spectacle.

We were near enough by this time to take a steady aim.

"Do you fire, Fred, and then reload as rapidly as you can, while I will
wait until you are ready."

"But I have no second bullet," fortunately recollecting at the moment
that I had expended all my bullets but one.

My uncle handed me a couple, and I obeyed his injunctions.  My bullet
passed through the lion's thick mane and crashed into its neck.

Uttering a tremendous roar as it felt the pain, it came towards us.
Without a moment's loss of time I reloaded, fearing that, should my
uncle's bullet fail to stop it, the brute would be upon us.

Notwithstanding the lion's near approach my uncle waited, and then
fired, hitting it between the eyes.  Still it advanced, but, blinded and
almost stunned, though it made a desperate bound towards us, its aim was
uncertain.  My uncle sprang on one side and I on the other, when, before
I had finished loading, over it fell, and lay dead between us.

"A pretty good afternoon's sport," observed my uncle.  "We'll take the
liberty of cutting a few steaks from the giraffe which this brute here
has hunted for us, and the sooner we get back to camp the better."

The chief difficulty in obtaining the steaks was in cutting through the
tough skin of the giraffe, which was almost as thick as that of a
rhinoceros.  By employing our axes we soon, however, accomplished our
task, and in a few minutes reached the camp, where Jan, who had heard
our shots, had made up a large fire in expectation of any game we should
bring.

While the elephant foot was cooking we regaled ourselves on some fine
slices of giraffe meat, which assisted to stop the cravings of hunger.
All night long we were surrounded by the abominable cries of hyaenas and
jackals which were collected round the carcases of the slain animals.

It is said that they dare not touch even a dead lion, but at all events
when we went out to look the next morning the bones only of the two
animals remained.

We now once more reloaded our ox and set out northward.  We remarked
that the poor creature, in spite of its long rest, looked thinner, and
in worse condition than before.

"Him tsetse do it.  You see, ox die!" exclaimed Jan.

Still the faithful brute stepped on with its heavy load, and we hoped
that Jan was mistaken.

At length we came in sight of a broader river than we had crossed since
we had left the desert.

We had no doubt that it would conduct us down to the lake, on the
borders of which we hoped to find our friends encamped.  How to cross it
was the difficulty.  I suggested that we should construct a raft, as the
reeds which fringed the bank would supply us with abundance of material.

Not far off was a tree-covered island, the intervening space being
filled with reeds.  Leaving Jan and the ox on the shore, my uncle and I
set off to reach the island, thinking that we could there more
conveniently build our raft and launch it than from the main land.

Plunging in among the reeds we soon found ourselves almost overwhelmed:
not a breath of air could reach us, and the heat was so stifling that we
almost fainted.  Still, having begun, we were unwilling to give up.

Frequently we could only get on by leaning against the mass of reeds,
and bending them down until we could stand upon them.  They were mixed
with a serrated grass which cut our hands, while the whole was bound
together by the climbing convolvulus, with stalks so strong that we
could not break them.

Plying our axes, however, we managed to make our onward way until we
gained the island, but here to our disappointment we found that we were
thirty yards or more from the clear water, which was full of great
masses of papyrus with stalks ten feet in height, and an inch and a half
in diameter.  These also were bound together by the convolvulus in a way
which made them perfectly impenetrable.  While we stood on the shore of
the island the sound of human voices reached our ears, and we saw in the
distance several canoes descending the stream.  Each carried three men,
two paddling and one standing up with a large harpoon attached to a rope
in his hand.  They were in pursuit of some large dark creatures whose
heads, just rising above the water, looked like those of enormous
cart-horses.

"They are hippopotami!" exclaimed my uncle, "and we shall see some sport
presently."

Suddenly, down came the harpoon, and was fixed in the back of one of the
monsters, which almost sprang out of the water as it felt the pain of
the wound; then off it went, towing the canoe at a tremendous rate after
it, the end of the rope being secured to the bows, while the barb to
which the rope was attached being shaken out of its socket remained
firmly fixed in the animal's body.

We ran along the island to watch the canoe as long as it remained in
sight, but it was towed so rapidly that it soon disappeared.  Presently,
however, we saw another coming down the stream fast to a second
hippopotamus, not only the head but a considerable portion of the body
of which was floating above the water.  The men in the canoe were
hauling themselves up closer to their prey, preparatory to plunging
their lances or harpoons into its body.  I fancied that I could almost
distinguish the savage glance of the brute's eyes.  Suddenly it stopped;
then, turning round, gave a rush at the canoe.

In vain the blacks slackened the rope, and seizing their paddles,
endeavoured to escape from it.  With open mouth the hippopotamus rushed
on the boat, and, seizing it in its enormous jaws, crushed it up as if
it had been made of paper.

One poor fellow was caught; a fearful shriek was heard; and, directly
afterwards, we saw his body, cut in two, floating down the stream.  The
other two men had disappeared, and we fancied must also have been
killed.  Again and again the animal darted at the canoe, expending his
rage upon it.

While he was thus employed the two men rose to the surface and instantly
made for the shore, dragging the end of the rope by a path we had not
before observed, between the reeds.  With wonderful activity they made
it fast to the trunk of a tree.  Directly afterwards three other canoes
arrived, and the men, armed with harpoons and heavy spears, jumping on
shore, joined their companions in hauling in on the rope attached to the
hippopotamus.  In vain the monster struggled, endeavouring to tear
itself away from the rope.  The blacks with wonderful boldness rushed
into the water, darting their spears at it.  It had seized the shaft of
the harpoon, which had broken in two, and was endeavouring to bite
through the rope.

Two other canoes now came up and their crews attacked the hippopotamus
in the rear.  So engaged were the hunters that they did not observe us.
As we watched their proceedings it appeared very probable that in spite
of its wounds the hippopotamus would break away.  Seeing this, my uncle
unslung his rifle and advanced towards the monster, which had already
severed several strands of the rope.  As it opened its vast mouth, he
fired down its throat, and it almost instantly, giving another
convulsive struggle, rolled over.

His success was greeted with triumphant shouts by the hunters who had
only just before discovered us.  Having drawn the body of the
hippopotamus up to the dry land, the blacks crowded round us, and by
signs and exclamations expressed their admiration of the way in which my
uncle had killed the creature.

We tried to explain that we were very happy to have been of service to
them, and that we should feel obliged, if, in return, they would ferry
us across the river, and guide us to the waggons of the white men who
had encamped not far off.

Leaving the hunters to cut up the hippopotamus, and stow its flesh on
board their canoes, we returned to where we had left Jan and the ox.  As
it was getting late, we agreed to remain where we were until the
following day,--in the meantime to try to shoot an antelope or deer of
some sort which would enable us to provide a feast for the natives by
whom we might be visited.

I was fortunate enough, while lying down among some rocks near our camp,
to kill a springbok, one of the most light and elegant of the gazelle
tribe; but its companions, of which it had several, bounded off at so
rapid a rate that I had no chance of killing another.  I, therefore,
lifting my prize on my shoulder, returned to camp, where my uncle soon
after arrived, laden with the flesh of a quagga, which, although
belonging to the family of asses, is good food.

Scarcely had we put on some meat to cook, when half a dozen of our
acquaintances arrived.  It was satisfactory to find that Jan understood
their language.  They appeared to be well-disposed towards us, and our
friendship was cemented by the feast of quagga flesh which we got ready
for them.  We ourselves, however, preferred the more delicate meat of
the springbok.  We kept some of the meat for our next day's breakfast,
and offered the remainder to our guests, which they quickly stowed away.

They undertook to convey us down the river the following morning in
their canoes, or on a raft, observing that, if we went in the canoes, we
must be separated, as each could carry only one of us.  We, therefore,
determined to trust to a raft, such as we ourselves had proposed
building.  Our guests retired for a short distance from us, and formed a
camp by themselves for the night.

I awoke about two hours before dawn, when my attention was attracted to
a peculiar noise which I might liken to a low grunting and the tread of
numberless feet.  As day broke, I saw the ground to the southward
covered with a dense mass of deer moving slowly and steadily on towards
an opening in a long range of hills to the east.  They appeared to be in
no hurry, but continued feeding as they went.  I aroused my uncle, who
pronounced them to be springboks, one of which I had shot on the
previous evening migrating for the winter to the northward.  They were
beautiful animals, graceful in form, of a light cinnamon red on the
back, fading into white on the under part of the body, a narrow band of
reddish brown separating the two colours.  As far as the eye could
reach, the whole country seemed alive with them,--not only the plain but
the hill-side, along which they bounded with graceful leaps.

Our guests on the previous evening had disappeared, but they quickly
came back with a large party of their tribe, and gave us to understand
that they could not escort us down to the river for the present, as they
must set out to attack the springboks, and hoped that we would accompany
them.

This my uncle and I at once agreed to do, and, supplying ourselves with
a good stock of ammunition, we set off with the first party that
started.  Our friends led us at a rapid rate over the hills by a short
cut, so that we might intercept the animals, as they passed through the
mountains.  Another party, we found, remained behind, to drive them
through, or prevent them turning back when frightened by our presence.
We were only just in time, for already the leaders of the herd had made
their appearance.  As we approached the mouth of the gorge, while some
of the hunters rushed up the hills, and stationed themselves on either
side, so as to dart their javelins at the passing deer, others took post
at the mouth of the gorge, thus preventing the egress of the animals,
without coming within range of their weapons.

Now a scene of slaughter commenced such as I have seldom witnessed.  The
leaders of the herd turned to retreat, but were met by the party who had
remained on the other side shrieking and shouting, and knocking the
handles of their spears against their shields.  Some of the animals
tried to escape up the mountains, others dashed forward to our very
feet, and many fell down killed by terror itself.  We shot a few, but
the slaughter seemed so unnecessary that we refrained from again firing,
and would gladly have asked the natives to desist; but while the animals
were in their power, they would evidently have refused to do so.

Happily the affrighted deer found an opening, which, from the excessive
steepness of the path, had been neglected.  Through this a considerable
number made their escape, and were soon beyond the reach of their
merciless pursuers.

The natives now began to collect the animals they had slain, and each
man returned in triumph with a springbok on his shoulders.

We, not to be outdone, each carried one of those we had shot, and a
pretty heavy load it was.  I was thankful when we got back to the camp,
where we cooked a portion of the venison.

As we might have felt sure, the natives, having plenty of food, were not
at all disposed to move from the spot, and, indeed, continued feasting
the whole of the next day.  On the following, they were so gorged that
they were utterly unable to make any exertion.  Had an enemy been near,
and found them in this condition, the whole tribe might have been killed
or carried off into captivity.

We in the meantime explored the banks of the river until we found a
convenient spot for forming our raft.  In most places the reeds extended
so far from the shore that during the operation we should have had to
stand up to our middles in water among them, with the risk of being
picked up by a crocodile or hippopotamus, both of which delectable
creatures were, in considerable numbers, frequenters of the stream.

As the blacks still showed no inclination to accompany us, Jan
volunteered to return for the elephant's tusks and other articles we had
left behind, if I would go with him.

To this my uncle somewhat demurred, but, at last, when I pressed the
point, he consented to remain in charge of the goods we had brought
while we set off on our expedition.



CHAPTER FIVE.

At daybreak Jan and I set off, he as usual leading the ox, while I
walked ahead with my rifle, ready for a shot.  Our baggage consisted of
a couple of skins to sleep on, a stock of ammunition, a small portion of
our remnant of flour, tea, sugar, and pepper.  We had no fear of not
finding food, as game of all sorts was abundant, provided I kept my
health, and was able to shoot it.

I asked Jan what he thought of the ox which looked remarkably thin.

"No good!" he answered; "last till get back, but not more--den him die."

I trusted that the poor animal would hold out as long as he supposed.

We rested at noon under an enormous acacia, of the younger branches of
which the elephants are apparently very fond.  We saw that they were
everywhere twisted off to the height of about twenty-five feet, which is
as far as an elephant can reach.

Here and there, under the trees, were conical hills twenty feet high,
built up for residences by the white ants.  Frequently they were covered
with creeping plants which met at the top, hanging back in an umbrella
shape, completely shading them.  I shot several doves and other birds to
serve us for dinner, and while Jan was cooking them I went in search of
fruit, and discovered an abundance of medlars very similar to those we
have in England, as well as some small purple figs growing on bushes.
The most curious fruit I met with was like a lime in appearance, with a
thick rind, but inside was a large nut.  I had to climb a tree to obtain
them, for all those lower down had been carried off by elephants who
were evidently very fond of the fruit.

As our object was to make as much haste as possible, I was resolved not
to go out of the way to shoot any large game, though I kept my rifle
loaded with ball as a defence against lions, leopards, rhinoceroses, or
hyaenas.

The first day's journey we saw several in the distance, though none came
near us.  We formed our camp at the foot of a tree, with a large fire in
front of us, and on either side of the trunk we erected a fence of stout
stakes in a semi-circular form; so we hoped that we should be able to
sleep without being molested by wild beasts.  The ox remained outside,
and we knew that he would run to the fire, should danger threaten him.

The usual cries proceeding from an African forest prevented us from
sleeping over soundly, and I was awakened by the roar of a lion, which
stood on a mound some little distance from our camp, afraid of
approaching near our fire, and the palisade which he probably took for a
trap.

We had exhausted our stock of wood during the night, and in the morning
Jan went out to procure a fresh supply for cooking our breakfast.  I was
employed in plucking some birds which I had killed in the evening, when
I heard my companion shouting lustily for help, and at the same time, a
loud crashing of boughs reached my ears, while the ox came hurrying up
to the camp in evident alarm.

Seizing my rifle, I sprang up, fearing that a lion had pounced down upon
Jan, while picking up sticks, and I was fully prepared for an encounter
with the savage brute.  Instead of a lion, however, I saw an elephant,
with trunk uplifted, rush out from among the brushwood.  I sprang behind
a tree, as the only place of safety, when what was my dismay, to see, as
he passed, Jan clinging to his hind leg.  How the black had got there
was the puzzle, and how to rescue him from his awkward position was the
next question to be solved.  Should he let go, he might naturally expect
to receive a kick from the elephant's hind foot which would effectually
knock all the breath out of his body; and yet, should he not get free,
he might be carried miles away and perish miserably.  My only hope was
at once to mortally wound the elephant.  Not a moment was to be lost if
I was to save poor Jan.  Just then the elephant caught sight of the ox,
and stopped as if considering if he should attack it.  Whether he was
aware that Jan was clinging to his leg or not, I could not tell, as the
black's weight no more impeded him than a fly would a man when running.

The ox, instead of endeavouring to escape, presented its head to the
elephant, though it trembled in every limb.

Jan, who seemed paralysed with fear, did not let go as I thought he
would have done, and his best chance would have been to spring back,
even though he had fallen on the ground directly behind the elephant.  I
did not like to shout to him for fear of attracting the creature's
attention.

Now or never was my time to save the poor fellow.  I stepped from under
cover of the tree, and, levelling my rifle, aimed at a spot directly
behind the ear.

The huge monster did not move, then presently it began swaying to and
fro.  I shouted to Jan to leap off and hurried on to help him.  Before I
reached the spot, he had followed my advice, and hardly had he done so,
than down came the elephant with a crash, to the ground.  Jan raised a
shout of triumph.

"De master hab done well!" he cried out.  I could not help joining him,
and even the ox gave a bellow of satisfaction as he saw his huge foe
stretched lifeless on the ground.

We at once set to work to extract the tusks with our axes.  Rather than
leave them, we agreed to take them with us.  We therefore placed them on
the back of our ox, together with some slices of elephant meat which
would prevent the necessity of shooting game during the day.

We now pushed forward for the cave where we had left our goods, and met
with no adventures worth noticing.  We saw numerous herds of antelopes,
giraffes, and a few ostriches.  The latter I would have killed if I
could, for the sake of their valuable feathers.  The cave had been
untouched, and it was with no small satisfaction that I loaded up the ox
with its contents, as we prepared to set off the next morning on our
return, intending, on our way back, to obtain the elephant's tusks we
had deposited in the tree, which had afforded me such seasonable shelter
when attacked by their owner.

We met as before buffaloes, elands, koodoos, and various antelopes.  As
I was walking along ahead, suddenly I found my face enveloped as if by a
thick veil; and as I was tearing off the web--for such it was--I caught
sight of a large yellow spider, hauling himself up to the tree above.
In the neighbourhood were many other webs, the fibres radiating from a
centre point where the greedy insect was waiting for its prey.

Each web was about a yard in diameter, and the lines on which they were
hung, suspended from one tree to another, were as thick as coarse
thread.  We occasionally met with serpents, but they generally kept out
of our way.

One day, during a halt, while seated under a tree, I caught sight of
another enormous spider of a reddish tinge.  Never did I see a creature
so active.  It suddenly made its appearance from a hole in the bark, and
giving a tremendous bound, caught a large moth which it quickly
devoured.  With wonderful rapidity it ran about the tree, now darting
forward, now springing back.  With a feeling of horror lest it should
spring upon me, I removed to a distance.  On looking down on the ground,
I saw what I at first thought was a coin the size of a shilling; but on
looking closer I discovered that it was of a pure white silky substance
like paper, and that it formed the door to a hole.  On trying to lift it
up I discovered that it was fastened by a hinge on one side, and on
turning it over upon the hole it fitted exactly--the upper side being
covered with earth and grass, so that, had it not been for the
circumstance that the inmate had been out, I could not possibly have
detected it.  Jan said it was the hole of a spider, probably the
creature I had seen engaged in seeking its prey.

While encamped that night, I heard the crashing of heads and horns.  Jan
told me it was caused by a troop of buffaloes who were fighting.
Presently a loud snorting and puffing reached our ears.  The uproar
increased, and he declared that the noise was produced by rhinoceroses
and buffaloes quarrelling.  My fear was that in their heady fight the
animals might come our way and trample over us, or perhaps the
rhinoceroses would attack our poor ox, who was but ill able to defend
himself.

While I was looking out beyond our camp-fire I caught sight of a herd of
elephants, the huge males going first, followed by the females, on their
way down to a large pool where they were going to drink.  I followed
them cautiously until they entered the water.

Having satisfied their thirst, they began throwing it over themselves
and disporting in the cool element, gambolling and rolling about like a
party of schoolboys bathing.  As I could not have carried away their
tusks, I did not attempt to shoot one but left them unmolested.  After a
while I saw them returning by the way they had come, appearing in the
uncertain light like huge phantoms so noiselessly did they stalk over
the ground.

It is strange that, huge as the elephant is, from the soft padding of
its feet, the sound of its steps is not heard even on hard ground.  Its
approach is only to be discovered by the snapping of boughs and twigs as
it makes its way among the brushwood.

We were but a short distance from the spot where we had left the
elephant's tusks, one of the objects of our expedition.  I felt very
sure of the place, as the adventure we had there met with had marked it
in my memory.

I was going up to the tree followed by Jan, when I saw an object moving
among the branches.  This made me approach cautiously, and fortunately I
did so, for on looking up, I caught sight of an enormous leopard, which
probably had been attracted by the smell of the flesh still adhering to
the roots of the tusks.  As the creature had got possession of the tree,
I had first to dislodge him before I could obtain our tusks; that they
were still there I discovered by seeing their points sticking out beyond
the forks of the boughs where we had deposited them.  I knew the
leopard's habit of leaping down on passing animals, and thought it might
attempt to catch me in the same manner.  I therefore stood at a
distance, but though I shouted at the top of my voice, and threw pieces
of wood at it, it held its post, snarling and growling savagely.

"Better shoot him, or he come down when no tinkee," cried Jan, who had
remained with the ox at a safe distance.

As we were in a hurry to move on, I saw that the sooner I did this the
better, but it was important to shoot it dead, for should I miss or only
wound it, it might make its leap before I had reloaded, and attack me
and Jan.

I advanced, and taking good aim, pulled the trigger, but what was my
dismay to find my gun miss fire, while at the same moment the leopard
made a spring from a high bough on which it was perched.  I expected the
next instant to feel its fangs in my neck, and be struck to the ground
by its sharp claws; but happily its feet caught in some of the creeping
vines which were entwined round the tree, and it very nearly came
toppling to the ground on its head.  Recovering itself, however, it
pitched on a lower bough.

I, in the meantime, endeavouring to be calm, cleaned out the nipple of
my gun, and put a fresh cap on; then retiring a few paces while the
creature gazed down upon me, about to make another spring, I fired at
its head, into which the bullet buried itself, and down it crashed to
the ground.

I leaped back, and reloading, stood ready to give it another shot, but
this was unnecessary; after a few convulsive struggles, it lay helpless
on the ground.  On drawing near I found that it was dead.  The skin
being a handsome one, I determined to secure it.  With Jan's assistance,
I soon had it off and placed on the back of the ox.  I now ascended the
tree, and found that though the ends of the tusks were gnawed, they were
not otherwise injured.

With the aid of Jan I lowered them down, and secured them to the back of
the ox.  The poor brute was now overloaded, but as we had not far to go,
I hoped that it would be able to carry its burden that short distance.

Had I been strong I would have endeavoured to carry some of the load,
but I found my gun and ammunition, with the birds I occasionally shot,
quite enough for me.  At length, greatly to my satisfaction, we drew
near the spot where I had left my uncle on some high ground overlooking
the river.  Every moment I thought that our poor ox would give in.

We might, I suspect, have been indicted by the Society for the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, had we been seen urging on the ox, but
we had no choice, for had we abandoned our goods, the natives would have
taken possession of them.  At last, as evening was approaching, we
caught sight of my uncle's camp-fire.  We shouted, as he did in return,
when he came hurrying down the hill to meet us.

"What poor brute have you got there?" he exclaimed, after welcoming us.

When I told him it was our old ox, he would scarcely believe it to be
the same animal.  Hardly was the burden off its back, and Jan was about
to lead it down to the water, than the poor creature, giving a
convulsive shudder, fell to the ground, and in a few minutes was dead,
having faithfully performed its duty to the last.  I felt more sad than
I could have supposed it possible, as I assisted my uncle and Jan in
drawing away the carcase from the camp.  We had not dragged it far,
before some natives arrived, who relieved us of all further trouble,
saying that they would take it to their camp, and eat it in spite of its
having died from the effects of the tsetse poison, which we warned them
was the case.

My uncle told me that he had prepared a raft, which would convey us and
our goods down the river to where Mr Welbourn's camp was situated, and
that he had engaged a couple of canoes and a party of natives to
accompany us.  Instead of the howling of wild beasts, we were serenaded
during the night by the shouts of laughter and songs of the blacks
feasting on the carcase of the poor ox.  It was quite as well, however,
that it should be eaten by them, as by jackals, which would have been
its fate had it died in the wilderness.

Next morning, assisted by the blacks, we carried our goods down to the
river, where we found a curious raft constructed of reeds.  It appeared
to me loosely thrown together, somewhat like the top of a floating
haystack.  My uncle said that the natives had formed it by throwing on
the calm water a number of reeds, which were interlaced together.  Then
others were added, until the lower sank by the weight of those pressed
upon them, it being built up until it rose to a sufficient height above
the surface to bear as many men and as much cargo as it was required to
carry.  In the centre was stuck a mast to which a sail made of skins,
was twisted, while a long oar projecting astern served to guide it.
Notwithstanding the assurances of the natives that it was fit to perform
a long voyage, I was glad of the attendance of the canoes.

All things being ready, amid the shouts of the people on shore, we
shoved off, and, being towed cut into the stream by the canoes, set
sail.  Considering the clumsy nature of our raft, we glided on with
great rapidity, the canoemen having to paddle pretty hard to keep up
with us.

It was pleasant to be reclining at our ease, and to be borne along
without having to exert ourselves.  The voyage, however, was not without
its dangers.  Now and then a huge hippopotamus would show its ugly head
alongside, threatening to overturn our frail craft, which it might
easily have done with one heave of its back.  Occasionally, too,
crocodiles would swim by, looking up at us with their savage eyes,
showing us how we should be treated should we by any chance be sent
splashing into the water.  About mid-day we steered for the shore where
our black crew intimated that they intended to dine.

The raft was secured by a rope round the mast and carried to the trunk
of a tree.  We, however, were unwilling to leave our goods on board
without a guard, and therefore determined to remain where we were and to
eat a cold meal; the materials for which we had brought with us.  The
water appearing bright and tempting, I was about to plunge overboard,
when I felt the raft give a heave.  Directly afterwards, a huge
crocodile poked his ugly snout above the surface, warning me that I had
better remain where I was.  Two or three others made their appearance
soon afterwards in the neighbourhood.  My uncle and I agreed that the
sooner we were away from the spot the better, as any of the savage
brutes coming under the raft might upset it, and we should be committed
to their tender mercies.

We were very glad, therefore, when the blacks, having finished their
meal, returned on board, and we once more began to float down the
stream.

We were in hopes that at the rate we were proceeding we should meet our
friends before the close of the day, but darkness approached, and the
blacks gave us to understand that we must go on shore and spend the
night at a village of their tribe, where we should be hospitably
entertained.  To this we could offer no objection, though it involved
the necessity of landing our goods, as we had no fancy to spend the time
on the raft, with the prospect of finding it melting away below our
feet, and we ourselves left to be devoured by the crocodiles, or
perhaps, to have it capsized by the heave of an hippopotamus beneath it.

As we glided on, we saw a collection of bee-hive looking huts on the top
of the south bank.  The raft was directed towards them.  The natives,
leaping on shore, secured it as before by a rope to a tree growing on
the beach.  They then assisted in carrying our property to the shore.
Having piled it up in a heap and covered it over with a roof of leaves,
they assured us that it would be as safe as if guarded by a hundred men.
As they had hitherto shown themselves to be scrupulously honest, we had
no reason to doubt them on this occasion; and we, therefore, willingly
accompanied them to the village, whence a number of people issued forth
to greet us.  They then conducted us to a newly built hut, the inside of
which was as clean as we could desire, the floor covered with freshly
made mats.  There we could more securely rest than we had been able to
do for a long time.  We were, however, not yet allowed to enter it; a
feast was preparing at which it was expected we should be present, after
which there was to be a dance for our entertainment.  For the feast a
fat ox had been killed, part being roasted and part stewed.  Some of
both was placed before us, together with huge bowls of porridge, which
our entertainers mixed with their fingers, and transferred by the same
means to their mouths in large quantities.  They looked somewhat
surprised when we hesitated to follow their example, but considering
that it would show mistrust, we at last overcame our repugnance.  The
porridge itself was certainly not bad, and our hosts laughed heartily as
they saw how we burnt our fingers and made wry faces.  The whole was
washed down with huge draughts of pombe, a sort of beer, with slightly
intoxicating properties.  We did not inquire too minutely as to how it
was made.  The feast over, we heard an extraordinary uproar proceeding
from another part of the village, a sound between the barking of dogs
and people endeavouring to clear their throats.  On going in the
direction whence the strange sounds came, we found several men with
spears in their hands and anklets of shells fastened round their legs,
bending over a small fire, and producing the melancholy noises which had
attracted our attention.  Others danced round them rattling their
anklets, while a party of women forming an outer semicircle sang a
monotonous chant and clapped their hands.  The old men and women, the
senior inhabitants of the village, whom we were invited to join, sat on
the opposite side, spectators of the performance.  In the meantime the
young men and boys were prancing about, now advancing to the girls
beating the ground, rattling their anklets, and creating an enormous
quantity of dust.

These proceedings had gone on for some time, when a gay youth, evidently
the leader among them, snatching a brand from the fire after dancing up
to the girls, stuck it in the ground, when he began to leap round and
over it, for a considerable time, taking care not to touch it.

After these various scenes had been enacted, a number of young men,
representing a war party returning victorious from battle, made their
appearance, and brandishing their broad-headed spears, ornamented with
flowing ox-tails.  Now they rushed off, as if to pursue an enemy; now
returned, and were welcomed by a chorus from the women.

The scene was highly effective; the glare of the fire being reflected on
the red helmet-like gear and glittering ornaments of the girls, on the
flashing blades and waving ox-tails on the warriors, and the figures of
the spectators, with the huts and groups of cattle in the distance,
while the howling, chanting, shrieking, and barking sounds were kept up
without intermission.  We, at last, making signs to the chief that we
were very weary, placing our heads on our hands and closing our eyes,
were led ceremoniously to our hut, into which we were thankful to enter.
Having closed the entrance we lay down and tried to go to sleep.  The
noises which reached our ears showed us, however, that the dance was
being kept up with unabated spirit, and I suspect that our hosts formed
but a mean opinion of our tastes in consequence of our disappearing from
the festive scene.

Next morning, having bestowed a few remaining trinkets to delight the
hearts of the black damsels, we wished our hospitable entertainers
farewell and continued our voyage, not an article of our property having
been purloined.

Our raft clung together far better than I should have supposed, but I
suspect, had it struck a rocky bottom, the case would have been very
different.  We passed by herds of hippopotami, some with young ones on
their backs, and although they sank as we approached, they soon came to
the surface to breathe.  On the trees overhead were numbers of iguanas,
which, on seeing us, splashed into the water.  The chief canoeman
carried a light javelin, with which he speared a couple, the flesh
proving to be tender and gelatinous.

Numerous large crocodiles, as we appeared, plunged heavily into the
stream, indeed there was everywhere an abundance of animal life.  Had we
not been anxious to join our friends, we should have been contented to
continue the voyage for several days longer.

Another evening was approaching when we espied beneath a huge tree what
looked like a tent and a couple of waggons near it.  We fired off our
guns as a signal, and in a short time we saw two white men coming
towards us.  We quickly landed in one of the canoes, and were soon
shaking hands with Mr Welbourn and his son Harry.



CHAPTER SIX.

Mr Welbourn had a good stock of ammunition, and with the supply we
brought it was considered that we had sufficient to enable us to
continue the journey northward into a region where elephants abounded.
The cattle were in good condition, and, provided we could escape the
tsetse and were not cut off by savage enemies, we might expect to obtain
full loads of tusks.  Besides three Hottentot drivers and a dozen
Makololo, Mr Welbourn was accompanied by a white hunter, Hans Scarff,
who had joined him on his way from the coast.  His appearance was not in
his favour, for a more sinister countenance I had seldom met with.  He,
however, was said to be a bold hunter and a first-rate horseman, and his
assistance was therefore likely to prove useful.

The head man of the Makololoes, Toko, as he was called, was a fine,
tall, active fellow with an intelligent countenance, who, if not
handsome according to our notion, was good-looking for a black, and a
brave faithful fellow.  Besides the oxen to drag the waggons, we had
eight fine horses, most of them well trained to encounter the elephant
and rhinoceros, or any other wild beasts of the forest.

Near our camp a stream of clear water fell into the river, and in the
evening Harry asked me to go down and bathe.  Hans said he would join
us.

"Are there no crocodiles there?"  I asked, and I told him of the numbers
I had seen in the river.

"No fear of the brutes there," answered Hans; "the water is too
shallow--"

"Or hippopotami," I put in.

"Still less likely," said Hans.  "The monsters never come up such
streams as these."

We started off, and on reaching the stream separated from each other.
While looking out for a clear pool free from lilies, or other aquatic
plants, presently.  Harry, who had gone up the stream, cried out--

"I've found a capital place.  We can leap into deep water from the
bank."

Just then I heard my uncle shout out--

"Where are you going, boys?  The crocodiles come up here to lay their
eggs.  It is as dangerous a part as any in the country."

At that moment Harry shouted out, "Hulloa!  I'm in!"

I was rushing to his assistance, when I heard a fearful cry from Hans,
who, his foot slipping, had fallen into the water.  As he did so, a huge
crocodile darted across the stream.

My uncle and Mr Welbourn were descending the bank, and were much nearer
than I was.  I was undecided to whose assistance I should run, when, to
my horror, I saw the crocodile seize Hans by the arm, before he could
regain his feet.  I fortunately had my large hunting-knife in my belt,
though I had not; brought my rifle.  Little as I liked Hans, I felt that
it was my duty to go to his assistance.  Unless I did so he would be
quickly dragged off into deep water, and become the prey of the
crocodile.  Seeing that his father and my uncle had already got hold of
Harry, drawing my hunting-knife I dashed forward, shouting with all my
might to try to frighten the savage brute.  Hans had caught hold of the
branch of a fallen tree, which he grasped with his left arm, holding on
to it for his life.  Every moment I expected to see him let go, when his
fate would have been sealed.  Not for an instant did I think of the
danger I was running.  I can scarcely even now understand how I acted as
I did.  With a single bound I sprang over the branches close to the head
of the crocodile, and seizing the man with one hand, I plunged the knife
into the eye of the monster, who immediately opened his jaws, and as he
did so, Hans, with an activity I could scarcely have expected, hauled
himself up to the top of the bough, where I sprang after him, while the
crocodile, giving a whisk of his tail which nearly knocked us off our
perch, retreated into deep water, the next instant to turn lifeless on
its back, when, floating down a few yards, its huge body was brought up
by a ledge of rocks which projected partly out of the water.

"Well done, Fred, my boy," shouted my uncle and Mr Welbourn in chorus.

Having placed Harry on the bank they hurried forward to assist me in
lifting Hans off the bough to which he was clinging, and to place him
beside Harry.  For some seconds he lay, scarcely knowing what had
happened.  On examining his arm, though it was fearfully crushed,
wonderful as it may seem, no bone was actually broken.  After a little
time he revived, and, accompanied by Harry, we led him back to the camp.
My uncle exerted all his medical skill to doctor him, and the next
morning, though his arm was useless, he was able to move about as well
as ever.  He did not exhibit any special feeling of gratitude to me, but
I won the good opinion of the natives, and of Toko in particular.  Had
anybody told me that I should have been able to perform the act, I
should have declared it was impossible, and all I know is that I did it.

As all the ivory in the neighbourhood for which we had goods to give in
exchange had been purchased, we pushed forward to the north-east to a
country inhabited by tribes which had hitherto had little or no
intercourse with Europeans.  It is not, however, my object so much to
describe the people as the adventures we met with.  I cannot exactly say
with the naval officer, who, describing the customs of the people he
visited, in his journal wrote, "Of manners they have none, and their
customs are beastly."  Savage those we met were in many respects, but
their savagery arose from their ignorance and gross idolatry.

We travelled in a very luxurious manner, compared to our journey with
the single ox across the desert.  As we advanced we saw numbers of large
game, and one evening nearly a hundred buffaloes defiled before us in
slow procession, almost within gun-shot, while herds of elands passed us
without showing any signs of fear.  We at the moment had abundance of
meat in the camp, or some of them would have fallen victims to our
fire-arms.

The next day, seeing a herd of zebras in the distance, taking my rifle,
I started off, hoping to shoot one of them.  As the wind was from them
to me, and as there were some low bushes, I expected to get up to them
within gun-shot, before they perceived me.  I was not disappointed; and,
firing, I wounded one of them severely in the leg.  The rest of the herd
took to flight, but the wounded animal went off towards our camp, from
which several of our men issued to attack it.

I was walking along leisurely when, hearing the sound of feet in the
direction from which I had come, I turned round and saw a solitary
buffalo galloping towards me.  The nearest place of safety was a tree,
but it was upwards of a hundred yards off.  I had, of course, reloaded,
and now got my rifle ready, hoping to hit the brute in the forehead.
Just then the thought occurred to me, "What would be my fate should my
gun miss fire?"  The buffalo came on at a tremendous speed, but
fortunately a small bush in its way made it swerve slightly and expose
its shoulder.  Now was the moment for action, and as I heard the bullet
strike the animal I fell flat on my face.  The buffalo bounded on over
my body, apparently not perceiving me.  I lay perfectly still.  It had
got to a considerable distance, when it was met by the men who had come
out to kill the zebra, and was quickly shot down.

Toko shook his head when he saw me, exclaiming that I must not go out
again without him, lest I should be killed by some savage animal.

"But I have my rifle to defend myself," I observed.

"Your rifle may miss fire sometimes, or you may fail to kill the
elephant or rhinoceros you attack better have two rifles.  I will go
with you," he answered, in his peculiar lingo.

Our plan was always to encamp near water, and where we could obtain wood
for our fires; for such regions were certain to be frequented by a
variety of animals.  Sometimes we remained two or three days in the same
spot, provided no villages were near; though people were generally
grateful to us for destroying the wild beasts, as even the elephants are
apt to injure their plantations by breaking in and trampling over them.

Harry and I, who had become fast friends, generally went out together,
accompanied by Toko, sometimes on foot, sometimes on horseback.  One day
we had all three gone out on foot, prepared for any game.  That we might
be more likely to fall in with some creature or other, we separated a
short distance; keeping, however, within hail, and agreeing that, should
one of us shout, the other two were to close in towards him.  I was in
the centre, Toko on the left, and Harry on the right.

We had gone some distance when I heard Toko shout, "Elephant, elephant!"
I uttered the same cry to Harry, but he did not apparently hear me,
and, at all events, I could not see him.  After running for thirty or
forty yards, I caught sight of Toko up a tree.  He cried out to me to
climb another a short distance off, the branches of which would afford
an easy ascent.  Wishing to follow his advice, I was running along, when
my foot caught in a creeper and I fell to the ground with considerable
force, letting my rifle drop as I did so, but in vain attempted to
regain my legs, so severely had I sprained my ankle.  I naturally called
to Toko to come to my assistance.  He did not move or reply, but
continued shouting and shrieking at the top of his voice.  What was my
horror just then to see a huge elephant, with trunk uplifted, burst out
from among the trees on one side, while, at the same moment, a large
lion approached with stealthy steps on the other.  I gave myself up for
lost, expecting to be carried off in the jaws of the lion, or trampled
to death by the feet of the elephant.  Toko sat immovable, with his
rifle levelled at the lion's head, and just as the brute was about to
make its fatal spring he fired.  As he did so, I saw the elephant,
startled by the sound, swerve on one side, its feet passing close to
where I lay, but it did not appear even to see me.  Away it went,
trumpeting loudly and crashing through the underwood.

The next instant Toko leaped down from his perch and hurried towards me,
when, turning my head, I caught sight of the lion struggling on its
back, and attempting to regain its feet.  Toko, lifting me in his arms,
carried me a few paces off, and taking up my rifle again approached the
lion and shot it dead.  Almost at the same instant the sound of another
rifle reached our ears.

"Go and help Harry," I said to Toko; "he may want your assistance."

"I place you in safer place dan dis," he answered; and, again taking me
up, he propped me against the root of a large tree close by; then
reloading my rifle, he put it into my hands.  He next reloaded his own.

"I must go and help Harry," he said; and away he bounded.

I had wished him to go and assist my friend, but scarcely had he
disappeared than the dreadful idea came into my head that another lion--
companion of the one just killed--might be prowling about and discover
me.  In spite of the pain I suffered, I endeavoured to rise on my knees,
so that should one appear I might take a better aim than I could lying
down.  Still, should my apprehensions be realised, I felt that I should
be placed in a very dangerous predicament.  One thing, however, was
certain, that it could not be worse than the one from which I had just
escaped.  Few people have been situated as I have been, with a lion
about to spring from one side, and an elephant appearing on the other.

Doing my best to keep up my spirits, I listened attentively to try and
ascertain what was happening to Harry.  Presently there was more loud
trumpeting and directly afterwards two shots were fired in rapid
succession.  This assured me that Harry had escaped and that Toko had
reached the scene of action.  The Makololo was too clever and
experienced an elephant hunter to be taken at disadvantage, and I had
great hopes that he had succeeded in killing the animal.

I did not forget my fears about another lion, and cast my eyes anxiously
around almost expecting to see one emerge from the thicket, while at the
same time I looked out eagerly for the return of my friend.

Once more the trumpeting burst forth, the sounds echoing through the
forest.  I thus knew that the elephant had not yet fallen.  A minute
afterwards I heard the crashing of boughs and brushwood some way off.  I
guessed, as I listened, that the animal was coming towards where I lay.
The sounds increased in loudness.  Should it discover me it would
probable revenge itself by crushing me to death, or tossing me in the
air with its trunk.  I had my rifle ready to fire.  There was a chance
that I might kill it or make it turn aside.  The ground where I lay
sloped gradually downwards to a more open spot.  I expected the next
instant that the elephant would appear.  It did so, but further off than
I thought it would, and I thus began to hope that I should escape its
notice.  It was moving slowly, though trumpeting with pain and rage.
The instant I caught sight of it another huge creature rushed out of the
thicket on the opposite side of the glade.  It was a huge bull
rhinoceros with a couple of sharp-pointed horns one behind the other.

The elephant on seeing it stopped still, as if wishing to avoid a
contest with so powerful an antagonist, I fully expected to witness a
long and terrible fight, and feared that, in the struggle, the animals
might move towards where I lay and crush me.  That the elephant was
wounded I could see by the blood streaming down its neck.  This probably
made it less inclined to engage in a battle with the rhinoceros.
Instead of advancing it stood whisking its trunk about and trumpeting.
The rhinoceros, on the contrary, after regarding it for a moment, rushed
fearlessly forward and drove its sharp-pointed horns into its body while
it in vain attempted to defend itself with its trunk.  The two creatures
were now locked together in a way which made it seem impossible for them
to separate, unless the horns of the rhinoceros were broken off.  Never
did I witness a more furious fight.  The elephant attempted to throw
itself down on the head of its antagonist, and thereby only drove the
horns deeper into its own body.  So interested was I, that I forgot the
pain I was suffering, while I could hear no other sounds than those
produced by the two huge combatants.  While I was watching them, I felt
a hand on my shoulder, and saw Harry standing over me.

"I am sorry you have met with this accident!" he exclaimed.  "The sooner
you get away from this the better.  There is a safer spot a little
higher up the bank, Toko and I will carry you there."

I willingly consenting, my friends did as they proposed, as from thence
I could watch the fight with greater security.  They, having placed me
in safety, hurried towards the combatants, hoping to kill both of them
before they separated.

The elephant, already wounded, appeared likely to succumb without our
further interference.  There was indeed little chance of its attempting
to defend itself against them.  Toko, making a sign to Harry to remain
where he was, sprang forward until he got close up to the animals, and
firing he sent a bullet right through the elephant's heart.  The huge
creature fell over, pressing the rhinoceros to the ground.  Leaping back
Toko again loaded, and Harry advancing they fired together into the body
of the survivor, which after giving a few tremendous struggles, sank
down dead.

The battle over, Harry proposed carrying me at once to the camp, and
then returning to bring away the elephant's tusks, the lion's skin, and
as much of the meat of the two first animals as was required for the use
of the party.  I was very thankful to accept his offer, as I wanted to
get my ankle looked to, having an uncomfortable fear that it was broken,
in which case my hunting would be put a stop to for many a week to come.
He and Toko were not long in manufacturing a litter to carry me, by
means of two long poles, on their shoulders.  Having placed me on it
they set off for the camp.  Fortunately we had not very far to go.  I
hoped that in the mean time we should meet with neither elephants nor
lions.

Only under rare circumstances are rhinoceroses to be dreaded, for they
are generally mild and well-disposed creatures, and usually take to
flight when they come in sight of human beings.

We had gone about half-way, when a lion, bursting out from a thicket
close by, stalked across the path some distance ahead.  My bearers
placed me on the ground and handled their rifles.

"We'll stand by and defend you, don't be alarmed," cried Harry.

"I'm not afraid of your running away," I answered, "but don't fire at
the creature unless it approaches to attack us.  If you only wound it,
its rage may be excited, and I to a certainty shall become its victim."

The lion regarded us for a few seconds when--we raising a loud shout--
it, greatly to my satisfaction, bounded on and disappeared in the wood.
Indeed a lion when alone will seldom, especially in the day-time, attack
human beings who show a bold front, though it will follow like a cat, as
do most other savage brutes, if a man runs from it.

My friends again taking me up, we proceeded, though I own that I peered
somewhat anxiously into the wood where the lion had retreated, lest it
should change its mind and rush out upon us.

My uncle returned soon after we reached the camp, and at once examined
my ankle.  Greatly to my relief he assured me that it was not broken,
and that, if he bound it up in a water bandage, I should probably be
well in a day or two.  As it was already late, the blacks were unwilling
to go through the forest at night for the purpose of bringing in our
spoils, for fear of being carried off by lions.  All night long we could
hear them muttering and roaring.  Harry suggested that they were
mourning for their late companion.  Occasionally the death-cry of some
unfortunate deer which they had pulled down reached our ears, while
various other sounds, some produced by insects or bullfrogs, or birds,
disturbed the silence of the forest.  I, however, managed, in spite of
the noise and the pain I suffered, to go to sleep, and in the morning,
greatly to my satisfaction, I found my ankle much better than I
expected.

As meat was wanted, several of the party proposed to set off at an early
hour to bring in some from the animals we had killed; my uncle, Mr
Welbourn, and Harry going also.  As I did not like to be left behind, I
begged to be allowed to mount a horse and to ride with them.  I should
have been wiser to have remained quietly at the camp, but I wanted to
revisit the scene of our encounter the previous day.  Jan followed
behind with several of the blacks, who were to be loaded with our
spoils.  As we neared the spot, I heard my friends exclaiming in various
tones--

"Where is it?  What has become of the creature!"--and, pushing forward,
I caught sight of the elephant and the dead lion at a distance, but
nowhere was the rhinoceros to be seen.  It was very evident that it
could not have been killed as we had supposed, and that, having only
been stunned, it, at length recovering itself, had made off.

Toko cried out that he had discovered its spoor, and I saw him hurrying
forward evidently hoping to find the creature.  The other blacks
meanwhile set to work to cut out the tusks, and select a few slices off
such parts of the body as were most to their taste, including the feet,
the value of which we knew from experience.

While they were thus occupied, my three white friends were busy in
flaying the lion.  I kept my eye on Toko, expecting that, should he
discover the rhinoceros, he would summon some of the party to his
assistance.  I saw him look suspiciously into a thicket, then he turned
to fly.  The next moment a huge beast rushed out, which I had no doubt
was the rhinoceros we fancied that we had killed on the previous day.
Toko made for a tree behind which he could shelter himself.  I called to
my friends to draw their attention to the danger in which he was placed,
but to my dismay before he could reach the tree the rhinoceros was upon
him.  There was no time to leap either to the one side or the other, but
as the animal's sharp horn was about to transfix him, he made a spring
as if to avoid it, but he was not in time, and the animal, throwing up
its head, sent him and his rifle floating into the air to the height of
several feet.  The rhinoceros then charged on towards the men cutting up
the elephant, when my uncle and his companions, having seized their
rifles, began blazing away at it.  Fortunately one of their shots took
effect, and before it had reached the blacks, down it sank to the
ground.  While Harry hastened on to where Toko lay, my uncle and Mr
Welbourn, quickly reloading, fired into its head and finished its
existence.

I had ridden up to the Makololo, expecting to find every bone in his
body broken.  As I approached, to my satisfaction I saw him get up; and
though he limped somewhat, after shaking himself and picking up his
rifle, he declared that he was not much the worse for the fearful toss
he had received, and was as ready as ever for work.

He soon rejoined the rest of the men, and assisted in packing the oxen
with the tusks and meat.  Some of the flesh of the rhinoceros was also
cut off, and with the lion-skin packed up.  Rhinoceros meat, though
tough, is of good flavour.  The portions we carried off were from the
upper part of the shoulder and from the ribs, where we found the fat and
lean regularly striped to the depth of two inches.  Some of the skin was
also taken for the purpose of making some fresh ox-whips.  We of course
carried away the horns, which are about half the value of ivory.
Altogether, the adventure which at one time appeared likely to prove so
disastrous, afforded us no small amount of booty.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

The constant mutterings and roarings which saluted our ears during the
night, made us suspect that we should not obtain much game in the
neighbourhood, besides which we should run a great risk of being
attacked while out shooting.  We therefore struck camp, and proceeded on
to the northward.  The country in many places was rocky, and though
there were no mountains of any great height there were savage defiles
through which we had to pass, the sides of the cliffs being covered with
brushwood and creepers, and in some spots with tall trees.  We were not
afraid of being attacked by natives, but notwithstanding we always sent
out scouts on our flanks and ahead.

We had gone on some distance when Toko, who was leading, came hurrying
back.

"I have seen a strange sight, which I would rather not have seen," he
exclaimed.

"What is it?" asked my uncle.

"Lions, a whole army of them.  They seem determined to stop our way," he
answered.

"If there were a hundred of them they should not do that," replied my
uncle.  "We'll have a look at the gentlemen.  We shall soon drive them
off if I mistake not."

As it would have been imprudent to carry the cattle and horses into the
neighbourhood, a halt was called, and the blacks were left in charge of
the animals, while we, with Hans Scarff, prepared to ride forward.

"Stay!" said Harry.  "I think we have got something to send them to the
rightabout, if our shouts fail to drive them away."  And going to the
waggon he produced half-a-dozen rockets.

"One of those will do," observed his father, "for we may want the rest
for another emergency.  However, you can carry a couple in case one
should fail."

Led by Toko, we proceeded along the defile, when, on reaching some high
ground, we saw, collected together below us among the rocks, an immense
number of lions.  There must have been several families, fathers and
mothers with their young ones.  What could have brought them together to
that spot, it was difficult to conjecture.  Toko declared that they knew
we were about to pass that way, and had assembled for the purpose of
attacking us.  Of course such an idea was ridiculous; however, there
they were, and had we passed close to them, they might have committed
serious havoc among our cattle, although we should no doubt have shot
down many of them.  They must have seen us, from the way they lashed
their tails and muttered; while, from the loud roars which three or four
of the elders gave forth, it was pretty clear that they meant mischief.

We, however, rode forward determined to drive them away.  Harry and I,
in the meantime, got the rockets ready to fire in case our shouts should
fail to produce the desired effect.  As we got nearer there was a
general movement among them.  As we shouted they roared in return,
apparently not being alarmed by the sound of our voices.

"We must not remain unarmed, so let only three fire at a time, while the
others reload," said my uncle.  "Now fire!"

As the smoke cleared away, it seemed doubtful whether any of the shots
had taken effect, as the lions did not move from the spot they occupied.

"I suspect they are waiting for the appearance of a herd of `gemsboks,'
and that they will not give up the chance of catching their prey,"
observed my uncle.

"We must disappoint them then," said Mr Welbourn.  "Harry, get one of
your rockets ready, and pitch it into the middle of them directly after
we fire our next volley."

We had got the tube fixed and placed at the proper elevation.  We had to
wait until those next to fire had discharged their rifles, when two of
the lions were evidently badly wounded, but even this did not make them
take to flight.  Harry then applied the match to the rocket which
pitched in the midst of the congregated lions.  The effect was
electrical.  Seized with a panic, away they all scampered over the rocks
at a greater rate than I had ever before seen lions run.  None stopped
for the others.  One with his spine injured lay on the ground.  Two
others dropped before they had got far, while the remainder were soon
out of sight.

"The brutes will not come back to this locality," exclaimed my uncle.
"We must now put the other ones out of their pain."

A rifle ball sent through the head of each quickly did this.  Rapidly
skinning them, we left the carcases to be devoured by the birds of prey,
which almost before we got out of sight appeared in the air; for
although hyaenas and jackals are said to keep aloof even from a dead
lion, the vulture tribes possess no such awe for the monarch of the
wilds.

Returning to where we had left our cattle, we at once moved forward,
anxious to get out from among the rocky defiles as soon as possible.
Scarcely had we emerged from them, than we saw in the distance an
enormous herd of deer, which Mr Welbourn at once pronounced to be
"pallah."  As they approached we drew on one side before we were
discovered.  First came a stag, a magnificent animal of a bay colour,
fading into a whitey-brown, with elegantly, somewhat harp-shaped horns,
marked with rings, and a black semi-circular mark on the croup by which
it could be at once distinguished.  Its feet were of a jetty hue.
Though it might have seen us, it continued walking on in a sedate
manner, the rest following their leader with a confidence which showed
that they must put implicit trust in him.

My uncle and Hans, at once dismounting, crept towards the herd; and,
waiting until the greater number had passed, fired together, when three
of the animals fell dead.  The remainder, instead of turning to fly,
dashed forward to fill up the gaps in their line, the whole moving on at
a much greater speed than before.  Two others, however, were killed
before the herd made their escape through the pass towards which they
were directing their course.

Had we not driven away the lions, probably many more would have been
killed by them.  We at once carried off the five which were destined for
provisioning our party, and loaded our waggons with their skins and
horns.

We were now approaching a part of the country where we hoped to find a
greater number of elephants than we had yet met with, our chief object
being to obtain their tusks; although nothing came amiss, rhinoceros
horns, skins, or ostrich feathers; the latter especially, from their
small bulk, were really of more value than elephant tusks.

We were now crossing a wide plain with rocks.  Here and there were
ant-hills, by the side of each of which grew a dark-leaved tree called
the "Mollopie."  Near our camp was a rain-pool, at which our animals
were watered.  Jan here captured a large frog in which, when he cut it
open, for the purpose of preparing it for cooking, he found a whole
mouse, two or three ants, and several other insects.

In the morning our people informed us that they had heard the roaring of
a lion during the night at a neighbouring pool; and as there was a great
likelihood of his paying a visit to the camp, to make a feast off our
oxen, we determined to dispatch him before going out to hunt.

As we approached the pool, the noise was again heard.

"He must be in a thicket close by," exclaimed Harry.

But every thicket round was well beaten, and no lion appeared.  At last
I heard Harry laughing heartily, and saw him pointing to the opposite
side of the pool, where I caught sight of a big frog poking his head
above the reeds.  There could be no doubt of it.  Though he could not
swell himself to the size of a lion, Mr Bullfrog had managed to imitate
very closely his voice, so we returned to camp feeling somewhat ashamed
of ourselves, Harry every now and then giving way to a burst of
laughter.

In the open country, where little shelter is to be found, lions are not
often to be met with, and as they can be seen long before they approach,
no danger is to be apprehended from them.  One of the men who had
remained behind followed, bringing one of the bullfrogs which he had
captured in the pool.  The body, which we measured, was nine inches in
length, by five and a half wide; and the hind legs, from toe to toe,
eighteen inches.  On being cut open a young bird which it had lately
swallowed was found in its inside.

I, having completely recovered the use of my foot, arranged with Harry
that we should make another expedition together in search of game.  We
agreed that Jan should accompany us, and just as we were starting Hans
offered to go.  We would rather have dispensed with his company, as he
was not a favourite with either of us.  Mr Welbourn, my uncle, Toko,
and two or three Makololoes were to set off in another direction.  They
charged us not to go beyond a _vlei_ or pool, which we had heard of from
the Makololoes, about twelve miles to the northward.

This, however, gave us a very wide scope, and we fully expected to come
back with plenty of game of some sort.

We went on for some distance without meeting with any live creatures,
though we crossed the spoor of numerous elands, buffaloes, giraffes, and
occasionally of elephants.  Neither Hans nor Jan knew more of the
country than we did, but Harry said that he had brought a compass, so
that we should have no difficulty in finding our way, even should clouds
gather in the sky or night overtake us.  When, however, he came to
search for the instrument in his pocket, it was not to be found.

"Never mind," he observed, "as the sky is bright, the sun will guide us
by day, and the stars by night, even if we are kept out, and there is no
reason why we should be if we turn back again in good time."

On we went, therefore, intending on arriving at the _vlei_, to wait
until some animals should come to drink, which they were sure to do,
unless there were other water-holes in the neighbourhood.

We had brought very little food, expecting to be able to supply
ourselves with meat and fruits.  From the appearance of the country we
had no doubt that we should meet with melons, even though we might not
come across water before we arrived at the _vlei_.

We had, according to our calculation, gone about two-thirds of the
distance without having shot a single animal, when the weather began to
change.  Clouds gathered in the sky, and a thick mist swept across the
face of the country, such as occasionally, though not often, occurs in
that latitude.  We agreed, however, that by turning directly back we
should have to traverse the same region we had just passed over, without
finding game, and we should thus be disappointed in obtaining food.
This was not to be thought of.  I would be far better to go on to where
we should have every chance of finding it.  Hans concurred with us, and,
as Jan was always ready to go forward, on we went.

In consequence of being shaded from the rays of the sun, we were better
able to travel than usual during the hot hours of the day.  We had
reached the part of the country where we had expected to find the
_vlei_; but, even though Jan mounted to the topmost boughs of the
tallest tree we could find, when he came down he declared that he could
not discover water.

We therefore again pushed on, until we reached a rocky hill, to the
summit of which we climbed.  Not a pool could we see either to the
north, east, south, or west.

We were now getting both hungry and thirsty, for we had exhausted the
water we had brought in our bottles.  We were convinced, however, that
we must be near the _vlei_, and that some rise in the ground probably
hid it from view.  While looking about we caught sight of some animals
of the deer tribe, and Harry and I arranged to go down to try and kill
one of them, while Hans and Jan were to continue the search for water,
and, should they find it, they were to meet us at the foot of the hill,
from which they started.

Keeping ourselves among the rocks and shrubs and tall grass, we made our
way in the direction we had seen the deer.  As we got nearer Harry
pronounced them to be _ourebis_.  We were afraid that we should have no
chance of getting within shot, for we saw them gliding rapidly along,
often bounding several feet into the air, then galloping on again, and
once more bounding on.

"I'll try a dodge I once saw practised," whispered Harry.  "Do you lie
down with your rifle ready to fire behind yonder bush, and I'll go
forward and show myself.  They have a good deal of curiosity in their
nature, and I'll try to excite it."

He then placed his rifle and coat and hat on the ground, and creeping a
little forward, to one side of where I lay, he suddenly rose with his
feet in the air, supporting himself on his hands.  How he could manage
to maintain that position so long surprised me.  I should have had the
blood rush into my head and dropped down in a minute had I made the
attempt.

All the time I was watching the ourebis; which, no longer leaping about,
remained quiet for some seconds, and then with slow and stately steps
advanced towards the curious object.  I had time to examine them
minutely.  Their colour was a pale tawny above, and white below.  The
horns straight and pointed, and, as far as I could judge, five inches in
length.  The animal itself is of no great height, standing not more than
two feet from the ground, though when it lifts up its head it looks much
taller.  The female of the pair which approached was hornless.  On they
came, closer and closer.  I was afraid that Harry would drop down and
frighten them away before they had got near enough to enable me to take
a sure aim.

I was in as good a position as I could desire, for, though the bush
effectually concealed me, I could see them clearly.  I dared not,
however, move my rifle in the least degree, for fear it should touch the
leaves and make the animals suspicious.  "Do not fire until they begin
to move away, I want to get them up close to me," said Harry, in a
whisper.

The animals still, in spite of the danger, came on, until they were not
twenty yards off.  At length, it seemed to me, by the way they moved
their ears, that they were on the point of starting.

I fired, the buck dropped on his fore-legs, and at the same instant
Harry threw himself on his feet, lifted his rifle and fired at the doe
before she had got ten paces off.  Down she also came utterly helpless,
and was quickly put out of her suffering by Harry.  The buck
instinctively attempted to defend himself with his horns, but seizing
one of them, I deprived him of existence.

We had good reason to be satisfied with the result of Harry's
experiment.  He told me that not only the ourebis but several other
deer, if attracted in the same way by their suspicions or curiosity
being aroused, can be thus shot.

We lost no time in cutting open our deer, so as to lighten the loads,
and the better to preserve the meat.  Each was as much as a man could
carry on his shoulders.  We were unwilling, however, to leave any part
behind.  Believing that we could carry them better whole than cut up, we
staggered along with our burdens, fortunately not having far to go.  On
arriving at the spot agreed on, we found that our companions had not
returned.  We therefore set to work to collect fuel for a fire, and to
cut up one of the animals.  So parched had we become, that we could
scarcely refrain from drinking their blood.  I had always found,
however, that blood rather increased than diminished thirst.  We were
both by this time well versed in wood-craft, and quickly divided the
animal in the most scientific fashion.  While we were employed in this
manner, we frequently looked round to ascertain if the two men were
approaching, but they were not to be seen.

Having finished our task, while I was making up the fire, Harry climbed
to the top of the rock, that he might obtain a wider look-out.

"I can see them nowhere," he said, when he came down, "but I caught
sight of an animal which, if I mistake not, is a big lion following our
spoor, or probably it is attracted by the scent of the deer.  As he is
coming this way, we must be prepared for him: though he might not
condescend to eat a dead deer, he may take it into his head to carry off
one of us living subjects.  He is not likely to give us any undue notice
of his approach."

Harry agreed therefore to keep watch while I continued the operations on
which I was engaged.  I soon got some forked sticks, which I ran into
the ground to hold the spits, and on these I placed the venison to
roast, but hungry as I was I felt that without water I could scarcely
get down the food I was cooking.  Evening was approaching.

"I say, Fred, if those fellows don't come soon, we must set off by
ourselves, and look out for water.  Perhaps some may be found among the
rocks, or if not, we must cut some wooden spades and dig for it.  Those
deer wouldn't be inhabiting these parts if water wasn't in the
neighbourhood."

"It will be too late to commence any search tonight," I observed.  "It
is already nearly dark, and the chances are that the lion you saw just
now will pounce down upon us, if we go far from the fire.  I would
rather endure thirst than run that risk."

"Still we must have water," exclaimed Harry; "but you stay here and look
after the venison, and I'll just wander to a short distance.  I do not
suppose the brute will find me; and perhaps, you know, it was not a lion
after all I saw: it might have been a buffalo or a brindled gnu."

"You said positively it was a lion," I remarked; "for your own sake, as
well as mine, I beg that you will not wander from the camp."

Still Harry, pointing to his mouth, insisted on going.  Just as he was
about to set off, a loud roar, not twenty paces off, reached our ears.

"What do you say now?"  I asked.  "You don't mean to assert that that
was the cry either of an ostrich or a bullfrog."

"I wish that it were the latter," he answered; "for then there would be
a chance of finding water.  However, I'll stay in camp and try to endure
my thirst until those fellows come back--and they're pretty sure to find
water."

I did not like to say that I was not quite certain on that subject.  I
had hopes, however, that even should they have failed to find it, we
should not perish, as I trusted before long we might have a shower of
rain, although none had as yet fallen from the cloudy sky.  Some venison
which I had put close to the fire was by this time cooked, but it was
with the greatest difficulty that we could get down even a few
mouthfuls.

"I cannot eat another morsel," cried Harry, putting down his knife.  "If
those fellows don't arrive soon, dark as it is, I must set off by myself
to try and find water; depend upon it, there is some not far off, or
that lion would not come here," and he threw himself, utterly overcome,
on the ground.

I tried to cheer him up, and made another attempt to eat some venison,
but had to give it up after nibbling at a piece; yet I felt that I could
have swallowed a hearty meal, if I could have obtained a draught of
water, however tepid and full of insects it might have been.

We were sitting a short distance from the fire with our rifles in our
hands, prepared for the reception of the lion, should he venture to
invade our camp, when Harry exclaimed, "Hark!  I hear footsteps: they
must be those of Hans and your black fellow."

We listened; and I hoped that Harry was right.

"Let us shout!"  I exclaimed.

We both together raised our voices.  Our hail was answered from a
distance.  The night air had brought the sound of footsteps much further
than I should have supposed possible.  It was some time before, by the
light of the fire, we saw the rough, uncouth figure of Hans, followed by
Jan.

"Have you brought water?" was the first question Harry asked.

"Yah! we have brought water, and have seen plenty of elephants--fine
country for shooting, and we will go there to-morrow."

"Never mind the elephants and shooting now; hand me the water," cried
Harry, eagerly.

Hans gave Harry his skin bottle, and Jan hurried up with his to me.  I
swallowed the liquid eagerly, hot and nauseous as it was, full, I
suspect, of living creatures; but it tasted like nectar, and I half
emptied the bottle at a draught.

"Now I am ready for the venison!" cried Harry.

"So am I, indeed," said Hans; "for we haven't had anything to eat once
we left you, and are well-nigh dying of starvation."

"As we were of thirst," I remarked, handing Hans and Jan a large piece
of venison each.  They devoured it eagerly, and Harry and I then turned
to and were able to eat a good meal.

"I should like to get some sleep," said Hans; "we will tell you
to-morrow of our adventures."

"We are in no hurry to hear them," said Harry; "but I tell you, one of
us must keep a watch, or we may have an unpleasant visit from a lion,
who is prowling about in the neighbourhood."

"The cowardly brute won't come near us," said Hans, drowsily.  "The
chances are it was a rock you saw in the dusk, or it might have been a
jackal."

"But we heard it roar," said Harry.

"Oh, then it was a bullfrog," cried Hans, rolling himself up in his
cloak and lying down.

"Bullfrog or lion, there it is again!" exclaimed Harry, jumping up and
seizing his rifle.

There was no doubt about the matter; though the voice of an ostrich at a
distance may sound like that of a lion, the roar of the king of the
forest is unmistakable when close at hand.  Even Hans was convinced, and
was quickly on his feet.  It was very certain that we should get no rest
that night, unless we could dispose of the intruder.  The lion-skin was
also of value, and we could not allow him to escape with impunity.  We
all advanced together, resolved forthwith to shoot the brute; that we
should see him directly we had no doubt.  A short distance off, between
our camp-fire and the spot whence the roar proceeded, was a pile of low
rocks, a spur from a neighbouring hill.  We had just reached it, when we
caught sight of the lion who had emerged from behind a thicket a little
way ahead.  He seemed at once to look upon us as his foes.  Had it been
in the day-time, he would probably have slunk away; but night was his
season for activity; and, lashing his tail and again roaring loudly, he
advanced across the open space below the rocks.  Now was the critical
moment: should we fail to kill him, he might make a desperate spring and
knock over one of us.  It was settled, therefore, that Harry and Jan
should fire first, and then Hans and I, should they fail to kill the
brute: we to try what we could do, they, of course, in the meantime,
reloading.

The grand principle in attacking wild beasts is never to allow the whole
of the party to remain unarmed for a moment.  The lion did not appear
quite to like the look of things.  He advanced cautiously, showing his
whole vast proportions, his huge shaggy mane, and the afterpart of his
body looking thin and small, but even that was of the size of a
full-grown donkey.  Twice he stopped, and each time uttered a tremendous
roar.

"He smells us, if he cannot see us," said Harry.

Still the creature appeared doubtful whether he would spring towards the
suspected point.

"Now, Harry, let's see what you can do," I whispered.

"I shall be glad if I can knock him over the first shot," he answered.

Harry and Jan's rifles went off at the same moment, and we could hear
their bullets strike, but neither brought the lion to the ground.  His
rage overcame his fears; and lashing his tail and again roaring, he was
about to spring on us, when Hans and I, taking steady aim at him as he
rose from the ground, sent our leaden messengers of death through his
body.  He must have leapt up half-a-dozen feet, falling right over on
his head, where he lay struggling for a few seconds; but before we could
leap over the rocks and get near him, he was dead.  We signified our
satisfaction at the victory by a loud shout.

"We shall now sleep soundly," said Hans, giving the animal a kick with
his foot.

We repaired to our camp and made up the fire.  Though Hans declared that
there was no necessity for remaining awake, Harry and I agreed to keep
watch and watch until the morning, not feeling at all certain whether
another lion, or perhaps a leopard, might pay us a visit; or a herd of
elephants, buffaloes, or rhinoceroses, might come our way and trample us
to death, while enjoying our balmy slumbers.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

When people know that their lives may depend upon maintaining a blazing
fire, they must be foolish indeed if they allow themselves to slumber at
their posts; but I confess that I had great difficulty, during my watch,
in keeping my eyes open, after the exertions of the day and the hunger
and thirst I had endured.  I felt that my only chance was to get up and
walk about with my rifle in my hand.  I did not, however, go far from
the fire, as the smoke drove the mosquitoes and other insects away from
its immediate vicinity; and I knew also, that at any distance from the
flames I was as likely to be seized by a savage animal as I should be
did no fire exist.

I could hear every now and then the mutterings and occasional roars of
lions, with the cries of hyaenas and jackals, and the calls of various
night-birds.  Altogether the concert had a somewhat depressing effect,
accustomed though I was by this time to the noises proceeding from an
African forest.

At last the time I had agreed to watch came to an end, and I roused up
Harry, charging him to keep a bright look-out.

"Do not let yourself drop off for a moment, old fellow," I said; "as
long as any prowling animal sees you moving about around the fire he'll
not venture to make an attack; but should you slumber for a moment, it
is impossible to say what he may do."

"I do feel awfully drowsy, I own," answered Harry, rubbing his eyes and
yawning; "still I'll do my best.  It is a shame that fellow Hans won't
stand watch as he ought to do.  I only hope that another lion will come
roaring close up to the camp, for the sake of making him get on his
legs.  He knows that neither you nor I would sleep on our posts, so he
rests in perfect security, throwing all the trouble on us."

Harry and I talked on for a little time, I hoping that he would thus be
thoroughly aroused; then I lay down on the spot he had occupied, pretty
close to the fire, with my rifle by my side ready for instant use.

It appeared to me that I had not been asleep five minutes when I heard
Harry exclaim--

"Fred, rouse Jan.  Up with you, and get ready for battle."

I seized my rifle and sprang to my feet, as wide awake as ever I was in
my life, and there I saw, not six paces off, a creature with glaring
eyes; not a lion, however, but looking unusually large as it emerged
from the darkness into the light of the fire.

It crouched as if for a spring; at the same moment I heard Hans shriek
out.  For an instant I glanced round, and caught an indistinct sight of
another big cat-like creature stealing towards the rear of the camp.

"You and Jan must look out after that brute, and we'll attend to this
one," I shouted.

As I spoke, the leopard, for such it was, notwithstanding our cries,--
Harry, I should have said, had begun to bawl away as loudly as I was
doing,--made a furious spring towards him; but though he was shouting
lustily, he remained as cool as a cucumber, holding his rifle ready.

We fired, and both our balls took effect, when the leopard literally
turned, with its feet uppermost, and fell right down into the centre of
the fire, where it lay struggling convulsively, utterly unable to rise.
Directly afterwards I heard the report of a pistol, and, while hastily
reloading, I saw that Hans had shot the other leopard through the head.

As we did not wish to lose the skin of the one we had shot, Harry again
firing gave it its quietus; we then seizing it by its hind legs dragged
it out of the fire, and Jan's knife soon finished the other.

We thus gained two magnificent leopards' skins: the fire had but
slightly injured the one we had killed.

"There is some use in keeping watch at night, Hans," observed Harry;
"what would have become of us if I had not been awake?  Those brutes
would have been in our midst before we were able to lift a hand in our
defence.  As it was, I caught sight of only one of them stealing towards
us, and had barely time to rouse up the rest of you, so that if Fred
hadn't been very quick, the brute would have been down upon us."

"All right," answered Hans, "such a thing is not likely to happen a
second time in a night, so I suppose we may now go to sleep in quiet."

"I don't suppose anything of the sort," replied Harry; "there are no end
of lions and leopards prowling about, and you would have heard them if
you hadn't snored so loudly.  It will be your turn to keep watch, and I
intend to rouse you up in half an hour."

"Yah, yah," answered Hans, placing his head on the ground, and going off
to sleep again.

As I thought would probably be the case, the scent of the dead leopards
attracted packs of hyaenas and jackals, who serenaded us with their
horrible yells and howls for the remainder of the night, though the
blazing fire we kept up prevented them from approaching.

Notwithstanding Harry's threat, he did not wake up Hans, who would
probably again have composed himself for sleep, and we might have been
left to the tender mercies of the hyaenas.

In the morning we took the skins off the two leopards; and cleaned and
packed them up so as to be easily transported.  As Hans claimed the skin
of the leopard he had shot, he had to carry it, while Jan carried ours.
We then started off for the _vlei_.  It would be too late in the
morning, we calculated, by the time we could reach it, to shoot any
animals; and we should have to wait till the evening, when they would be
likely to come down to drink at the pool.  We should not, therefore,
have hastened our footsteps, had we not been anxious to obtain a fresh
supply of water; for the small stock Hans and Jan had brought was
exhausted, and we were now almost as thirsty as we had been on the
previous day.

Hans walked on ahead without speaking; but as he was never very
talkative, we were not surprised at this.  At last he turned round, and
told Jan that he must carry his leopard-skin.

We thought this too much of a good thing.  Jan appealed to us.

"Certainly not," answered Harry.  "You claimed all the skin as your
property.  You are bound to carry it, or leave it behind if you like,
but Jan shall not be compelled to carry it."

Hans turned round and walked on sullenly, but presently I saw him drop
his burden, and then present his rifle at Harry.  Fearing that Hans was
about to murder my friend, I dashed forward and struck up the weapon,
which the next instant went off, the bullet almost grazing Harry's hat.

"We must overpower the man," I said, making a sign to Jan, and we all
three threw ourselves upon him, and prevented him drawing his knife,
when he would, I suspect, have run amuck among us, as the Malays
frequently do when exasperated.

How to treat the madman--for such he appeared to be--it was difficult to
say.  He was immensely strong, and we had to exert ourselves to keep him
down.  Jan proposed to kill him, and was drawing his knife for the
purpose when we interfered.

"We shall have to do it, I fear, if we cannot bind his hands behind
him," said Harry.

"No, no; we must deprive him of his rifle and ammunition, and he will
thus be compelled to follow us."

"If he wanders away into the desert, his fate will be certain," observed
Harry.

"He has brought it upon himself," I remarked; "here, Jan, take my
rifle-strap; slip it round his arms and draw it tight,--be quick about
it.  Now, Harry, get another strap round his legs."

All this time Hans was struggling violently, without uttering a word.
Having succeeded in doing as I proposed, we had him completely in our
power.  He grinned fearfully and foamed at the mouth; indeed, he almost
seized poor Jan's bare arm in his teeth, and had not Harry given him a
severe blow he would have succeeded.

"Now let's try to get him on his feet, and we will then slacken the
strap sufficiently to enable him to walk, though not to allow him to run
away," I said.

Hans was very unwilling at first to move, but at length we got him to
walk along, though he appeared like a man in a dream,--not knowing what
he was doing.  Jan assured us that he could find the way to the
water-hole, and we therefore proceeded in the direction he pointed out.
It was a question, however, whether we should remain to shoot there, or,
having supplied our bottles, return with our unfortunate companion to
the camp.  As he seemed strong enough to carry the leopard-skin, we
replaced it on his shoulders.  Every now and then he would attempt to
run; but the strap round his legs quickly brought him up.  Our progress
was of course very slow, until at length the _vlei_ was reached.  We
passed on our way several trees of considerable size overturned by
elephants; many of them being ten inches in diameter, it must have
required great strength to uproot them.  Others were broken short off, a
little distance from the ground, by the elephants.  This showed us that
the country was frequented by the animals, and that if we had patience
we might be able to shoot a number.  While lying in ambush, however, it
would be necessary to remain perfectly silent, as they would be alarmed
by the slightest noise.

At length the water-hole came in sight, and eagerly hurrying forward we
quenched our thirst and refilled our bottles.  Hans did not refuse to
drink, and appeared somewhat better afterwards; but there was a roll in
his eye which made us unwilling to set him at liberty.  Not to alarm the
elephants, we retired to a distance and lighted a fire, where we cooked
the venison we had brought with us, which, although somewhat high, was
still eatable; we then lay down to rest under the shade of a
wide-spreading tree, making Hans sit by us.

Harry and I, wishing to obtain some sleep, told Jan to watch our
prisoner; and as he had had more rest than we had the previous night, we
hoped he would keep awake.

At length I opened my eyes, and, on looking round, what was my dismay to
see Jan fast asleep, and to find that Hans was not there.  I aroused
Harry.  We had placed our prisoner's rifle and knife close to us, and
they were safe.  He could not be far off; so calling Jan--who looked
very much surprised at finding what had happened--we started off, hoping
to discover the poor wretch.  The feeling of anger with which we had
before regarded him was now changed into compassion.  Should he have had
any evil intentions, could he have got his arms free, he might have
brained us as we slept.  However, it seemed doubtful whether he had been
able to get more than his legs at liberty.  The strap which secured his
elbows was nowhere to be seen.  We traced his spoor, but this
disappeared along an elephant track--for even Jan failed to discover the
marks of his footsteps.  The night was approaching, and we lost all hope
of discovering him.  We therefore took up our position in the thicket we
had selected, close to the path the elephants pursued when going down to
the pool.  We here fully expected to shoot two or three animals.  We
then proposed returning next morning to the camp, in order to bring two
or three of the men with us to make further search for Hans.

We had not long taken up our position, when we caught sight of the huge
forms of several elephants coming through the forest, along the path
which we had discovered.  We saw them sweeping their trunks backwards
and forwards over the ground, evidently suspecting something wrong.

Thirst impelled them forward, however.  They approached close to where
we lay hidden, and I was just about to fire at the leader, who had
magnificent tusks--Harry having agreed to take the next in order--when a
loud shout rent the air, and a figure started up directly in front of
the animal.  It was Hans.  His arms were still bound, but he kept
leaping about, utterly fearless of the elephants before him.  I
hesitated for a moment, when the thought struck me,--should I kill the
elephant, I might save the life of the unhappy being who seemed to be
courting his fate.  I pulled the trigger.  I could hear the ball strike,
but what was my horror to see the animal rush forward, and the next
moment trample Hans Scarff beneath his feet.  A single shriek escaped
the miserable man, and then all was silent.  Excited as I was, I did not
notice that Harry fired at the second elephant at the same moment.  His
bullet must have entered the animal's brain, for it sank a helpless mass
on the ground.  The rest of the herd, alarmed by the fate of their
leaders, turned round, and with loud trumpeting rushed away into the
forest.

The first elephant, in the meantime, lifted up the body of his victim,
whom he dashed violently to the ground; and then, staggering a few
paces, came down with a crash and lay motionless.

We hurried out of our ambush to render assistance to Hans; but he was
dead, every bone in his body being broken; even his features could not
be recognised.  We could not blame ourselves for the occurrence, though
grieved at his sad fate.

We now purposed returning to our last camp, where we had left our fire
burning.  Jan begged leave to cut off some pieces of the elephant's
flesh to cook for supper.  This he did forthwith, in a more rapid way
than we could have accomplished the task.

Covering up the body of Hans with some thick bushes, we left it where it
lay, in order to prevent the hyaenas and jackals from getting at it, and
returned to our fire.

We had not long been seated round it, talking over the events of the
day, when Jan, starting up, declared that he saw the light of a fire in
the distance.

Harry and I looked in the same direction.  There was no doubt about the
matter.

"Who can they be?" exclaimed Harry.

"Perhaps they are natives," I answered.  "If so, we must be careful how
we approach them."

"I think it is more likely that they are our friends coming to search
for us," said Harry.  "They will be surprised at our not appearing
yesterday, and may have pushed forward a party who, if on horseback,
would soon be up with us."

I at length agreed that such was probably the case, and we accordingly
settled at once to go towards the fire.  We should probably, even at a
distance, be able to discover whether or not it was made by our friends.
Jan was of our opinion.

Having hastily finished our meal, we made our way in the direction we
proposed.  On getting near the fire, Jan offered to go forward and to
bring word while we lay hid, so that we might retreat if necessary
before we were discovered.

When I was in the forests of Africa, I always remembered that while I
was stalking an animal, a lion or leopard might be stalking me; and we
therefore, while we waited for the return of Jan, kept our eyes about
us, and our ears open to detect the slightest sound.

We had longer to wait than we expected.  At length we heard a rustling
of leaves near us, and Jan's voice exclaiming--

"Dey de Capt'n's party, and Toko, and two, three, Makololoes; dey all
got horses!"

This was good news.  As we went along he told me that he had not
informed them that we were near, as he wished to give us the pleasure of
announcing ourselves.

In a few minutes we were in the midst of our friends, and our appearance
afforded my uncle great relief.  They had come across our camp, and
found the bodies of the lions, and had some misapprehensions that after
all we might have been carried off by others.

He was, of course, much shocked at the fate of Hans, though, he
observed, that it was better he should have died thus, than have
committed murder or some other mischief, as from his uncertain temper it
was very likely he would have done.

The Makololoes, on hearing that we had killed two elephants, were eager
to go at once and obtain some of the flesh; but my uncle persuaded them
to remain until the next morning, promising that they should then have
an abundance of meat.

Although expeditions on foot have their advantages, Harry and I came to
the conclusion, when we again found ourselves mounted, that we should
prefer in future going out on horseback.  My uncle told us that he
expected the waggons would camp where we then were, so that we might
load them with the tusks and skins we might obtain.

Directly breakfast was over we rode to the scene of our encounter with
the two elephants, neither of which had been disturbed.  The tusks were
soon removed, and the Makololoes cut away enough flesh for a whole army.
A grave was then dug, and the body of poor Hans buried.  This done, we
followed the spoor of the elephants, intending to kill them while
feeding in the day-time, and afterwards attack them as they came down to
drink.

We had not ridden far when Toko, who was ahead, came back with the
intelligence that he had discovered four or five in an open glade,
plucking off the branches and leaves of their favourite trees; and that
by keeping along through the wood we might come upon them without much
risk of being discovered.  Almost a minute afterwards we came in sight
of the animals, when we at once dismounted to watch them and arrange our
plan of proceeding.  While some Makololoes held our horses, my uncle,
Harry, and I crept along not far from the edge of the forest, so as to
get in front of the elephants we saw feeding, while Mr Welbourn, Toko,
and one of his followers made a wider circuit, with the intention of
taking them on the other side should they move in that direction.  We
hurried on, eager to get in front of the animals before they should move
away.  They now offered unusually good marks to our rifles.  My fear was
that their sharp eyes might detect us before we could get near enough to
fire.  My uncle advised each of us to select a tree up which we could
climb, or whose trunk was of sufficient thickness to afford us
protection should the elephants, discovering us, make a charge.

As the forest was tolerably thick, they could not move as rapidly as in
the open ground.  We hoped, therefore, to have time to escape should our
bullets fail to kill them at the first shot.  There were three
magnificent fellows feeding close together, and several others beyond
them.  The latter had fallen to the share of Mr Welbourn and his party,
and we agreed to devote our attention to the three nearest.  We
proceeded with the greatest care, in Indian file.  The slightest sound,
even at a distance, caused by a stumble or the breaking of a twig, would
attract the attention of our expected prey.

We at length could see their trunks lifted above their heads to reach
the higher branches, the rest of their bodies being invisible, and of
course they could not see us.

Having taken up our positions, one in front of each elephant, we crept
forward, bending down as low as we could so as to escape detection as
long as possible.  At the same time we looked out for trees to serve as
places of refuge.  Activity and presence of mind are necessary when a
person is hunting wild beasts, but especially when elephant shooting.

I lost sight of my uncle, who was on my left, but I could just see
Harry, who was on the opposite side, his head appearing above the grass
and shrubs.  I had made up my mind not to fire until I heard the report
of my uncle's rifle.  At last I could see the huge ears of an elephant,
just in front of me, flapping up and down.

I knew that the moment would soon arrive when I must fire or be
discovered by the elephant.  I crept on a few paces further, then rose
on my knees.  At the moment that I heard the crack of my uncle's rifle,
I lifted my own weapon and fired, aiming full at the creature's broad
chest as high up as I could, so as to clear the head.  Before the
smoke--which was kept from rising by the branches--had cleared away, a
loud trumpeting was heard.  The moment it began Harry fired, but I could
not see the result.  I sprang to my feet, so as to escape behind a tree
I had marked, fully expecting to have the elephant I had shot charge
furiously at me; but it did not, and though I retreated some paces I
could still see its head.  It seemed to be looking about to discover the
enemy who had wounded it.  No long time passed before it caught sight of
me, and then on it came.  I could also hear a loud crashing among the
boughs to the right, produced, I had no doubt, by the elephant at which
Harry had aimed.  On reaching the tree I instantly began to reload,
hoping to have time to give the elephant another shot as he passed me;
for, though he had seen me for a moment, I knew that he would go
straight on without looking behind the tree.  But, even before he had
got up to the spot, down he fell on his knees, crushing several young
trees.  At the same moment I heard Harry cry out, and leaving my own
prize I dashed forward to his assistance.  I was just in time to see the
elephant, with his trunk uplifted, close to Harry, who had not had time
to reload or take shelter behind a tree.  I fired, aiming behind the ear
of the elephant, when down it came, as mine had done, prostrate on the
ground.  If my uncle had been equally successful, we should have made a
grand haul.  Without stopping to finish off our elephants, we hurried in
the direction we supposed him to be, reloading as we went.  We uttered a
loud shout to attract his attention.  It was replied to by a tremendous
roar; and, instead of an elephant, what was our surprise to see an
enormous lion lashing its tail and looking up at the branches of a tree,
among which we discovered my uncle; and he must have had a narrow
escape, for he was only just beyond reach of the brute, who might, it
seemed to us, by making a desperate spring, have struck him down.  We
had now to look out for ourselves, for should the lion discover us,
unless we could kill him at once, he might tear us to pieces.
Fortunately another tree of considerable girth, and in the position we
desired, was close at hand.  We retreated behind it.  As the lion turned
his head and we thought might be looking for us, we both fired.  To our
great delight we rolled him over where he stood.

"Bravo!  Well done!" cried my uncle, descending the tree.  "We'll now go
after my elephant."

Leading the way, without exchanging further words, he dashed out of the
forest.



CHAPTER NINE.

On getting out from among the trees we caught sight of an elephant going
along at full swing across the plain.  There seemed but little chance of
our overtaking him, but my uncle urged us to persevere, for by the large
blotches and splashes of blood which we met with, it was evident that he
was wounded.  It was pretty hot work, as we were loaded with our
ammunition and our rifles, but we were encouraged to proceed by finding
that the elephant was slackening his pace.

"We shall catch him before long!" exclaimed my uncle.  "On, on.  If that
lion hadn't interfered, I should have shot him at once; but the brute's
lair must have been close to where I stood, and I ran a fearful chance
of being seized by him."

We did not see what had become of the other elephants, and we concluded
that either Mr Welbourn had disposed of them, or that they had run into
the forest to conceal themselves.  However, we soon saw that the attempt
to overtake the elephant on foot was useless.  We therefore made a short
cut back to where we had left our horses.  Each of us mounting one,
guided by the spoor, we immediately made chase.  It was far more
satisfactory to be on horseback than on foot.  Following the spoor, we
quickly again came in sight of the elephant, which was moving slowly on.
Seeing us, he lifted up his trunk and, trumpeting loudly, seemed about
to charge.

My uncle, notwithstanding, rode forward and fired.  The ball struck,
when immediately, turning the horse's head, he galloped off, taking the
way towards the camp.  He had not gone far, however, before the elephant
stopped, and Harry and I coming up, both fired, when down it came to the
ground, and was dead before my uncle reached it.

"A good day's sport, my lads," he exclaimed in high glee.  "We shall
soon have the waggons loaded if we go on in this way.  Fred, you go to
the camp to bring up the oxen to load with the tusks and meat, while
Harry and I will look after the other elephants and the lion."

I had taken a good survey of the country, so that I believed I could
find my way, and without hesitation set off.  I had gone but a short
distance when a troop of giraffes hove in sight, and beautiful objects
they were, with their heads elevated on their long necks.  Influenced by
the propensity of a hunter I dashed forward in pursuit.  Suddenly, my
horse swerved on one side, and I saw that he had narrowly escaped a
pitfall.  Almost directly afterwards, two of the giraffes sank into
other pits, and on turning round I saw that the animals were pursued by
a party of natives, who had them thus completely in their power.

On examining the pit into which I had so nearly tumbled, I perceived
that it was about twelve feet in depth, with a bank of earth about seven
feet high left in the centre, broad at the bottom, and narrowing towards
the top.  The fore-legs of the giraffe had sunk into one side of the
hole, the hinder legs into another, the body resting on the narrow bank,
so that the creature in spite of all its struggles could not possibly
extricate itself.

I left the natives to take possession, and rode on endeavouring to avoid
the pit-falls, of which I had little doubt there were many on my way.  I
had, of course, to go much slower than I should otherwise have done.
Though two or three times I nearly got caught, I safely reached the
camp.  Stopping merely to take some refreshment, I again set off with
the oxen, to bring in the produce of our chase.  We found that it was
necessary to be quick about it, lest the natives should find that we had
killed the elephants and appropriate the tusks.  They, however, had
hitherto been so busily employed in chasing the giraffes that they had
not discovered the elephants.  We took possession of the tusks, and as
much of the meat as our party could consume.

Mr Welbourn had been almost as successful, having killed two fine
elephants and a couple of deer.  Next day we continued our journey
northward.  In passing over the plain, while Harry and I were riding on
ahead, we caught sight of an animal occasionally rising out of the
ground and then disappearing.

"That must be a beast caught in a trap or pit-full," said Harry; "let's
go and see what it is."

On reaching the spot we found that he was right in his conjectures.  He
told me that the animal was a quagga, which somewhat resembles a
well-shaped ass.  In vain the quagga tried to get out by the most
desperate efforts.  Sometimes its fore feet almost touched the top of
the bank, but again and again it fell back.

"I should like to take possession of the animal," said Harry, "it
doesn't appear to be at all injured, and if we could manage to break it
in, it would make a capital riding horse.  If you'll watch the pit, I'll
go and get some of the men to come with ropes."

To this I agreed, and he soon returned with Toko and two other men,
bringing not only ropes, but a large sack and a saddle.

"What are you going to do with those things?"  I asked.

"You shall see," he replied.  "It was Toko's idea."

The quagga looked very much astonished at seeing itself surrounded by
human beings, and as before, it endeavoured to escape from the pit.

As it did so, Toko, who had fastened the sack to a loop at the end of a
long stick, drew it over the quagga's head, so as to prevent its biting,
which it would have done had it been able to see.

A halter was fixed round its mouth, and ropes were passed under its
body, by which it was drawn out.  As soon as it found itself on firm
ground, it began to throw its legs out in all directions, but Toko held
it fast by the halter.  At last, wearied by its exertions, it stood
perfectly still.  The moment it did so, Toko made a sign to his
followers, who clapped a saddle on its back, and drew tight the girths.

"Capital!" cried Harry.  "I have got a first-rate steed at small cost,
and I'll soon show you what it can do."

Before I could dissuade him from making the attempt, he, with his usual
impetuosity, leapt on the quagga's back, and, seizing the bridle, told
Toko to let go.

What Harry might have expected occurred.  Off started the quagga, full
gallop, towards the herd from which it had been separated by falling
into the pit.  I feared from the vicious nature of the animals, that,
seeing some strange being on the back of their companion, they would
kick it and its rider to death.  In vain I shouted to Harry to stop his
steed and come back: that was more than he could do.  So telling Toko to
mount his horse, I set off in pursuit.

The moment the herd of quaggas saw us coming, away they galloped at a
furious rate.  There were not many streams, but over the rocky beds of
watercourses, through dense thickets, up hills, down valleys, on they
went.

Our horses began to show signs of fatigue, and I was afraid Harry would
be carried away into the wilderness.  To attempt to throw himself off
would have been madness, and yet while the quaggas were running, there
was little chance that their companion would stop.

We had ridden so far that I knew our friends would be anxious about us,
for they had not seen us disappear, and no one in the camp would know
what had become of us.

To abandon Harry was not to be thought of, and we therefore pushed
forward in the hopes of at length coming up with him and stopping his
wild steed.  The difficulty was solved in an unexpected way.  Suddenly
in front of the herd of quaggas appeared a large party of people armed
with spears and darts.  Uttering loud shouts, the blacks began to send
their missiles among the herd.  The quaggas were thrown into the
greatest confusion, some going on one side, some on the other, others
turning in the direction from which we had come.  At length the shouts
and cries around it brought Harry's quagga to a standstill, and enabled
us to get alongside.  I advised him to dismount.

"No, no!" he answered.  "I have got my steed and intend to him, and if
you ride near he'll go well enough."

Harry was right.  The brute, pretty well tired out, went with perfect
quietness, and submitted to be tethered with a strong rope and hobbles
round its legs, so that there was no chance of its breaking away.

"I'll tame him!" cried Harry.  "Tell them, Toko, no one must on any
account bring him food--I alone will give it him."

By this time the natives, who had killed half-a-dozen quaggas, had come
close to us.  We considered that it would be prudent, if not an act of
politeness, to thank them for stopping the quagga; and Toko, who was our
spokesman, so explained matters, that the hunters expressed their
happiness in seeing us, and invited us to their village.

We should have excused ourselves, on the plea of having at once to
return to camp; but, as the day was already drawing to a close, and even
Toko declared that during the darkness he should be unable to find his
way back, we accepted the invitation, and set off with our new friends,
who were in high spirits at the thoughts of the quagga flesh they were
about to enjoy.

Their huts were larger and cleaner than any we had yet seen; and we
found that, although the people were hunters, they were also
agriculturists, and possessed pretty extensive plantations at the back
of the village.

The women were immediately set to work to prepare the feast; and in a
short time the whole population was banqueting.  We, of course, soon
knocked off, and begged permission to rest in one of the huts.  We had
scarcely however gone to sleep, than we were aroused by a tremendous
hubbub; and, rushing out, we found all the women on foot, engaged in
seizing their children, whom they had hauled out of their beds, or
rather up from the mats on which they lay, and were belabouring them
unmercifully with rods.  On enquiring the cause from Toko, he told us
that news had been brought that an immense herd of elephants was
approaching the plantations.  The object of beating the children was to
frighten away the animals.  This was, for one cause, good news for us,
as we hoped to obtain full cargoes for our waggons.  We at once offered
to go out and shoot the elephants, if the natives would guide us to the
trees in which we could take up our posts for the purpose.

We soon found plenty of volunteers, and, guided by them, we each reached
a tree in the neighbourhood of the plantations, near which they assured
us the elephants were sure to pass.  We gladdened their hearts by
telling them that they should have the meat, provided we retained the
tusks for our share.  The noise, however, continued; the women
shrieking, and flourishing their rods, the children howling, dogs
barking, and the men shouting at the tops of their voices and waving
fire-brands.  Our fear was that the elephants would be frightened, and
turn back; but scarcely had we climbed up the trees, each of us
accompanied by several natives, than we caught sight, through the gloom,
of the dusky forms of an immense herd of elephants emerging from the
thicker part of the forest.  We at once, taking aim at the leaders,
fired, hoping to kill some and turn back the rest.  Two fell, and the
herd halted, apparently too much astonished to tell what had happened.

This gave us time to reload, when again the animals came on, passing by
the fallen bodies of their companions.  Taking steady aim we again all
fired; and, beyond our most sanguine expectations, three more elephants
sank to the ground, each shot through the head.  Whether or not the
shrieks in front distracted their attention and made them regardless of
the sound of our shots, I cannot say; but the animals scarcely stopped
for a moment, though some of them trumpeted notes of alarm, and advanced
with apparent caution.  The rest stopped lazily, waving about their huge
trunks.

I was very thankful that we were high enough up the trees to be out of
their reach.  Though several passed, us before we had reloaded, others
followed, and three more bit the dust.  Neither did this stop the onward
course of the elephants; for, breaking down the fences which enclosed
the plantations, they swept across, seizing the fruit with their trunks,
and transferring it to their mouths.

Again and again we fired together.  The cries of the inhabitants did not
stop their advance, though it tended to turn them on one side, where,
meeting with several huts, they trampled them down as if they had been
built of cards.  Had it not been for the exertions of the people, the
whole village would have been destroyed; which Toko assured us, had
frequently in other instances been the case.

As soon as the elephants had passed, we descended, and as they showed no
inclination to turn back, we pursued them, firing as we could make
certain shots, thus killing I am afraid to say how many more, lest my
account might not be credited.

The remainder of the herd then swept on, though we would not give up the
chase until we had expended nearly all the ammunition we had with us.
At length we returned to the village, where we found the people taking
the loss of their crops very philosophically, as they considered that
the abundance of elephant meat would make them ample amends.

"I hope the poor people will not get a surfeit," remarked Harry.  "I
suspect in a few days they'll wish the carcases at Jericho, or at all
events, at a distance from their village.  Our horses and the quagga
would have fared ill, had the elephants come across them."

After a few hours' rest, we bade our friends goodbye, and mounted our
steeds, promising to return for the tusks, which we reminded them were
ours.

Harry wisely kept a sack over his animal's neck, and Toko and I rode on
either side to guide it.  The creature went wonderfully well, and sooner
than we had expected we came upon the waggons.  The news we brought was
highly satisfactory, and without a moment's delay the oxens' heads were
turned in the direction of the village.

The people received us as old friends, and to encourage them to help us
we promised them a reward for each of the tusks they brought in.  They
had already begun to butcher the elephants which had fallen in their
plantations, and in every direction round the huts strips of flesh were
hung up to dry, creating an odour far from pleasant.  They lost no time
in bringing in the tusks.  Harry and I were highly complimented on our
performance.  The tusks being cleaned and stowed away, our waggons were
nearly full: another day's successful hunting would enable us to turn
our faces westward.  We accordingly promised to reward our hosts if they
would bring us information as to the direction the herd had taken.
Harry and I had been congratulating ourselves on the prospect of a quiet
night's rest in our tent between the waggons; but we had not been long
asleep when we were aroused by a tremendous clap of thunder which seemed
to break directly over our heads, while almost immediately afterwards,
there came a most fearful shrieking and shouting from the village close
to which we were encamped.  Slipping on our coats, we hurried out.  As
we did so a curious sight met our gaze.  The whole of the male
population were on foot, armed with bows, and arrows; and as the
lightning darted from the black clouds we saw them shooting away at them
as fast as they could place their arrows to the string.

As may be supposed, we kept carefully behind the savages lest we might
be struck by the arrows, which we had heard were poisoned.  The thunder
rattled and roared, the lightning flashed, and the men shrieked and
howled.  I asked Toko what it all meant.

"They're shooting at the storm-clouds to drive them away," he answered.

"Do you think it will produce that effect?"  I asked.

"Who knows?" he replied.  "They fancy so, and are therefore right to try
and get rid of the storm, and drive away what they believe would do them
harm."

I told Toko that the powerful Being who rules the heavens would not be
influenced by such folly, though he would be ready to hear the prayers
of the smallest child.  He seemed to take the matter far more lightly
than I should have expected.

"They are poor ignorant savages," he remarked, "who have not the
advantage of living with white men."

The storm swept by, and the poor people were satisfied that their
shooting had driven it away.

Next morning, inspanning at an early hour, we proceeded in the direction
we concluded the elephants had taken.

While camping at noon, some of the natives who had gone on ahead as
scouts, brought us the satisfactory intelligence that the herd were
feeding in a wood about eight miles off; and that as a stream ran by,
they were certain to go down to drink in the evening; when, if we took
proper measures, we should be able to kill as many more as we wanted.
We lost no time, therefore, in proceeding onward, and as the ground was
pretty level we made good progress.

We camped at a part of the stream where we could draw water; and where,
from the rocky character of the bank, the elephants were not likely to
come down and drink.  On one side it was a swamp, between which and our
camp we could leave our horses at liberty to feed, one or two men only
being required to watch them.  As soon as these arrangements were made,
we set off to search for the spoor of the elephants, so that we might
place ourselves in ambush on one side, as we had before done, to shoot
them as they approached or returned from the water.

As we made our onward way, we caught sight of numerous elephants feeding
at their ease in various directions.  If they were part of the herd
which we had lately attacked, they had soon recovered from their alarm.
We took up our posts in satisfactory positions, hoping that, before the
night was over, we should have bagged the full complement of tusks we
required.

I do not suppose the detailed account of our various proceedings would
prove interesting.  Suffice it to say, we were not disappointed.  Harry,
I, and Toko shot one elephant apiece, and my uncle and Mr Welbourn each
shot three, they using explosive bullets, which never fail to kill the
animals they wound.

At length, frightened by the destruction of their companions, the
remainder of the herd retreated, and we, leaving the bodies until next
morning, returned to our tent.

As Harry and I were pretty well knocked up with our exertions of the
previous day, we remained encamped while natives were employed in
bringing in the tusks.

After breakfast we strolled out with our guns, hoping to get some wild
fowl in the marsh, for we were somewhat tired of feeding on elephant's
flesh.

We had killed several birds, and on our way back we stopped to look at
the horses and quagga, which were feeding in perfect harmony.  The
latter having a bandage round its eyes, and it being hobbled, Harry went
up to it, and spoke gently in its ear.

"Take care!"  I exclaimed, "he'll give you an ugly bite."

As I spoke the quagga turned his head and very nearly caught him by the
arm.

It was a lesson to Harry not to pet his favourite in future, and I
advised that he should muzzle it until its temper should become
softened.

We were standing talking, when suddenly the horses began to prance and
kick up their heels.

"Hallo! what are those?" exclaimed Harry, turning round.

We then saw, emerging from the marsh, where they had been wallowing, a
couple of huge rhinoceroses, who seemed to look upon the horses and us
as intruders they had a right to drive off their domains.

It was not without some difficulty that we got out of their way.  Clumsy
as the animal looks, and short as are its legs, it can move with
wonderful rapidity over the hard ground.

As our guns were only loaded with small shot, it would have been useless
to fire at them.  The horses could take pretty good care of themselves,
though they exhibited their fear of the savage-looking creatures by
scampering off in all directions.

Meantime, having withdrawn our small shot, we were ramming down bullets
as fast as we could.  Although the horses could escape, the poor quagga,
with its legs hobbled and its eyes covered, had but a poor chance.  The
leading rhinoceros had singled it out as the object of attack; and,
before Harry and I could fire, rushing furiously forward, it pierced the
poor animal through with its formidable horns, pinning it to the earth.
When too late to save the quagga, we both pulled our triggers, when the
animal, still dragging the body of its victim on, rushed forward several
paces before it dropped.

We, of course, reloaded, but before we could fire, the other rhinoceros
might be in the midst of the camp and commit all sorts of damage.
Fortunately, at that moment, Toko, who had just arrived with a party of
men carrying the tusks, his rifle being loaded with ball, with a
well-directed shot prevented the catastrophe we feared by killing the
rhinoceros just before it reached the waggons.

We had an evening of rejoicing, for by the addition of our rhinoceros
horns, our waggons were piled up to the very top; and my uncle expressed
some apprehension that the axles might break down with the weight of the
unusual load before we arrived at the coast.

We lost not a day in proceeding thither.  On reaching Walfish Bay, we
safely embarked the valuable produce we had collected.

So ended the first series of my adventures in Africa.  I have, however,
since made several other expeditions to various parts of that hitherto
little-known continent, of which I may some day give an account to the
world.

THE END.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Adventures in Africa, by W.H.G. Kingston

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ADVENTURES IN AFRICA ***

***** This file should be named 23575.txt or 23575.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/5/7/23575/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
