The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Temporary Dead-Lock, by Thomas A. Janvier

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Temporary Dead-Lock
       1891

Author: Thomas A. Janvier

Release Date: December 10, 2007 [EBook #23806]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TEMPORARY DEAD-LOCK ***




Produced by David Widger






A TEMPORARY DEAD-LOCK

By Thomas A. Janvier

Copyright, 1891, by Harper & Brothers




I.


Mr. John Amesbury, Senior Warden of St. Jude's Church, Minneapolis, to
the Rev. Clement Markham:

Vestry of St. Jude's, April 4th.

Dear Mr. Markham,--At a special meeting of the wardens and vestry of St.
Jude's Church held this day, it was unanimously decided to grant your
request for leave of absence from your duties as rector of this parish
from June 1st till September 13th, inclusive, proximo, with permission
to go abroad. I am instructed further to state that the wardens and
vestry of St. Jude's have much pleasure in granting your request, as
they feel that your zealous and very successful administration of
the affairs of the parish has abundantly entitled you to a period of
relaxation and rest. Your salary for the term of your absence will be
paid to you in advance.

In my personal capacity, my dear Markham, permit me to add that I am
delighted that you are to have this holiday. You richly deserve
it. By-the-way, a good deal of amusement was caused by the rather
characteristic error in the date of your formal application for leave.
Were you to receive precisely the holiday that you asked for, you would
have to turn back the wheels of time, for your letter was dated _last
year!_




II.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mrs. Winthrop Tremont, Boston:

St. Jude's Rectory, Minneapolis, May 15th.

Dear Aunt Lucy,--We are getting on famously with our preparations for
the summer. Dear Clement is full of his visit to England, and I am sure
that he will have a delightful time. The bishop has given him a letter
of introduction to the Bishop of London, and another to Dean Rumford,
of Canterbury, so a very desirable introduction to the best clerical
society is assured to him. He expects to sail from New York on the
_City of Paris_ June 5th, and to sail from London on the same vessel on
September 4th. This will bring him back to New York in plenty of time to
get home to preach on the next Sunday, the 14th. He expects to write his
sermon on the voyage. It would be delightful to go with him, but this
is impossible on account of the children. I have engaged board for
the summer at a small but very good hotel in the White Mountains--the
Outlook House, Littleton, New Hampshire--and I expect to be very
comfortable there. I made a funny mistake in writing for my rooms. I
directed my first letter to Littleton, New York. Wasn't it absurd?

Dear Clement expects to get some vestments in London, where they
make them so well, you know, and he has promised to bring me from
Paris--where he will spend a fortnight--two dozen pairs of gloves and
six pairs of black silk stockings. Fancy my having six pairs of black
silk stockings at once! I shall feel like a queen. The children are very
well.




III.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mrs. Clement Markham, Littleton, New
Hampshire:

On board "City of Paris," June 5th--3:80 p.m.... I stayed with my brother
Ronald last night, and he and Van Cortlandt came down to see me off.
I barely caught the steamer, for I forgot my watch--left it on the
mantel-piece in Ronald's chambers--and did not remember it until we were
half-way down town. Ronald said, in his chaffing way, that I left my
head somewhere when I was a boy, and that I have been going around
without it ever since. I wish that he and Van Cortlandt hadn't such
silly notions about my incapacity in the ordinary affairs of life--not
that I really mind their nonsense, for you know how well I love them
both. I am very glad that you consented to go directly to the mountains
instead of coming to New York to see me off. There was a great crowd on
the dock, and I much prefer to think of our tender parting.... Be sure
to cable me on the 15th--the day that I get to London. The address, you
know, is simply, "Clement, London," and I am to arrange with my bankers
to have the despatch sent to me. Good-bye, my--Here is the pilot.




IV.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mrs. Clement Markham, Littleton, New
Hampshire:

[Cable Despatch.]

London, June 16th. Why have you not cabled?




V.

The Rev. Clement Markham to Mrs. Clement Markham, Littleton, New
Hampshire:

Charing Cross Hotel, London, June 16th.... After I cabled you this
morning I remembered that I hadn't arranged with the bankers about my
cable despatches. When I had rectified this error of omission I received
your despatch of yesterday. It was a very great relief to my mind to
have direct news from you, and to know of the safety and health of my
loved ones, who are dearer to me....




VI.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mrs. Clement Markham, Littleton, New
Hampshire:

Charing Cross Hotel, London, August 20th.

... I had a delightful fortnight in Paris.... I bought the gloves and
the stockings--it was droll, and not quite proper, about buying the
stockings. I will tell you all about it when I get home. And I also
bought you Something Else that I am sure will be a pleasant surprise to
you when you see it....

His lordship, Dr.------, has been kindness itself to me. I dined again
at Lambeth Palace yesterday--a farewell dinner. I was a little late, I
am sorry to say, for I got into the wrong boat at Westminster Bridge,
but his lordship very cordially accepted my excuses. At dinner I was
seated next to a very interesting man who has charge of a large parish
in the east end of London. Such poverty as there is in that wretched
region, and such moral depravity, are sickening to contemplate. Thank
Heaven, there is nothing like it in Minneapolis....

I shall sail (D. V.) on the _City of Paris_ two weeks from to-morrow.
I think that the best arrangement will be for you to come down to your
aunt Lucy's on the 11th, and on the 12th (D. V.) I will join you at her
house in Boston, whence we will start for home that evening _via_ the
Boston and Albany. I must be in New York for a few hours to see Ronald
and to make the final arrangements about the new stained-glass windows.
If you prefer to meet me in New York, arrange matters with Ronald, who
will meet you at the station and take you to a hotel. As I shall go
directly to his office on landing, I will find out at once what you have
decided to do.... On referring to your letter of the 10th I perceive
that you are afraid that I may have made some mistake about the sizes
of the stockings and gloves. Of course I got the right sizes; I had it
written down: "No. 61/4, long fingers," and "No. 8 1/2, narrow ankles."
Don't fall into Ronald's way of fancying that I always get things wrong.
It was about the narrow ankles that--But I had better wait and tell it
to you when I get home. It certainly was very droll. I have bought a
most satisfactory chasuble, very elegant in material and beautifully
made. I should have hesitated to buy so costly a garment for myself; but
this is for the Service of the Sanctuary. It will make something of a
stir among the congregation, I think, the first time that I wear it in
dear St. Jude's.... If, as is probable, I go down into Wales next week,
this will be my last letter. My heart is full of joyful thankfulness to
think that so very soon I shall see again (D. V.) my own dear Margaret,
who....




VII.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mrs. Winthrop Tremont, Boston:

Littleton, August 29th.

Dear Aunt Lucy,--I have just received a long and delightful letter from
dear Clement. He had a lovely time in Paris, and he has bought me the
gloves and the silk stockings, and also Something Else; but he won't
tell me what this other thing is, for he means it to be a surprise. Do
you think it could _possibly_ be the silk for a dress? He knows how much
I want a new black silk. But I shall not think about it, for I don't
want to be disappointed. He has had such delightful dinners with his
lordship the Bishop of London at Lambeth Palace. His lordship was
"kindness itself," Clement writes. Clement must have made a very
favorable impression, of course. And Clement writes that he has bought
such a love of a chasuble. It will stir up the whole congregation the
first time that he wears it, I am sure.

If it is _quite_ convenient to you, dear Aunt Lucy, I shall come down to
you, with the nurse and the children, on the 11th. That is the day that
Clement will arrive in New York, and he writes that he will come to
Boston the next day--after seeing Ronald, and attending to the final
arrangements about our beautiful new chancel windows--and join me at
your house.

But if this arrangement is the _least bit inconvenient_ to you, please
tell me so frankly, for I can perfectly well meet him in New York,
where Ronald will take care of me till he comes--a plan that he also
has arranged in case I do not go to you. Dear Clement always is so
thoughtful and careful, you know. Please answer soon, so that I may know
what to do. The weather is quite chilly here now. The children are brown
as little berries and very well. Baby has cut another tooth.




VIII.


Mrs. Winthrop Tremont to Mrs. Clement Markham,

Littleton, New Hampshire:

No. 19 Mount Vernon Place, August 30th. My dear Margaret,--I write at
once because, I am very sorry to say, it will be impossible for me
to have you here on the date that you name. I have just completed my
arrangements for having the entire house papered and painted. All
the furniture is locked up in the dining-room (that was done up, you
remember, last summer), and I set out this afternoon on a round of
visits that will fill up the time until September 12th, when I am
promised that the work will be done. The servants are to have holidays
and the painters and paper-hangers are to be in complete possession of
the premises. Could I be sure that they would keep their promises and
get through by the 12th, I should urge your coming on that day, which
still would be in time to meet Clement, instead of on the 11th. But you
know how uncertain people of this sort are. Much as I would love to have
you and Clement with me, I think that you had better follow out your
second plan, and go to Ronald's care in New York.




IX.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mr. Ronald Markham, New York:

Littleton, August 31st.

Dear Ronald,--Clement had arranged, in case we could stay at Aunt
Lucy's, to meet me in Boston on his return. But I have just received a
letter from Aunt Lucy in which she says that her house is torn up, and
that we cannot possibly come to her before the 12th. Therefore I must
adopt the other plan that dear Clement, with his usual thoughtfulness,
has suggested, which is to meet him in New York. He tells me to ask you
to engage rooms for me in some quiet hotel, and also to ask you to meet
me on my arrival with the children and nurse. I shall leave here on
the morning of the 10th by the White Mountain Express (that gets in
at Jersey City, I think); and if you will care for me in the way that
Clement suggests, I shall be very grateful.

Clement has had a lovely time during his holiday. He has been especially
favored by seeing a great deal of the higher clergy. He has dined
repeatedly with the Lord Archbishop of London at Lambeth Palace, and
I am sure that he must have created a very favorable impression among
them, and given them a highly satisfactory idea of the clergymen of the
American branch of the Anglican Church. Please answer soon, so that I
may know what to do. I forgot to say that Clement expects to arrive on
the 11th. He is to sail on the 4th.




X.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mrs. Clement Markham, Littleton, New
Hampshire:

[Cable Despatch.]

Liverpool, September 3d. Sail to-day.




XI.


Mr. Ronald Markham to Mrs. Clement Markham, Littleton, New Hampshire:

[Telegram.]

San Antonio, Texas, September 5th.

Here for a week on railroad business. Van Cortlandt will secure you
rooms and meet you. Write him at No. 120 Broadway.




XII.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mr. Hubert Van Cortlandt, New York:

Littleton, September 5th.

Dear Mr. Van Cortlandt,--By a telegram that I have just received from
Ronald, I find that he is in Texas. I had written to him to ask him to
secure rooms for me at some quiet hotel, and to meet me at Jersey
City on the evening of the 10th, on the arrival of the White Mountain
Express. Of course he cannot do this now, and he telegraphs me to ask
you to do it all in his place. I feel that I am taking a great liberty
in asking so much of you, but I really cannot help myself. I had
expected to meet Clement in Boston at my aunt's, but my aunt is out of
town; and now Ronald is away from New York. It is very provoking. So,
you see, I can only throw myself on your mercy. But I do this with the
less hesitation because I know how strong your friendship is for my dear
Clement, who will be, as I will be also, very grateful to you.

I am very much puzzled by a cable despatch from Clement that came two
days ago. It reads, "Sail to-day," and is dated September _third_.
Clement's passage was engaged on the _City of Paris_, which I know was
advertised to sail on September _fourth_, and that is the date that he
all along has named for his return. Can the date of sailing have been
changed? Ought I to come to New York one day earlier? Everything seems
to be going wrong of late, and I am both worried and perplexed. If
you can think of any comforting explanation that will account for this
change, I shall be very much obliged to you. Please give my kindest
regards to Mrs. Van Cortlandt.




XIII.


Mr. Hubert Van Cortlandt to Mrs. Clement Markham, Littleton, New
Hampshire:

Law Offices of Van Cortlandt, Howard, Warrington & Edgecombe, Equitable
Building, 120 Broadway.

[Dictated.]

New York, September 7th.

My dear Mrs. Markham,--Your favor of the 5th is received. I am very glad
indeed that I shall have this opportunity to serve you. You must not
consider yourself under any obligation at all. Remember how close
Clement is to me, though our ways in life have separated widely, and
how true his friendship has been to me through all these years. I am
delighted that Ronald is out of town, and that I am to be permitted to
serve you in his place.

I regret exceedingly that Mrs. Van Cortlandt is still in the
Catskills, and that our house still remains in its condition of summer
dismantlement. Were she at home, and the house in order, you would
come directly to us, of course. As this cannot be, I have engaged an
apartment for you with my old landlady, Mrs. Warden, No. 68 Clinton
Place. For a number of years before I was married I occupied rooms in
this house, and I am confident that you will be far more comfortable
there than you possibly could be at any hotel. Mrs. Warden, who is a
motherly old body, and who remembers Clement well, will take the best of
care of you, and I have arranged that your meals shall be sent across to
you from the Brevoort.

In regard to Clement's cable despatch, I am as much puzzled as you are.
One of my young men has just returned from the office of the Inman Line,
and reports that the _City of Paris_ sailed on her regular date, the
4th, and is due to arrive here on Wednesday next, the 11th. My young man
was assured that no steamer belonging to any of the regular lines left
Liverpool for this port on the 3d. The Cunard steamer _Samaria_ did
leave Liverpool on the 3d, however, for Boston. It is possible, of
course--since your original plan seems to have been that you and Clement
should meet in Boston--that he has sailed in the _Samaria_. But I do not
think that this is probable. The _Samaria_ is a much slower boat than
the _City of Paris_, and I think that even Clement would perceive that
by sailing in her he would lose time instead of gaining it. Frankly, my
dear Mrs. Markham, I think that Clement simply has mixed things up in
his despatch by writing "today" when he meant "to-morrow." Bless his
dear old heart! he always did have a faculty for getting things wrong,
you know. I decidedly advise you, therefore, to come down to New York on
the 10th, as you have already arranged.

I observe that you speak of the White Mountain Express as coming in at
Jersey City. This is a mistake: it arrives at the Forty-second Street
Station. Bear this fact in mind, please; and I advise you to write on
a card--which you had better have easily accessible in your
pocket-book--Mrs. Warden's address, No. 68 Clinton Place. Then, should
I miss you in the crowd at the station, or should any other mischance
occur in regard to our meeting, you will know where to tell your driver
to take you, and where to send your trunks. Do not fear that any such
untoward accident will occur: it is only professional prudence that
leads me to provide for every contingency that may arise. As a further
precautionary measure (we lawyers are full of precautionary measures,
you know), please telegraph me from Littleton on the morning that you
leave.




XIV.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mr. Hubert Van Cortlandt, New York: Littleton,
September 9th.

Dear Mr. Van Cortlandt,--Your very kind letter came last evening. I
cannot tell you how grateful I am to you for all your goodness and
thoughtfulness. With such explicit directions I cannot possibly go
wrong. You must be right, I think, in regard to the cable despatch. Such
a mistake would be just what dear Clement would be almost certain to
make when in one of his absent-minded moods. I will do all the prudent
things which you so thoughtfully advise, and I shall keep your letter
to show to dear Clement, so that he may know how much trouble you have
taken to make everything about my arrival secure. Of course, the train
does not come in at Jersey City: I remember about it now perfectly. I
am in the thick of packing to-day, and expect to get off in the morning;
but I will telegraph you before I start. I don't want to bother you
with this letter at your office, so I send it to your house. I find the
address in Clement's address-book. Am I not considerate?




XV.


Dr. Atwood Vance to Mr. Hubert Van Cortlandt, New York:

[Telegram.]

Tannersyille, New York, September 9th. Mrs. Van Cortlandt taken
dangerously ill in night, and continues in critical condition. Come at
once.




XVI.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mr. Hubert Van Cortlandt, New York:

[Telegram. Endorsed: "Not delivered. Party out of town."]

Littleton, New Hampshire, September 10th. Will arrive on White Mountain
Express this evening.




XVII.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mrs. Clement Markham, No. 19 Mount Vernon
Place, Boston:

[Telegram. Endorsed: "Returned to sender. Unknown at this address."]

Breyoort House, New York, September 11th. Arrived this morning. Will be
with you (D. V.) to-morrow.




XVIII.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mrs. Winthrop Tremont, No. 19 Mount Vernon
Place, Boston:

[Telegram. Endorsed: "Returned to sender. Addressee absent from
Boston."]

Breyoort House, New York, September 11th. Is Margaret with you? Please
answer at once.




XIX.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Clerk, Outlook House, Littleton, New
Hampshire:

[Telegram.]

Breyoort House, New York, September 11th. Is Mrs. Markham still at
Outlook House? Answer prepaid.




XX


Clerk, Outlook House, to the Rev. Clement Markham, New York:

[Telegram.]

Littleton, New Hampshire, September 11th. Mrs. Markham left on morning
train yesterday for New York.




XXI.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mr. John Amesbury, Minneapolis:

[Telegram.]

Breyoort House, New Tore, September 11th. Has Mrs. Markham returned to
Minneapolis? Please answer immediately.




XXII.


Mr. John Amesbury to the Rev. Clement Markham, New York:

[Telegram.]

Minneapolis, September 11th. Mrs. Markham has not returned. Glad you are
back safe.




XXIII.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mr. Ronald Markham, Menger House, San
Antonio, Texas:

[Telegram.]

Breyoort House, New York, September 11th. [Delivered September 12th.]

Did Margaret communicate with you in regard to her intended movements? I
cannot find her and am much perturbed. Answer at once.




XXIV.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mr. Hubert Van Cortlandt, No.--Broadway, New
York:

No. 68 Clinton Place, September 11th. Dear Mr. Van Cortlandt,--I was so
sorry that, after all, we did miss each other in the crowd last night.
But I got along very well, thanks to your forethought in telling me just
what to do, though I must confess that I had five very dreadful minutes
while I was looking for the card on which I had written Mrs. Warden's
address. And where do you suppose I found it at last? It was in my
pocket-book, just where you told me to put it! Wasn't it absurd? So then
we came down here very comfortably, and found the delightful apartment
that you had secured for me. As for Mrs. Warden, she is as good as gold.
She even had warm milk ready for Teddy, and a delicious cup of tea for
me. I never shall be able to thank you enough for all that you have
done.

What arrangements have you made about bringing Clement to me? If the
dear boy hasn't gone on that slow ship to Boston, and has come, as you
think he has, on the _City of Paris_, he ought to arrive today. I should
love to go down to the dock and be the very first to welcome him. But
in such a crowd as there will be I ought not to venture, ought I? Please
let me know by bearer just what you have done about our meeting, and
when I am to expect my dear boy.




XXV.


Mr. Robert Warrington to Mrs. Clement Markham, No. 68 Clinton Place, New
York:

Law Offices of Van Cortlandt, Howard, Warrington & Edgecombe, Equitable
Building, No. 120 Broadway.

New York, September 11th. Miss (or Mrs.) Margaret Markham:

Dear Madam,--Replying, in the absence of Mr. Van Cortlandt, to yours
of even date, I would say that Mr. Van Cortlandt was called out of
town suddenly yesterday by the dangerous illness of his wife. I have
no knowledge of the matter concerning which you inquire, and regret,
therefore, my inability to supply the information which you ask. I
may say, however, that the _City of Paris_, as I have ascertained by
telephone, arrived at her dock about half an hour ago. Should you desire
to telegraph Mr. Van Cortlandt, his address is the Bear and Fox Inn,
Tannersville, Greene County, New York.




XXVI.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mr. Hubert Van Cortlandt, Bear and Fox Inn,
Tannersville, Greene County, New York:

[Telegram.]

68 Clinton Place, New York, September 11th. [Delivered September 12th.]

What arrangements did you make for letting Clement know where to find
me? If he came on the _City of Paris_ he is here in New York now. I am
anxious. So sorry about Mrs. Van Cortlandt.




XXVII.


Mr. Ronald Markham to the Rev. Clement Markham, New York:

[Telegram.]

San Antonio, Texas, September 12th. Do not know Margaret's plans. Think
she arranged matters with Van Cortlandt. See him.




XXVIII.


Mr. Hubert Van Cortlandt to Mrs. Clement Markham, New York:

[Telegram.]

Tannersyille, September 12th. Made no arrangements. Expected to meet
Clement at dock. Sorry if I have occasioned you annoyance. You know
cause of neglect. Mrs. Van Cortlandt now out of danger.




XXIX.


The Rev. Clement Markham to Mr. Ronald Markham, San Antonio, Texas:

[Telegram.] Breyoort House, New York, September 12th. Van Cortlandt in
Catskills with sick wife. Saw his partner, Edgecombe, who can tell me
nothing.

I have ascertained that Margaret left Littleton day before yesterday for
this city. With her departure from Littleton all trace of her is lost.
She has not returned to Minneapolis. I am wellnigh crazed with grief and
anxiety. Advise me at once what is best to be done. Shall I advertise?
Will it be well to employ the police? For Heaven's sake, answer promptly
and fully!




XXX.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mrs. Winthrop Tremont, Boston:

[Telegram.]

68 Clinton Place, New York, September 12th. _City of Paris_ arrived.
Mrs. Warden been to dock and got passenger list. Clement's name in it,
so he certainly made mistake in his cable despatch. I state facts fully
and clearly, so that you may understand why Mr. Van Cortlandt was called
suddenly to see sick wife in Catskills, and so, while Clement must be
here in New York, perhaps close by me, am unable to find him, and he, of
course, does not in the least know where to find me. There are hundreds
of hotels here in New York, and he may be at all of them. I don't know
what to do, and am almost frantic with anxiety. Telegraph me at once,
dear Aunt Lucy, and make telegram perfectly clear, like mine, and long
and full and explicit. This is no time to think about what telegraphing
costs. Perhaps Clement has gone on to you, or the other ship may have
got in sooner. If he is with you, implore him to return to me at once.
Would it be well for me to employ the police? That was my first thought,
but I was afraid that I might make his disappearance get into the
newspapers and be a scandal, and that would not do for a clergyman. And
he has not really disappeared; it is only that we neither of us know
where we each are. My head is one horrible buzz. Shall I advertise? Had
I better offer a reward? Give me your best advice, dear Aunt Lucy, and
please answer immediately.




XXXI.


Mr. Ronald Markham to Mrs. Winthrop Tremont,

Boston:

[Telegram.]

San Antonio, Texas, September 18th. [Delivered 18th.]

Clement is at Brevoort House, New York. By characteristic blunder has
missed Margaret. If you know her address, please telegraph him.




XXXII.


Mrs. Winthrop Tremont to Mr. Ronald Markham, New York (forwarded to San
Antonio, Texas):

[Telegram.]

Boston, September 12th. [Delivered 13 th.]

Margaret is at No. 68 Clinton Place, in great distress because Clement
does not come to her. What foolishness has overtaken these innocents
now? Please set them right.




XXXIII.


Mrs. Winthrop Tremont to Mrs. Clement Markham, No. 68 Clinton Place, New
York:

[Telegram.]

Boston, September 13th. Clement is at the Brevoort House, quite close by
you.




XXXIV.


Mr. Ronald Markham to the Rev. Clement Markham, Brevoort House, New
York:

[Telegram.]

San Antonio, Texas, September 13th. You will find Margaret at No. 68
Clinton Place, directly across the street from your hotel.




XXXV.


Mrs. Clement Markham to Mrs. Winthrop Tremont,

Boston:

St. Jude's Rectory, Minneapolis, September 23d.

Dear Aunt Lucy,--We left New York early last Monday, and by Tuesday
night we were once more safe and together here in our own dear home. We
had no misadventures on our journey, except that we nearly missed our
connection at Syracuse (where we left the parlor-car for the sleeper)
by getting on the wrong train. Fortunately dear Clement found out his
mistake just in time.

I had not the energy to do more than telegraph you from New York that
all our troubles were ended. I was too much upset by the agony that I
had been through to write. It was a very dreadful two days, dear
Aunt Lucy; the most dreadful--especially that second day and the last
night--that I have ever known. And dear Clement suffered even more than
I did, for I knew at least that he was alive, and he knew absolutely
nothing about me at all. It all seems now like a horrible dream, and
when I shut my eyes and think about it, I turn giddy and feel sick and
faint. You cannot possibly imagine, dear Aunt Lucy, how utterly, utterly
dreadful it all was!

If it had not been so very dreadful, it would have been a little absurd,
I think; for, you know, all the while that we were in such terrible
distress about being unable to find each other, we actually could have
opened our windows and talked to each other just across the street! As
I found out, when at last dear Clement came to me, his room in the
Brevoort House was directly opposite my apartment at No. 68 Clinton
Place. Was it not strange? And what was still stranger, dear Aunt Lucy,
was that the very morning that our agony ended I happened to look across
the street, and there, hanging beside an open window of the hotel, I saw
a lovely chasuble that I knew must belong to some clergyman, and it
made me think of the chasuble that Clement had written he had bought in
London--and it really was that very chasuble, you know, for Clement had
hung it there to get the creases out of it--and seeing it set me into
a perfect agony of grief, for I thought that I never was to see my dear
husband again, and that my children were fatherless, and that I was
a widow, and that there was nothing left for me in the world but the
blackest despair. And it was while I was crying my very heart out that
there was a knock at the door, and then, in a single instant, all my
sorrow was ended as I found myself once more in dear Clement's arms.

Yesterday dear Clement preached a beautiful sermon about man's
liability to error, and the mysterious ways through which human error
providentially is set right. It was a very impressive sermon. In the
service he wore his new chasuble. It is exceedingly becoming. Everybody
was very much moved by the sermon; and I was moved, of course, most
of all. I could not help crying. Dear Clement's voice trembled once
or twice, and I saw that there were tears in his eyes. The gloves are
perfect, and the stockings really are too good to be true. They are
open-work over the ankles, and three of the six pairs are ribbed. I wish
that I could tell you what a queer time dear Clement had when he was
buying them. He bought them in a French shop in Paris, you know; and
when he asked for stockings with narrow ankles, the young woman who was
waiting on him--But it will be better to wait until I can tell it to
you. It was very funny. And the very best of all, dear Aunt Lucy, is
that the surprise that Clement would not write to me about _is_ the silk
for a new black silk dress! It is a lovely quality. I do wish that you
could have heard Clement's beautiful sermon yesterday, and that you
could have seen how handsome he looked in his new chasuble. The weather
to-day is very warm. The children are wonderfully well.






End of Project Gutenberg's A Temporary Dead-Lock, by Thomas A. Janvier

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A TEMPORARY DEAD-LOCK ***

***** This file should be named 23806.txt or 23806.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/8/0/23806/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
