The Project Gutenberg EBook of For the Master's Sake, by Emily Sarah Holt

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: For the Master's Sake
       A Story of the Days of Queen Mary

Author: Emily Sarah Holt

Illustrator: H. Petherick

Release Date: January 1, 2008 [EBook #24105]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR THE MASTER'S SAKE ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




For the Master's Sake, by Emily Sarah Holt.

________________________________________________________________________
The story is set in the middle of the sixteenth century, in London, at a
time when a Catholic Queen had succeeded to the throne, shortly to marry
King Philip of Spain.  The Protestant Bishops were replaced with
Catholic ones, in particular Bonner, Bishop of London, and these set
about murderously dealing with the least signs of Protestantism.

All this is very confusing to the average person, and that is what the
story is about.  Just fairly ordinary citizens of London, trying to work
out what they are supposed to think and do.

The author was a strong Protestant, and this makes her arguments all the
stronger.

________________________________________________________________________
FOR THE MASTER'S SAKE, BY EMILY SARAH HOLT.



PREFACE.

This is not a story which requires much preface.  The tale speaks for
itself.  But it is only right to inform the reader, that the persons who
play their parts in it (apart from the historical details given) are all
fictitious, excepting John Laurence and Agnes Stone.

It rests, under God, with the men and women of England--and chiefly with
those of them who are young now--whether such events as are here
depicted shall recur in this nineteenth century.  The battle of the
Reformation will soon have to be fought over again; and reformations (no
less than revolutions) are "not made with rose-water."

"Choose you this day whom ye will serve!  If the Lord be God, follow
Him; but if Baal, then follow him."

Are we ready to follow the Master,--if He lead to Calvary?  Or are we
ready to run the awful risk of hearing Christ's "Depart!" rather than
face men's "Crucify"?  Now, while it is called to-day, let us settle the
question.



CHAPTER ONE.

GLAD TIDINGS.

  "For when the heart of man shuts out,
  Straightway the heart of God takes in."

  _James Russell Lowell_.

"Good lack, Agnes!  Why, Agnes Stone!  Thou art right well be-called
Stone; for there is no more wit nor no more quickness in thee than in a
pebble.  Lack-a-daisy! but this were never good land sithence preaching
came therein,--idle foolery that it is!--good for nought but to set folk
by the ears, and learn young maids for to gad about a-showing of their
fine raiment, and a-gossiping one with another, whilst all the work to
be wrought in the house falleth on their betters.  Bodykins o' me! canst
not hear mass once i' th' week, and tell thy beads of the morrow with
one hand whilst thou feedest the chicks wi' th' other? and that shall be
religion enough for any unlettered baggage like to thee.  Here have I
been this hour past a-toiling and a-moiling like a Barbary slave, while
thou, my goodly young damosel, wert a-junketing it out o' door; and for
why, forsooth?  Marry, saith she, to hear a shaven crown preach at the
Cross!  Good sooth, but when I tell lies, I tell liker ones than so!
And but now come home, by my troth; and all the pans o' th' fire might
ha' boiled o'er, whilst thou, for aught I know, wert a-dancing in
Finsbury Fields with a parcel of idle jades like thyself.  Beshrew thee
for a lazy hilding [young person; a term applied to either sex] that
ne'er earneth her bread by the half!  Now then, hold thy tongue,
Mistress, and get thee a-work, as a decent woman should.  When I lack a
lick o' th' rough side thereof, I'll give thee due note!"

Thus far Mistress Martha Winter poured out the vials of her wrath,
standing with arms akimbo in the doorway, and addressing a slight,
pale-faced, trembling girl of twenty years, who stood before her with
bowed head, and made no attempt at self-defence.  Indeed, she would have
been clever who could have slipped in a sentence, or even have edged in
a word, when Mistress Winter had pulled out of her wrath-bottle that
cork which was so seldom in it, as Agnes Stone knew to her cost.  Nor
was it the girl's habit to excuse or defend herself.  Mistress Winter's
deprecation of that proceeding was merely a flourish of rhetoric.  So
Agnes, as usual, let the tempest blow over her, offering no attempt to
struggle, but only to stand and endure.

Mistress Winter had made an excellent investment when, six years before,
she adopted Agnes Stone, then an orphan, homeless and friendless; not by
any means to be "treated as one of the family," but to be tyrannised
over as drudge and victim in general.  The transaction furnished her
with two endless topics for gossip, on which she dilated with great
enjoyment--her own surpassing generosity, and the orphan's intense
unworthiness.  The generosity was not costly; for the portion of food
bestowed on Agnes consisted of the scraps usually given to a dog, while
she was clothed with such articles as were voted too shabby for the
family wear.  All work which was dirty or disagreeable, fell to Agnes as
a matter of course.  The widow's two daughters, Joan and Dorothy,
respectively made her the vent for ill-temper, and the butt for sarcasm;
and if, in some rare moment of munificence, either of them bestowed on
her a specked apple, or a faded ribbon, the most abject gratitude was
expected in return.  She was practically a bond slave; for except by
running away, there was no chance of freedom; and running away, in her
case, meant starvation.

It had not always been thus.  For ten years, more or less, before her
term of bondage to Martha Winter, Agnes had lived with an aunt, her only
surviving relative.  During this stage of her life, she had taken her
fair share in the household work, had been fed and clothed--coarsely
indeed, for her aunt was comparatively poor, but sufficiently--and she
had been allowed a reasonable number of holidays, and had not been
scolded, except when she deserved it.  Though her aunt was an
undemonstrative woman, who never gave her an endearing word or a caress,
yet life with her was Elysium compared with present circumstances.  But
beyond even this, far back in early childhood, Agnes could dimly
recollect another life again--a life which was love and sunshine--when a
mother's hand came between her and hardship, a mother's heart brooded
warmly over her, and a mother's lips called her by tender pet names, "as
one whom his mother comforteth."  That was long ago; so long, that to
look back upon it was almost like recalling some previous state of
existence; but the very memory of it, dim though it was, made the
present bondage all the harder.

The offence which Agnes had committed on this occasion lay in having
exceeded the time allowed her by six minutes.  Out of respect to the
day, which was the festival of Corpus Christi, she had been graciously
granted the rare treat of a whole hour to spend as she pleased.  She had
chosen to spend it in hearing the latter half of a sermon preached at
Paul's Cross.  For, despite Mistress Winter's disdainful incredulity,
the assertion was the simple truth; though that lady, being one of the
numerous persons who cannot imagine the possibility of anything
unpleasant to themselves being delightful to others, had been unable to
give credence to the statement.  As to the charge of dancing in Finsbury
Fields, poor Agnes had never in her life been guilty of such a piece of
dissipation.  But she knew what to expect when she came in sight of the
clock of Saint Paul's Cathedral, and became mournfully conscious that
she would have to confess where she had been: for Mistress Winter had
peculiar ideas about religion, and a particular horror of being
righteous overmuch, which usually besets people who have no tendency in
that direction.  Anything in the shape of a sermon was her special
abhorrence.  Every Sunday morning Agnes was required to wait upon her
liege lady to matins--that piece of piety lasting for the week: and
three times in the year, without the faintest consideration of her
feelings--always terribly outraged thereby--poor Agnes was dragged
before the tribunal of the family confessor, and required to give a list
of her sins since the last occasion.  But anything beyond this, and
sermons in particular, found no favour in the eyes of Mistress Winter.

Generally speaking, Agnes shrank from the mere _thought_ of a lecture
from this terrible dame.  But this time, beyond the unpleasant sensation
of the moment, it produced no effect upon her.  Her whole mind was full
of something else; something which she had never heard before, and could
never forget again; something which made this hard, dreary, practical
world seem entirely changed to her, as though suddenly bathed in a flood
of golden light.

God loved her.  This was what Agnes had heard.  God, who could do
everything, who had all the universe at His command, loved her, the poor
orphan, the unlettered drudge; penniless, despised, unattractive--God
loved her, just as she was.  She drank in the glad tidings, as a parched
soil drinks the rain.

But this was not all.  God wanted her to love Him.  He sought for her
love, He cared for it.  Amid all the hearts laid at His feet, He would
miss hers if she did not give it.  The thought came upon her like a new
revelation from Heaven, direct to herself.

The preacher at the Cross that day was a Black Friar--a tall spare man,
whom some might call gaunt and ungainly; a man of quick intelligence and
radiant eyes, of earnest gesture and burning words.  No idle monastic
reveller this, but a man of one object, of one idea, full of zeal and
determination.  His years were a little over forty, and his name was
John Laurence.  But of himself Agnes thought very little; her whole soul
was concentrated upon the message which he had brought her from God.
God loved her!  Since her mother died, she had been unloved.  God loved
her!  And she had never asked Him for His love--she had never loved Him.

It was just the blessed fact itself which filled the heart, and mind,
and soul of Agnes Stone.  As to how it had come about, she had very
little idea.  She had not heard enough of the Friar's sermon to win any
clear notion on that point; it was enough for her that it was so.

It never occurred to her to doubt the fact, and demand vouchers.  It
never occurred to her to suppose that her own hard lot was any
contradiction to the theory.  And it never occurred to her to imagine,
as some do, that God's love led to no result; that He could love, and
not care; that He could love, and not be ready to save.  Human love was
better than that.  The mother who, alone of all creatures, so far as she
knew, had ever loved Agnes Stone, had shown her love by always caring,
by always shielding from danger where it lay in her power.  And surely
the Fountain could be no weaker than the stream; the love of a weak,
fallen, fallible human creature must be less, not more, than the love of
Him who is, and who was, and who is to come; who is the same yesterday,
and to-day, and for ever.

"Hie thee down this minute, thou good-for-nothing hussy!" thundered the
voice of Mistress Winter up the garret stairs, as Agnes was hastily
resuming her working garb.  "I'll warrant thou didst ne'er set the foul
clothes a-soaking as I bade thee ere thou wentest forth to take thy
pleasure, and left me a-slaving hither!  Get thee to thy work, baggage!
Thou art worth but one half as many pence as there be shillings in a
groat!  [A fourpenny-piece.]  I'll learn thee to gad hearing of
sermons!"

"I set the clothes a-soaking ere I went forth, Mistress," said Agnes,
coming quickly down stairs, and setting to work on the first thing she
saw to need doing.

"Marry come up!" ejaculated Mistress Winter, looking at her.  "Good
lack! hast met with a fortune dropped from the clouds, that thou art all
of a grin o' mirth?"

"I met with nought save that I went for," replied the girl quietly.  But
it struck her that the comparison of "a fortune dropped from the clouds"
was a singularly happy one.

"Lack-a-daisy!" cried Dorothy.  "The Friar must have told some merry
tale belike.  Prithee, give us the same, Agnes."

"Methinks it were scantly so merry for you, Mistress Doll," answered
Agnes rather keenly.  The stranger must not intermeddle with her joy.
She held her new treasure with a tight, jealous grasp.  Not yet had she
learned that the living water flows the fuller for every streamlet that
it fills; that the true riches are heaped the higher, the more lavish is
the hand that transmits them.

"Hold thy silly tongue!" cried Mistress Winter, turning sharply round
upon her daughter.  "It were jolly work to fall of idle tale-telling,
when all the work in the house gapeth for to be done!--Thou weary,
dreary jade! what art thou after now?  (Agnes was hastily mending a rent
in the curtain.)  To fall to dainty stitchery, like a gentlewoman born,
when every one of the trenchers lacketh scraping, and not the touch of a
mop have the walls felt this morrow!  Who dost look to, to slave for
thee, prithee, my delicate-fingered damsel?  Thou shouldst like well, I
reckon, to have a serving-maid o' thy heels, for to 'tend to all matter
that was not sweet enough for thy high degree!  _I_ go not about to
sweep up the dirt off thy shoes, and so I tell thee plainly!"

Certainly there was not often any want of perspicuity in Mistress
Winter's admonitions, though there might occasionally be a little lack
of elegance and gentleness.  But plainly told or not, Agnes remained
silent, scraped the wooden trenchers, a process which answered to the
washing of earthenware, and duly mopped the walls, and to the best of
her power fulfilled the hard pleasure of her superior.

And here let us leave her for a moment, while we take a glance at the
outer world, to discover where we are in the stream of time, and what
sort of an England it is into which we have entered.

The day, the festival of Corpus Christi, is the first of June, 1553.
King Edward the Sixth is on the throne--a white-faced, grave, reserved
boy of fifteen years, whose life is to close about five weeks
thereafter.  But beside the throne, and on it in all but name--his hand
firmly grasping the reins of power, his voice the living law of the
State--stands John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland; a man whose
steel-blue eyes are as cold as his heart, and whose one aim in every
action of his life is the welfare and aggrandisement of John Dudley.  He
professes himself a Lutheran: at heart, if he care at all for religion
of any kind, he is a Papist.  But it will not be of service to John
Dudley at the present moment to confess that little fact to the world.
Grouped around these two are men of all types--Cranmer, Archbishop of
Canterbury, true Nature's gentleman, leal-hearted Gospeller, delicate in
mind, clear in intellect, only not able, having done all, to stand;
Ridley, Bishop of London, whose firm, intelligent, clear-cut features
are an index to his character--perhaps a shade too severe, yet as severe
to himself as any other; Hugh Latimer, blunt, warm-hearted old man, who
calls a spade a spade in the most uncompromising manner, and spares not
vice, though it flaunt its satin robes in royal halls; William Herbert,
Earl of Pembroke, the mean-spirited time-server who would cry long life
to a dozen rival monarchs in as many minutes, so long as he thought it
would advance his own interests; Henry Grey, Duke of Suffolk, who spends
his life in a fog of uncertainty, wherein the most misty object is his
own mind; William Paulet, Marquis of Winchester, who always remembers
his motto, "I bend, but break not;" Richard Lord Rich, the
sensual-faced, comfortable-looking, stony-hearted man who pulled off his
gown the better to rack Anne Askew, of old time; and, behind them all,
one of whom they all think but little--a young man of short stature,
with good forehead, and small, wizened features--Mr Secretary Cecil,
some day to be known as the great Earl of Burleigh, who holds in his
clever hands, as he sits in the background with his silent face, the
strings that move most of these puppets, and pulls them without the
puppets knowing it, until, on the accession of Mary, the Tower gates
will be opened, and Stephen Gardiner will walk forth, to take the reins
into his hands, and to steep England in blood.

Of public events, there have been few since the general confiscation of
church plate in the preceding month.

The Londoners, of whom our friends at Mistress Winter's form a part, are
divided in opinion concerning this step; but neither party has been too
much distressed to observe the usual dance round the Strand maypole, on
the site of which Saint Mary-le-Strand will presently be built.  At
present, and for those five weeks yet to come, the march of events is
dull and sleepy.  It will be sufficiently lively and startling to please
the most sensational, before many days of July have run out.

The Bible is now open in every parish church, chained to a desk, so that
any one who pleases may read.  The entire service is conducted in
English.  The roods and images have been pulled down; candles, ashes,
and palms are laid aside; "the wolves are kept close" in Tower and Fleet
and Marshalsea; masses, public and private, are contraband articles; the
marriage of priests is freely allowed; the altar has been replaced by
the table.  It is still illegal to eat flesh in Lent; but this is rather
with a view to encourage the fish trade than with any religious object.

To turn to minor matters, such as costume and customs, we find
Government does not disdain to occupy itself in the regulation of the
former, by making stringent sumptuary laws, and effectually securing
their observance by heavy fines.  The gentlemen dress in the Blue-Coat
style, occasionally varying it by a short tunic-like coat instead of the
long gown, and surmounting it by a low flat cap, which the nobles
ornament by an ostrich feather.  The ladies array themselves in long
dresses, full of plaits, and often stiff as crinoline--plain for the
commonalty, but heavily laden with embroidery, and deeply edged with
fur, in the case of the aristocracy.  Both sexes, if aspiring to
fashion, puff and slash their attire in all directions.  The ruff,
shortly to become so fashionable, is only just creeping into notice, and
as yet contents itself with very modest dimensions.

Needles are precious articles, of which she is a rich woman who
possesses more than two or three.  Glass bottles are unknown, and their
place is supplied by those of leather, wood, or stone.  Wooden bowls and
trenchers for the poor, gold and silver plate for the rich, make up for
the want of china.  The fuel is chiefly wood, coal being considered
unhealthy.  Every now and then Government takes alarm at the prodigious
size to which the metropolis is growing, and an Act is passed to
restrain further building within a given distance from the City walls.
Country gentlemen receive peremptory orders to reside on their estates,
and not to visit London except by licence; for the authorities are
afraid lest the influx of visitors should cause famine and pestilence.
There is no drainage; for every householder pours his slops into the
street, with a warning shout, that the passengers below may run out of
the way.  There are few watches, and fewer carriages; no cabs, no
police, no post-office; no potatoes, tea, coffee, newspapers, brown
paper, copper coinage, streetlamps, shawls, muslin or cotton goods.  But
there is at times the dreaded plague, which decimates wherever it comes;
the terrible frequency of capital punishment for comparatively trivial
offences; the pleasant probability of meeting with a few highwaymen in
every country journey; the paucity of roads, and the extreme roughness
of such as do exist; a lamentable lack of education, even in the higher
classes, hardly atoned for by the exceptional learning of one here and
there; and (though the list might be greatly enlarged) last, not least,
the constant presence of vermin of the most objectionable sort, from
which neither palace nor cottage is exempt.  This, then, was the England
of 1553.



CHAPTER TWO.

FATHER DAN.

  "Fasting is all very well for those
  Who have to contend with invisible foes:
  But I am quite sure that it does not agree
  With a quiet, peaceable man like me."

  _Longfellow_.

Fortunately for Agnes Stone, she was too low down in the world for many
things to affect her which sorely troubled the occupants of the upper
strata.  Sumptuary laws were of no consequence to a woman whose best
gown was patched with pieces of different colours, and who had not a
hood in her possession; taxes and subsidies, though they might press
heavily on the rich, were no concern of hers, for she did not own a
penny; while no want, however complete, of letters, books, and
newspapers, distressed the mind of one who had never learned the
alphabet.

Mistress Winter dwelt in Cowbridge Street, otherwise Cow Lane; now the
site of crowded City thoroughfares, but then a quiet, pleasant, suburban
lane, the calm of which was chiefly broken by the presence, on
market-days, of numbers of the animal whence the street took its name,
caused by the close proximity of Smithfield.  Green fields lay at the
back of the houses, through which, on its way to the Thames, ran the
little Fleet River, anciently known as the River of the Wells; beyond it
towered the Bishop of Ely's Palace, with its extensive walled garden,
famous for strawberries; to the left was the pleasant and healthy
village of Clerkenwell, whither the Londoners were wont to stroll on
summer evenings, to drink milk at the country inn, and gossip with each
other round the holy well.  On the right hand, between Cow Lane and the
Thames, lay the open, airy suburbs of Fleet and Temple, and the royal
Palace of Bridewell, with its grounds.  In front, Hosier Lane and Cock
Lane gave access to Smithfield, beyond which was the sumptuous but now
dissolved Priory of Saint Bartholomew, the once royal domain of Little
Britain, and the walls and gates of the great city, with the grand tower
of Saint Paul's Cathedral visible in the distance, over the low roofs of
the surrounding houses.

The locality of Cow Lane was far from being a low neighbourhood, though
its name was not particularly aristocratic in sound.  In the old days
before the dissolution, which Agnes could just remember, the Prior of
Sempringham had his town house in Cow Lane; and the Earl of Bath lived
on the further side of the Fleet River, with Furnival's Inn beyond, the
residence of the Barons Furnival, now merged in the Earldom of
Shrewsbury.  Mistress Winter lived in the last house at the north end of
the lane, next to Cow Cross, and almost in the country.  There is no
need to name her neighbours, with two exceptions, since these only are
concerned in the story.  But in Cow Lane every body knew every body
else's business; and the mistress at the Fetterlock could not put on a
new ribbon without the chambermaid at the Black Lion being aware of it.
Do not rush to the conclusion, gentle modern reader, that Cow Lane was
full of inns or public-houses.  Streets were not numbered in those days;
and in order to effect the necessary distinction between one house and
another, every man hung out his sign, selecting a silent woman [Note 1],
a blue cow, a griffin, or a rose, according as his fancy led him.
Sign-painting must have been a profitable trade at that time, and a very
necessary one, when scarcely one man in twenty knew his alphabet; and
the cardinal figures were cabalistic signs to common eyes.

The two families previously alluded to lived at the southern end of Cow
Lane, and their respective names were Flint and Marvell.  Mistress Flint
was a cheerful, good-tempered woman, with whom life went easily, and who
had a large family of sons and daughters, the youngest but one, little
Will, being a special favourite with Agnes.  The Marvells were very
quiet people, who kept their opinions and feelings to themselves; though
their son Christie, a mischievous lad of some twelve years, was renowned
in Cow Lane for the exact opposite.

The day was drawing towards evening, when Agnes, as she turned round
from emptying a pail of dirty water into the common sewer of Cow Lane,
detected the burly figure of Father Dan, the Cordelier Friar, who was
Mistress Winter's family confessor, coming up from Seacoal Lane.  Not
without some fears of his errand, she waited till he came near, and then
humbly louted--the ancient English reverence, now conventionally
supposed to be restricted to charity children.

"Christ save all here!" said the priest, holding up three fingers in the
style of benediction peculiar to his Order.

Taking no further notice of Agnes, he marched within, to be cordially
welcomed, and his blessing begged, by Mistress Winter and Dorothy; for
Joan was gone to see the bear-baiting in Southwark.

Father Dan was a priest of the popular type--florid, fat, and jovial.
His penances were light and easy to those who had it in their power to
ask him to dinner, or to make gifts to his Order.  It might be that they
were all the harder to those from whom such favours were not expected.

The Cordelier took his seat at the supper-table just laid by Dorothy,
this being an easy and dainty style of work in which that young lady
condescended to employ her delicate hands.  Mistress Winter was busily
occupied with a skillet containing some savoury compound, and the
Friar's eyes twinkled with expectant gastronomic delight as he watched
the proceedings of his hostess.  Supper being at last ready, the three
prepared to do justice to it, while Agnes waited upon them.  A golden
flood of buttered eggs was poured upon the dish in front of the Friar, a
cherry pie stood before Dorothy, while Mistress Winter, her sleeves
rolled up, and her widow's barb [Note 2] laid aside because of the heat,
was energetically attacking some ribs of beef.

"Had Joan no purpose to be back for supper, Doll?" demanded her mother.

"Nay," said Dorothy; "Mall Whitelock bade her to supper in Long Lane.  I
heard them discoursing of the same."

"And what news abroad, Father?" asked Mistress Winter.  "Pray you, give
me leave to help you to another shive of the beef.  Agnes, thou lither
[wicked] jade, whither hast set the mustard?"

Father Dan's news was of a minute type.  He was no intellectual
philosopher, no profound conspirator; he was indeed slightly interested
in the advancement of the Church, and much more deeply so in that of his
own particular Order; but beyond this, his mind was one of those which
dwell rather on the game season than the government of the country, and
was likely to feel more pleasure in an enormous gooseberry, or a calf
with two heads, than in the outbreak of a European war, or the discovery
of an unknown continent.  The great subject in his mind at the moment
was starch.  Somebody--Father Dan regretted that he was not able to name
him--had discovered the means of manufacturing a precious liquid, which
would impart various colours, and indescribable powers of standing
alone, to any texture of linen, lawn, or lace.

"Good heart! what labour it shall save!" cried lazy Dorothy--who did
assist in the more delicate parts of the household washing, but shirked
as much of it as she could.

"Ay, and set you off, belike, Mistress Doll," added the complimentary
Friar.  "As for us, poor followers of Saint Francis, no linen alloweth
us our Rule, so that little of the new matter is like to come our way.
They of Saint Dominic shall cheapen well the same [buy plenty of it], I
reckon," he added, with a contemptuous curl of his lip, intended for the
rival Order.

"But lo' you, there is another wonder abroad, as I do hear tell,"
remarked Mistress Winter, "and 'tis certain matter the which, being
taken--Agnes, thou dolt! what hast done wi' the salad?--being taken
hendily [gently, delicately] off the top of ale when 'tis a-making,
shall raise bread all-to [almost] as well as sour dough.  I know not
what folk call it.--Thou idle, gaping dizzard [fool]! and I have to ask
thee yet again what is come of aught, it shall be with mine hand about
thine ears!  Find a spoon this minute!"

"Ha!" said Father Dan, helping himself to sack [Note 3], which had been
brought out specially to do him honour.  "_Yeast_ is it I have heard the
same called.  'Tis said the bread is better tasted therewith, rather
than sour dough."

"Pray you, good Father, to eat of this salad," entreated his hostess.
"I had it of one of my Lord of Ely his gardeners; and there is therein
the new endive, and the Italian parsley, that be no common matter."

That the Cordelier was by no means indifferent to the good things of
this life might be seen in his face, as he drew the wooden salad bowl a
little nearer.

"Have you beheld the strange bird that Mistress Flint hath had sent to
her over seas?" inquired he.  "I do hear that great lords and ladies
have kept such like these fifty years or so; but never saw I one thereof
aforetime.  'Tis bright yellow of plumage, and singeth all one as a
lark: they do call his name canary."

"Nay, forsooth, I never see aught that should do me a pleasure!" said
Mistress Winter crustily.  "Gossip Flint might have told me so much.--
Take that, thou lither hussy!  I'll learn thee to let fall the knives!"

And on the ear of the unfortunate Agnes, as she was stooping to recover
the dropped knife, came Mistress Winter's hand, with sufficient
heaviness to make her grow white and totter ere she could recover her
balance.

Father Dan took no notice.  He could not have afforded to quarrel with
Mistress Winter, especially now when priests of the old style were at a
discount; and in his eyes such creatures as Agnes were made to be beaten
and abused.  He merely saw in his hostess a notable housewife, and in
Agnes a kind of animated machine, with just soul enough to be kept to
the duty of confession, and require a careless absolution, three times
in the year.  Such people had no business, in Father Dan's eyes, to have
thoughts or feelings of any sort.  They were sent into the world to mop
and cook and serve their betters.  Of course, when the animated machines
did take to thinking for themselves, and to showing that they had done
so, the Cordelier regarded it as most awkward and inconvenient--a piece
of insubordinate presumption that must be stamped out at once, and not
suffered to infect others.

After further conversation in the same style, being unable to go on
eating and drinking for ever, Father Dan rose to depart.  It was not
confession-time, and on all other occasions Father Dan's pastoral visits
came very much under the head of revelling.  There was not a syllable of
religious conversation; that was considered peculiar to the
confessional.

Mistress Winter and Dorothy, after a little needlework and some more
scolding of Agnes, tramped upstairs to bed; and Joan, coming in half an
hour later, excessively cross after her day's pleasuring, followed the
example.  Having put away the supper things, and laid every thing in
readiness for the morrow's work.  Agnes stood for a moment before she
too lay down on her hard pallet in the one chamber above that served all
four as bedroom.  Through the uncurtained window high up in the room the
June stars looked down upon her.  She had no notion of prayer, except
telling beads to Latin Paters and Aves; but the instinct of the awakened
spirit rose in something like it.

"God, Thou lovest me!" she said in her heart.  He was there, somewhere
beyond those stars.  He would know what she was thinking.  "I know but
little of Thee; I desire to know more.  Thou, who lovest me, tell some
one to teach me!"

It would have astonished her to be told that such unuttered longings for
the knowledge of God could be of the nature of prayer.  Brought up in
intense formalism, it never occurred to her that it was possible to pray
without an image, a crucifix, or a pair of beads.  She crept to her poor
straw pallet, and lay down.  But the latest thought in her heart, ere
she dropped asleep, was, "God loves me; God will take care of me, and
teach me."  She would have been startled to hear that this was faith.
Faith, to her, meant relying on the priest, and obeying the Church.  But
was there no whisper--unheard even by herself--

"O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt?"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  This, I am sorry to say, was a lady without a head.  It
probably indicated the residence of an old bachelor.

Note 2.  The barb was a plaiting of white linen, which was fastened at
the chin, and entirely covered the neck.

Note 3.  Sack appears to have been a general name for white wine,
especially the sweeter kinds.



CHAPTER THREE.

MAKING PROGRESS.

  "I care not how lone in this world I may be,
  So long as the Master remembereth me."

  _Helen Monro_.

"So sure as our sweet Lady, Saint Mary, worketh miracles at Walsingham,
never was poor woman so be-plagued as I, with an ill, ne'er-do-well,
good-for-nought, thankless hussy, picked up out of the mire in the
gutter!  Where be thy wits, thou gadabout?  Didst leave them at the
Cross yester-morrow?  Go thither and seek for them! for ne'er a barley
crust shalt thou break this even in this house, or my name is not Martha
Winter!"

And, snatching up a broom, Mistress Winter hunted Agnes out of doors,
and slammed the door behind her.

It was not altogether a new thing for Agnes to be turned out into the
street for the night, and Mistress Winter reserved it as her most
tremendous penalty.  Perhaps, had she known how Agnes regarded it, she
might have invented a new one.  These occasions were her times of
recreation, when she usually took refuge with good-natured Mistress
Flint, who was always ready to give Agnes a supper and a share of her
girls' bed.  A few hours in the cheerful company of the Flints was a
real refreshment to the hard-worked and ever-abused drudge.  But this
time she did not at once seek Mistress Flint.  She walked, as Mistress
Winter had amiably suggested, straight to the now deserted Cross, and
sat down on one of its stone steps.  It would not be dark yet for
another hour, and until the gathering dusk warned her to return, Agnes
meant to stay there.  She was feeling very sad and perplexed.  The glory
in which the world had been steeped only yesterday had grown pale and
grey.  The cares of the world had come in.  Poor Agnes had set out that
morning with a firm determination to serve God throughout the day.  Her
idea of service consisted in the ceaseless mental repetition of forms of
prayer.  Busy with her Aves and Paternosters, she had forgotten to shut
the oven door, and a baking of bread had been spoiled.  She sat now
mournfully wondering how any one in her position could serve God.  If
such mischances as this were always to happen, she could never get
through her work.  And the work must be done.  Mistress Winter was one
of the last people in the world to permit religion to take precedence of
housewifery.  How then was poor Agnes ever to "make her salvation" at
all?

The mistake was natural enough.  All her life she had walked in the mist
of self-righteousness; her teachers had carefully led her into it.
Starting from the idea that man had to merit God's favour, was it any
wonder that, when told that God loved her already, she still fancied
that, in order to retain that love, she must do something to deserve it?
The new piece was sewn on the old garment, and the rent was made worse.

But now, must she give up the glad thought of being loved?  If serving
God, as she understood that service, made her neglect her every-day
duties, what then?  How was she ever to serve God?  It was a misfortune
for Agnes that she had heard only half of the Friar's sermon.  The other
half would have removed her difficulties.

She had reached this point in her perplexed thoughts, when she was
startled by a voice inquiring--

"What aileth thee, my daughter?"

Agnes looked up, and beheld the same dark shining eyes which had flashed
down upon her from the Cross yesterday morning.

"I scantly can tell," she said, speaking out her thoughts.  "It seemeth
not worth the while."

"What seemeth thus?" asked the Friar.

"Living," said the girl quietly.  There was no bitterness in her tone,
hardly even weariness; it was simply hopeless.

The Friar remained silent for a moment, and Agnes spoke again.

"Father," she faltered, in a low, shy voice, "I heard you preach here
yester-morrow."

"I brought thee glad tidings," was the significant answer.

The tears sprang to her eyes.  "O Father!" she said, "I thought them so
glad--that God loved me, and would have me for to love Him; but now 'tis
all to no good.  I cannot serve God."

"What letteth?"

"That I am in the world, and must needs there abide."

"What for no?  Serve God in the world."

"Good Father, if you did but know, you should not say the same!" said
Agnes in the same hopeless tone in which she had spoken before.

"If I knew but what?"

In answer, Agnes told him her simple story; unavoidably revealing in it
the hardships of her lot.  "You must needs see, good Father," she
concluded, "that I cannot serve God and do Mistress Winter's bidding."

"I see no such a thing, good daughter," replied the Friar.  "Dost think
the serving of God to lie in the saying of Paternosters?  It is thine
heart that He would have.  Put thine heart in thy labour, and give Him
both together."

"But how so, Father?" inquired Agnes in an astonished tone.  "I pray you
tell me how I shall give to God the baking of bread?"

"Who giveth thee thy daily bread?"

"That, no doubt, our Lord doth."

"Yet He giveth the same by means.  He giveth it through the farmer, the
miller, and the baker.  It falleth not straight down from Heaven.  When
thou art the bakester, art not thou God's servant to give daily bread?
Then thy work should be good and perfect, for He is perfect.  By the
servant do men judge of the master; and if thy work is to be offered
unto God, it must be the best thou canst do.  Think of this the next
time thou art at work, and I warrant thee not to _forget_ the oven door.
But again: Who hath set thee thy work?  When this hard mistress of
thine betook thee to her house, did not God see it? did not He order it?
If so be, then every her order to thee (that is not sinful, understand
thou) is God's order.  Seek then, in the doing thereof, not to please
her, but Him."

"O Father, if I could do that thing!"

"Child, when the Master went home for a season, and left His lodging
here below, He appointed `to every man his work.'  Some of us have hard
work: let us press on with it cheerfully.  If we be His, it is _His_
work.  He knoweth every burden that we bear, and how hard it presseth,
and how sore weary are His child's shoulders.  Did He bear no burdens
Himself in the carpenter's workshop at Nazareth; yea, and up the steep
of Calvary?  Let Him have thy best work.  He hath given thee His best."

Never before, nor in so short a time, had so many new ideas been
suggested to the mind of Agnes Stone.  The very notion of Christ's
sympathy with men was something strange to her.  She had been taught to
regard Mary as the tender human sympathiser, and to look upon Christ in
one of two lights--either as the helpless Infant in the arms of the
mother, or as the stern Judge who required to be softened by Mary's
merciful intercession.  But the one gush of confidence over, she was
doubly shy.  She shrank from clothing her vague thoughts with precise
and distinct language.

"I would I might alway confess unto you, Father," she said gratefully,
rising from her hard seat "I would have thee confess unto a better than
I, my daughter," was the priest's answer.  "There is no confessor like
to the great Confessor of God.  Christ shall make never a blunder; and
He beareth no tales.  Thine innermost heart's secrets be as safe with
Him as with thyself."

"But must I not confess to a priest?" demanded Agnes in a surprised
tone.

"There is one Priest, my daughter," said the Friar.  "And `because He
continueth ever, unchangeable hath He the priesthood.'  There can be
none other."

This was another new idea to Agnes--if possible, more strange than the
former.  She ventured a faint protest which showed the nature of her
thoughts.

"But He, that is the Judge at the doomsday! how could such as I e'er
confess to Him?"

A smile--which was sad, not mirthful--parted the grave lips of the Black
Friar.

"Child!" he answered, "there is no man so lowly, there is no man so
loving, as the Man Christ Jesus."

Agnes was so deep in thought that she did not hear his retreating steps.
She looked up with a further remark on her lips, and found that he was
gone.

It was nearly dark now, and there was only just time to reach the City
gate before the hour when it would be closed.  Agnes hurried on quickly,
passed out of Newgate, and, afraid of being benighted, almost ran up
Giltspur Street to the south end of Cow Lane.  A hasty rap on Mistress
Flint's door brought little Will to open it.

"Good lack!" said the child.  "Mother, here is Mistress Agnes Stone."

"What, Agnes!" cried Mistress Flint's cheery voice from within.  "Come
in, dear heart, and welcome.  What news to-night, trow?"

"The old news, my mistress," said Agnes, smiling, "that here is a
supperless maid bereft of lodgment, come to see if your heart be as full
of compassion as aforetime."

"Lack-a-daisy! hath Gossip Winter turned thee forth?  Well, thank the
saints, there is room to spare for thee here.  Supper will be ready ere
many minutes, I guess.  Prithee take hold o' th' other end of Helen's
work, and it shall be all the sooner."

Helen Flint, who was busy at the fire, welcomed the offered help with a
bright smile like her mother's, and set Agnes to work at once.  The
latter was beginning to find herself very hungry, and Mistress Flint
treated her guest to considerably better fare than Mistress Winter did
her drudge.  There were comparatively few of the household at home to
supper; for the party consisted only of Mr and Mrs Flint, two
daughters, Helen and Anne, and the little boys, Will and Dickon.

"What news abroad, Goodman?" demanded Mistress Flint, when her curiosity
got the better of her hunger.

"Why, that 'tis like to rain," returned her husband, a quiet,
unobtrusive man, with a good deal of dry humour.

"That I wist aforetime," retorted she; "for no sooner set I my foot out
of the door this morrow than I well-nigh stepped of a black snail."

"I reckon," observed Mr Flint, calmly cutting into a pasty, "that black
snails be some whither when there is no wet at hand."

"Gramercy, nay!" cried unphilosophical Mistress Flint.

"Oh, so?" said he.  "Fall they from the sky, trow, or grow up out o' th'
ground?"

"Dear heart [darling, beloved one], Jack Flint! how can I tell?"
answered his wife.

"Then, dear heart, Mall Flint!" responded he, imitating her, "I'd leave
be till I so could."

Mistress Flint laughed; for nothing ever disturbed her temper, and the
banter was as good-humoured as possible.

"Well, for sure!" said she.  "Is there ne'er a man put in the pillory,
nor a woman whipped at the cart-tail, nor so much as a strange fish gone
by London Bridge?  Ha, Nan! yonder's a stranger in the bars.  Haste
thee, see what manner of man."

Anne left the form on which she was sitting, and peered intently into
the grate.

"'Tis a dark man, Mother," said she, after careful investigation.

"Is he nigh at hand?" inquired Mistress Flint anxiously.

"I trow so," replied Anne, still occupied with the bars, "and reasonable
rich to boot."

"Marry, yonder's a jolly hearing!" said her mother.

"How so," asked Mr Flint, pursing up his lips, "without he make us a
gift of his riches?"

"Dear heart alive!" suddenly ejaculated Mistress Flint, turning round on
Helen.  "How many a score o' times must I tell thee, Nell, that to lay
thy knife and spoon the one across the other is the unluckiest thing in
all this world, saving only the breaking of a steel glass
[looking-glass], and a winding-sheet in the candle?  Lay them straight
along this minute, child!  Dear, dear; but to think of it!"

Helen, in some perturbation, altered her knife and spoon to the required
positions.

"Now, Agnes, dear heart, prithee get some flesh o' thy bones!" said
Mistress Flint, returning to her usual cheery manner.  "Good lack!  I
love not to see a maid so like to a scarecrow as thou.  Come now,
another shive of mutton? well, then, a piece o' th' pasty--do!  Eh, in
good sooth, thou mayest well look white.  Now, Will and Dickon, lads,
'tis time ye were abed."

Will and Dickon, thus addressed, promptly knelt down, one on each side
of his mother, and Will proceeded to gabble over his prayers, followed
by Dickon with articulate sounds which had no other merit than that of
bearing some resemblance to the words in question.

The boys commenced by crossing themselves, then they raced through the
Paternoster, the Angelical Salutation, and the Creed, all in Latin; of
course without the faintest idea of any meaning.  They then repeated a
short prayer in English, entreating the Virgin, their guardian angels,
and their patron saints, to protect them during the night.  This done,
Will rattled off half a dozen lines (carefully emphasising the
insignificant words), which alone of all the proceeding had either
interest or meaning in his eyes.

  "Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John,
  Bless the bed that I lie on:
  Four corners to my bed,
  Four angels at their head--
  One to read, and one to write,
  And two to guard my bed at night."

"Good lads!" said Mistress Flint, as she rose and restored the crucifix
which she had been holding before the boys to its usual place.

"Mother!" said Will, who was inconveniently intelligent, "who be
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John?  Doth it mean Luke Dobbs, and Father?"

Mr Flint indulged himself in a quiet laugh.

"Nay, dear heart!" answered his mother.  "Those be the holy Apostles,
that writ the Evangels."

"What be the Evangels, Mother?"

"Did ever one see such a lad to put questions?" demanded Mistress Flint.
"Why, child, they be writ in the great Bible, that lieth chained in the
Minster."

"What be they about, Mother?"

"Come, lad, if I tarry to answer all thy talk, thou shalt not be abed
this even," responded Mistress Flint discreetly; for this was a query
which she would have found it hard to answer; and with a playful show of
peremptoriness, she drove Will and Dickon upstairs to the bedchamber, in
which slept the five boys of the family.

There was a minute's silence, only broken by the movements of Helen and
Anne, who were putting away the bowls, jugs, and trenchers which had
been used at supper, when suddenly Mr Flint said--to nobody in
particular--

"What _be_ they about?"

His daughters looked up, and then resumed their occupation, with a shake
of the head from Anne, and a little laugh from Helen.

"Methinks, Master," said Agnes rather diffidently, "'tis about God, and
His love to men."

"What thereabout?" replied he, continuing to look into the fire.

"Why, Master," said Agnes, "surely you do wit better than I."

"Well, I wit nought thereabout, nor never want," said Anne a little
pettishly.  "'Twill be time enough when I have the years o' my grandame,
I guess, to make me crabbed and gloomsome."

Agnes looked at her in amazement.

"Nan," said her father, "I heard thee this morrow a-singing of a
love-song."

"Well, so may you yet again," said she, laughing.

"That made thee not gloomsome, trow?" he asked.

"Never a whit! how should it?" replied Anne, still laughing.

"Let be! but 'tis queer," said he, rising.  "Man's love is merry gear;
but God's love is crabbed stuff.  'Tis a strange world, my maids."

Both Helen and Anne broke into a peal of laughter; but Mr Flint was
grave enough.  He walked through the kitchen, and out at the front door,
without saying more.

"What hath come o'er Father of late?" said Helen.  "He is fallen to ask
as queer questions as Will."

"What know I?" replied Anne, "or care, for the matter of that.  Come,
Nell, let us sing a bit, to cheer us!"

It struck Agnes that there was not much want of cheer in that house; but
Helen readily responded to her sister's wish, and they struck up a
popular song.

  "The hunt is up, the hunt is up,
  The hunt is up and away,
  And Harry our King is gone hunting,
  To bring his deer to bay.

  "The east is bright with morning light,
  And darkness it is fled,
  And the merry horn wakes up the morn
  To leave his idle bed.

  "Behold the skies with golden dyes
  Are glowing all around,
  The grass is green, and so are the treen,
  All laughing at the sound."

The sisters sang well, and Agnes enjoyed the music.  This song was
followed by others, and Mistress Flint, coming down, joined in; and the
eldest son, Ned, made his appearance and did the same, till there was
almost a concert.  At last Mistress Flint stopped the harmony, by
declaring that she could not keep awake five minutes longer; and all
parties made the best of their way to bed.

Mistress Winter was found, on the following morning, to have recovered
as much of her temper as she was usually in the habit of recovering.
That Joan had lost hers was nothing new; it was rarely the case that
both mother and daughter were in an amiable mood together.  The former
received Agnes with her customary amenities, merely suggesting, with
pleasantry of her own kind, that of course 'twould be too heavy a toil
for her gracious madamship to carry the water-pails to Horsepool--the
spring in West Smithfield which supplied Cow Lane--and that so soon as
she could hear tell of a gentlewoman lacking of a service, she would
engage her at ten pound by the month to wait of her worshipfulness.
Agnes made no answer in words; she only took up the pails quietly and
went out.  As she came up to Horsepool, she spied her friend Mistress
Flint, bent on a similar errand, coming up Cock Lane.

"Dear heart, Agnes!" cried the latter.  "Is there none save thee to bear
those heavy pails of water?  Methinks yon lazy Joan might lift one, and
be none the worsen.  She hath the strength of a horse, and thou barely
so much as a robin."

Agnes smiled her thanks for her friend's sympathy, as she let down the
water-pails.

"I am used to the same, Mistress Flint, I thank you."

"Go to,--wert thou at the Cross t' other morrow?  Methought I saw thy
face in the throng."

A light broke over the face, but Agnes only said, "Ay."

"How liked thee yon Friar's discourse?"

"It liked me well."

"Marry, thus said Cicely Marvell, that dwelleth by me.  But for me, I
saw none so much therein to make ado o'er.  `God loveth men'--ay, to be
sure He doth so: and `we should love God'--why, of course we so should,
and do.  Forsooth, what then, I pray you?"

"Why, then, much comfort, as meseemeth," answered Agnes.

"Comfort!" repeated Mrs Flint, looking at her.  "Ay, poor soul, I dare
say thou hast need.  But I lack no comfort at this present, the blessed
Sacrament be thanked!  I have enough and to spare."

And, half laughing, with a farewell nod, Mrs Flint took up her full
pail, and trudged away.  With some surprise Agnes realised that to this
cheerful, healthy, prosperous woman, the ray of light which was making
her whole soul glad, was not worth opening the windows to behold; the
wine of Paradise which brimmed her cup with joy, was only common water.
Perhaps, before that light could make a happy heart glad, other lights
must be put out; before the water could be changed to wine, other
conduits must run dry.  It was well for Agnes Stone that she had nothing
wherewith to quench her thirst but the cup of salvation, and no light to
shine upon her pathway but the light of life.



CHAPTER FOUR.

THE ROOT OF THE MATTER.

  "My Christ He is the Heaven of Heavens--
  My Christ what shall I call?
  My Christ is first, my Christ is last,
  My Christ is all in all."

  _John Mason_.

As Agnes toiled home with her weary burden, she met her own special
favourite, little Will.

"Look you, Mistress Agnes!" cried little Will, triumphantly holding up
his horn-book.

"I can say all my Christ-Cross-Row [alphabet]--every letter!"

"Dear heart!" returned Agnes, sympathising in her little friend's
pleasure.

"And as to-morrow I am to join the letters!" exclaimed little Will
again, in high exultation.

"I trust thou wilt be a good lad, Will, and apply thee diligently."

"Oh, ay," said Will, dismissing that part of the question somewhat
curtly.  "And look you, I met, an half-hour gone, with the Black Friar
that preached at the Cross th' other morrow; and he saw my horn-book,
and asked at me if I knew the same.  And when I said I so did, what did
he, think you, but sat him down of a stone, and would needs have me for
to say it all o'er unto him.  And I made but one only blunder; I said,
`Q, S, R,' in the stead of `Q, R, S.'  And he strake mine head, and said
I was a good lad, and he would I should go on with my learning till I
might read in the great Bible that lieth chained in the Minster."

"Well-a-day! did he so?" responded Agnes.

"Ay, so did he.  But wot you what Christie Marvell saith?  He saith 'tis
rare evil doing that any save a priest should read in yon big book, and
he hath heard his father for to say the same.  And he saith old Father
Dan, the Cordelier, that is alway up and down hereabout, he said unto
him that he would not for no money that he should learn to read the
Evangel, for that it should do him a mischief.  What think you, Mistress
Agnes?"

"Methinks, Will, thou shalt do well to give good heed unto the Black
Friar, and to thy master at the school, and leave Christie Marvell a-be
with his idle talk."

"Nay, go to, Mistress Agnes! 'tis Father Dan's talk."

"Then tarry till Father Dan tell thee so much himself.  It may well be
that Christie took not his words rightly."

"Ay," said the child, doubtfully.  "But what manner of mischief, think
you, meant he?  Should it cast a spell on me, or give me the ague?"

Little Will, as we have already seen, was the child of a superstitious
mother.  To hear the tap of a death-watch was sufficient to make
Mistress Flint lose a night's sleep; and a person who disbelieved in
fairies she would have considered next door to a reprobate.  But Agnes
was remarkably free from such ideas for her time, when few were entirely
devoid of them; and she laughed at little Will's fancy.

"Well," said he, "any way, when I can read in the great Bible, Mistress
Agnes, then will I read unto you, and you shall come to the Minster and
hear me.  Christie's mother saith there be right pretty stories
therein."

Like many another in those days, into the household of Henry and Cicely
Marvell, the Gospel had brought not peace, but a sword.  The husband, a
stern, morose man, was fondly attached to the beggarly elements of Roman
ceremonials; while the wife had received and hidden the Word in her
heart, and though too much afraid of her husband to venture far,
contrived now and then to drop a word for Christ's Gospel.  Christie,
the troublesome boy, cared for none of these things, and made game of
the views of each parent in turn.

Agnes smilingly bade good-bye to her ambitious little friend Will, for
they had now reached Mistress Winter's door.  A scolding awaited her, as
usual, first for "dawdling," and then for spilling a few drops of water
on the brick floor as she set down the heavy pails.  But Agnes scarcely
heeded it, for her mind was full of a new project.  It would be some
time before little Will could read, and longer still before he could see
over the Minster desk, where the great Bible lay chained.  But why
should she wait for that?  She dimly remembered, in long past days, when
her aunt was living, having several times gone with her on Sunday
afternoons to vespers in the Cathedral, and heard some one reading at
the desk in the nave.  Then she had not cared to listen.  Why should she
not go to hear it now?

Of political events Agnes knew little, and thought less.  She could
barely have told who was on the throne, had she been asked.  She had
watched alike tumult and pageant without any intelligent notion of what
was passing.  Nor had she any idea that during those past days, when
such things had no interest for her, the opportunity of using them had
been passing away; and that in a very few weeks the public reading of
the Bible would be perilous to those who had the courage to dare it.
Imprisonment would soon await any layman who should dare to read to
another the Word of Life.

It often occurred that projects had to dwell in Agnes's mind for some
time before she had an opportunity to put them into execution.  That
such should be the case with this one gave her no surprise.  Generally
speaking, after mass on Sunday, Joan and Dorothy donned their finest
clothes, and went out on a merry-making expedition, while Mistress
Winter, also in grand array, preferred to entertain her neighbours at
home.  She considered Agnes on these occasions as one too many, and
usually contrived to send her on some errand to a distance; but now and
then, when no errand was forthcoming, she had the Sunday afternoon to
herself.  Five Sundays passed after the project had taken shape in her
mind, and no leisure had yet come to Agnes.  The Saturday arrived, the
eve of the sixth Sunday, and she was still in expectation of fulfilling
her hopes in some happy future.  The hope was communicated to Cicely
Marvell, whom Agnes met in returning from the pump, with certainty of
sympathy on her part.

The full pails were only just set down on the kitchen floor, when in
bustled Mistress Flint, with a dish-cloth in her hand, which she had not
waited to lay down, so eager was she to utter what she came to say.

"Go to, Gossip Winter!  Heard you the news?"

"News, gramercy!  Who e'er hath the grace to tell me a shred thereof?"
returned Mistress Winter crustily.  "What now, Gossip?"

"Forsooth, the King's Grace is departed."

"Alack the day!  Who saith it?"

"Marry, my Lord Mayor himself hath proclaimed it at the Cross, and as
Monday are my Lords of the Council to ride unto the Tower for to salute
the new Queen."

"The new Queen!  Who is she, belike?" demanded Mistress Winter, who did
not usually trouble her head with politics.  She was standing by the
fire with a frying-pan in her hand, arrested in her occupation by
surprise and curiosity, as Mistress Flint had been in hers.

"Why, what think you?  Folk say that heard the same, that the King's
Highness hath left the Crown by will to his cousin, my Lady Jane Dudley,
and hath put by his own sisters; and she shall be proclaimed as
to-morrow in Cheapside."

"Dear heart alive!" cried Mistress Winter.  "And what say my Ladies the
King's sisters, that be thus left out in the cold?"

"That is as it may be," replied Mistress Flint mysteriously.  "My good
man saith, if the Lady Mary suffer all tamely, then is she not the maid
he took her to be."

"Lack-a-day! but I do verily hope siege shall be ne'er laid to London!
It should go ill with us that dwell in the outskirts."

"You say well, Gossip, in very deed.  The blessed saints have a care of
us! as metrusteth they shall."

"Not they belike!" growled Mistress Winter, resuming her suspended
proceedings with the frying-pan.  "They shall be every one a-looking out
for the Lady Jane."

Mistress Flint came nearer, and replied in a mysterious whisper.

"Scantly so, as methinks, Gossip, when she is of the new learning, if
folk speak sooth touching her.  The saints and angels shall trouble them
rare little about her.  Trust me, they shall go with the Lady Mary,
every man of them."

"Say you so?" demanded Mistress Winter.  "Why, then shall the old
learning come in again, an' she win."

"Ay, I warrant you!" responded her neighbour.

Mistress Winter fried her rashers with a meditative face.

"Doll!" said she, when Mistress Flint and her dish-cloth had departed,
"whither is become Saint Thomas of Canterbury?"

"Go to! what wis I?" returned Dorothy.  "He was cast with yon old lumber
in the back attic, when King Edward's Grace come in.  He hath been o' no
count this great while."

"Fetch him forth," said Mistress Winter; "and, Agnes, do thou cleanse
him well.  If my Lady Jane win, why, 'tis but that we love not to have
no dirt in the house: but if my Lady Mary, then shall he go to the
gilder, and I will set him of an high place, for to be seen.  Haste thee
about it."

Half an hour later, Agnes (to whom Dorothy deputed the dusty search)
came down from the attic, carrying a battered wooden doll on a stand,
which had once been gaudily painted, but was now worn and soiled,
deprived of an arm, and gashed in sundry places, having been used as a
chopping-block for a short time during the palmy days of the
Reformation.

"He'll lack a new nose," remarked Mistress Winter, thoughtfully
considering the poor ill-used article.  "And an arm must he have, and be
all fresh painted and gilt, belike.  Dear heart! it shall be costly
matter!  Howbeit, we must keep up with the times, if we would swim and
not sink."

Keeping up with the times is a very costly business.  It costs many men
their fortunes, many their reputations, and some their souls.  Yet men
and women are always to be found who will pay the full price, rather
than miss doing it.

The struggle was sharp, but short.  On the tenth of July, Lady Jane made
her queenly entry into the Tower, in anticipation of that coronation
which was never to be hers in this world; and on the twentieth, her nine
days' reign was over, and Mary was universally acknowledged Queen of
England.  The first important prisoner made was the Duke of
Northumberland, hurled down just as he touched the glittering prize to
the winning of which he had given his life; the second was Bishop
Ridley.  Events followed each other with startling rapidity.  The Lady
Elizabeth, with her customary sagacity, kept quiet in the background
until the succession of her sister was assured, and then came openly to
London to meet the Queen.  Peers were sent to the Tower in a long
procession.  Bonner was restored to the See of London, Gardiner sworn of
the Council, Norfolk and Tunstal released from prison.  The Queen made
her triumphal entry into her metropolis, and the new order of things was
secured beyond a doubt.

Business was very brisk, for some weeks afterwards, with the carver and
gilder at the bottom of Hosier Lane.  Quantities of idols, thrown six
years before to the moles and to the bats, were now searched for,
mended, cleaned, regilt, and set up in elevated niches.  Every house
showed at least one, except where those few dwelt who counted not their
lives dear unto them for the Master's sake.  Henry Marvell went to the
expense of a new Virgin, which he set up on high in his kitchen; but
Cicely did not put her hand to the accursed thing, and quietly ignored
its existence.  Christie, as usual, made himself generally disagreeable,
by low reverences to the image in the presence of his mother, and making
faces at it in that of his father--a state of things which lasted until
he was well beaten by the latter, after which occurrence he reserved his
grimaces for other company.

Mistress Flint was entirely indifferent to the question; but since every
body else was setting up an idol, she followed in the crowd.  If Mr
Flint cared, he kept his own counsel.  Little Dickon clapped his hands
at the pretty colours and bright gilding; and Will innocently asked,
"Mother, wherefore had we ne'er Saint Christopher aforetime?"

"Come now, be a good lad, and run to Gossip Hickman for a candle!" was
his mother's convincing answer.

But this is anticipating, and we must retrace our steps to that sixth
Sunday for which Agnes was waiting in patient hope.  Very anxiously she
watched to see whether, when dinner was over, she would be despatched to
Aldgate or Bermondsey.  But it happened at last as she desired; there
was nowhere to send her.  Mistress Winter, in her usual considerate
style of language, gave Agnes to understand that she had no wish to see
her again before dark; and, clad in the old patched serge which was her
Sunday dress, the poor drudge crept timidly into Saint Paul's Cathedral.

From the Lady Chapel, soft and low, came the chant of the Virgin's
Litany.  The fashionable people, in rich attire, were promenading up and
down the aisle known as "Paul's Walk."  In the side chapels a few
worshippers lingered before the shrines; and round a lectern, in one
corner of the nave, were gathered a little knot of men and women,
waiting there in the almost forlorn hope that some priest, more zealous
than the rest, might come up and read to them.  They could not now
expect any layman to have the courage to do so.  Agnes joined this
group.

"I misdoubt there'll be no reading this day," said a grey-headed man.

"Ne'er a priest in Paul's careth to do the same," responded a
forlorn-looking woman.  "They be an idle set of wine-bibbers, every man
Jack of them."

"Hush thee, Goody!" whispered a second woman, giving a friendly push to
the first.  "Keep a civil tongue in thine head, prithee, as whatso thy
thoughts be."

"Thoughts make no noise," said the old man, smiling grimly.

All at once there was a little stir among the group, as the tall, gaunt
figure of the Black Friar was seen climbing the steps of the desk.

"Brethren!" said the voice which Agnes so well remembered, "let us read
together the word of God."

And, beginning just where he had opened the book, he read to them the
story of the raising of Lazarus.  He gave no word of comment till he
reached the end; then he shut the book and spoke to them.

"Brethren!" said the ringing voice, "this day is come Christ unto you,
that He may awake you out of sleep.  And if ye have not heretofore heard
His voice, your sleep, like Lazarus, is that of very death.  Now, O ye
dead, hear the voice of the Son of God, and live.  No man cometh unto
the Father but by Him.  Ye must come at God neither by mass, nor by
penance, nor by confessing, nor by alms-giving, but alonely by Christ.
And him that cometh will Christ in nowise cast out.  No thief will He
turn away; no murderer shall hear that he hath overmuch sinned for
pardon; no poor soul shall be denied the unsearchable riches; no weary
heart shall seek for rest and find none.  Yea, He is become Christ--that
is, God and man together--for this very thing, that He might give unto
every one of you that will have them, His pardon and His peace.  Come
ye, every one of you, this day, and put this Christ unto the test."

Without another word the Black Friar descended from the desk, and passed
along the nave to the western door with long, rapid strides.  And Agnes
went home with her heart full.

Full--with what strange and new thoughts!  No masses, no penances, no
confessions, no alms-givings, to be the means of reconciliation with
God; but only Christ.  And was it possible that the Friar meant one
other thing which, he had not said--no intercession of saints?  If
Christ were so ready to receive and bless all who would come--if He were
Himself the Mediator for man with God--could He need a mediator in His
turn?

Yet if not, thought Agnes with a feeling of sudden terror as the
supposition came to her, what became of the intercession of Mary?  She
who was held up as the Lady of Sorrows--just as Isis, and Cybele, and
Hertha had been before her, but of that Agnes knew nothing--she who was
pictured by the Church as the fountain of mercy and compassion--the
maiden who could sympathise with the griefs of womanhood, the mother who
had influence with, yea, authority over, the divine Son--what place did
Friar Laurence find for her in his teaching?  The mere imagination of a
religion without Mary, was like the thought of chaos.  Hitherto she had
been the motive-power of all piety to Agnes Stone.  A sermon without our
Lady!  It was shocking even to think of it.

Had Agnes been in the regular habit of attendance at Saint Paul's Cross,
she would have heard many such sermons during the reign of Edward the
Sixth.  But Mistress Winter's disapprobation, combined with her own
indifference, had been enough to keep her away, and the half-discourse
of John Laurence at the Cross had been the only sermon she remembered to
have heard during the five years of her residence with that delectable
dame.  Many thoughts, therefore, now familiar to the church-going
public, were quite new to her.

If she could but once again come across Friar Laurence!



CHAPTER FIVE.

AGNES IS ASKED A QUESTION.

  "Whate'er I say, whate'er I syng,
  Whate'er I do, that hart shall se,
  That I shall serue with hart lovyng
  That lovyng hart that lovyth me."

Few things are more touching in their way than the fragment of paper
containing the poem from which the motto to this chapter is a quotation.
Among the dusty business manuscripts of the Dean and Chapter of
Canterbury, in the oldest division, relating to the affairs of the
Priory of Christ Church, were found by the Historical Commission two
songs, scribbled on scraps of paper.  One was a love-song of the common
type, such as, allowing for difference of diction, might be had in any
second-rate music-shop of the present day.  But the other was of a very
different and far higher order.  It was the cry of the immured bird
which has been forced from its nest in the greenwood, and for which life
has no other attraction than to sit mournfully at the door of the cage,
looking out to the fair fields, and the blue sky in which it shall
stretch its wings no more.  None but God will ever know the name or the
story of that poor heart-weary monk, torn from all that he loved on
earth, who thus "pressed his soul on paper," one hundred years before
the dissolution of the monasteries.  We can only hope that through the
superincumbent wood, hay, stubble, he dug down to the one Foundation and
was safe: that through the dead words of the Latin services he heard the
Living Voice calling to all the weary and heavy-laden, and that he too
came and found rest.

But to turn to our story.

The days rolled slowly on, undistinguishable from one another save by
the practical divisions of baking-day, washing-day, brewing-day, and so
forth; and, certainly, not distinguished by any increase of comfort in
the outward surroundings of Agnes's lot.  She was trying to do her work
heartily, as to the Lord; but it did seem to her that the harder she
tried, the harder Mistress Winter was to please; the crosser was Joan,
the more satirical was Dorothy.  The only sunshine of her life was on
those precious Sunday afternoons, when always the tall gaunt figure
might be seen ascending the desk in the nave of Saint Paul's, and, after
the reading from Scripture, came a few pithy, fervent words, which Agnes
treasured up as very gems.  But by-and-by, another gleam of sunlight
began to creep into her life.

It was again Sunday afternoon, and the reading in Saint Paul's was over
for that day.  But it was too soon to go back to the bosom of that
uncongenial household which Agnes called home; for Mistress Winter was
generally extra cross--and the ordinary exhibition was enough without
the extra--if Agnes presented herself before she was expected.  The now
deserted steps of the Cross were the only place where she could sit; and
accordingly she took refuge there.  Not many minutes were over, when she
recognised the dark figure of Friar Laurence passing through the
churchyard with his usual rapid step.  All at once a thought seemed to
strike him.  He paused, turned, and came straight up to the place where
Agnes was seated.

"And how is it with thee, my daughter?" he demanded.

"Well, Father; and I thank you," said she.  "Verily, touching outward
things, as aforetime; but touching the inward, methinks the good Lord
learneth me somewhat."

"Be thou an apt scholar," said he.

Agnes grew desperate, and resolved to plunge into the matter.  She was
afraid lest he should leave her, with one of his usual rapid movements,
before she had got to know what she wanted.

"Father!" she said hastily, crimsoning as she spoke, "pray you, give me
leave to demand a thing of you."

"Ask thy will, my daughter."

"Pray you, tell me of your grace, wherefore in your goodly discourses
you make at all no mention of our Lady?"

The Friar sat down on the steps, when he was asked that question.

"What wouldst thou have me for to say of her?"

"Nay, Father!" returned Agnes, humbly.  "You be a learned priest, and I
but an ignorant maiden; but having alway heard them that did preach
sermons to make much of our Lady, methought I would fain wit, an' I
might ask it at you, wherefore you make thus little."

"My child!" answered the Friar quietly, "who died on the rood for thee?"

"Jesus Christ our Lord," responded Agnes readily.

"What! not Saint Mary?"

"Certes, nay, Father, as methinks."

"And who is it that pleadeth with God for thee?"

"You have told me, Father, our Lord Christ is He.  Yet the folk say
alway, that our Lady doth entreat our Lord for to hear our prayers."

"Child!" asked the Black Friar, "did Christ die for thee against His
will?"

"I would humbly think, not so, Father," answered Agnes meekly, "sith He
needed not to have so done at all without it were His good pleasure."

"Right!" was the rejoinder.  "It was by reason that God the Father loved
thee, that He gave Christ to die for thee; it was by reason that Christ
loved thee, that He bare for thee the pain and shame of the bitter
cross.  Tell me, is there in this world any that thou lovest?"

Agnes hesitated.  It seemed something new and strange to think that she
could love, or could be loved, since the death of her mother.  But she
thought, and said, that she loved little Will Flint.

"Tell me, then," pursued her teacher, "if this little lad were in some
sore trouble, and that thou couldst quickly ease him thereof, should he
need for to run home and fetch his mother to entreat thee?"

"Surely, nay!" responded Agnes.  "I would do the same incontinent
[immediately], of mine own compassion, and the more if he should ask it.
I would never tarry for his mother!"

"My daughter, is thy love so much better than His that died for us?
Should Christ tarry till His mother pray Him to be thine help, when of
Himself He loveth thee?"

"But, Father--I pray you pardon me if I speak foolishly, in mine
unwisdom--how then needeth a mediator at all, if God the Father be so
loving unto men?"

"God is a King, whose law thou hast broken.  He is all perfect;
therefore must His justice be perfect, no less than His mercy.  A
lawgiver that were all justice should be a scourge unto men; but a
lawgiver that were all mercy should be as good as no law.  God hath
appointed His Son to be thy Surety; and by reason that He is thy Surety,
He is become thine Advocate.  He hath said in His Word that the Son is
the Advocate with the Father; but of an advocate with the Son never a
word saith He.  Wherefore God saw fit to appoint a Mediator, He knoweth,
not I.  I am content that having thus decreed, He hath Himself provided
the same."

Agnes looked up, after a moment's thought, with an expression of fear
and trouble on her white face.

"But what then of our Lady?"

"Wherefore should there be aught beyond what God hath told us?" replied
Friar Laurence.  "She was `highly favoured' and `blessed among women,'
in that she was the mother of the Saviour.  Must she needs _be_ the
Saviour to boot?"

"But we must worship her, trow?"

"Must we so?  `Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shalt
thou serve.'  Let us hold by God's Word, my daughter."

"Father, I wis so little thereof! nought at all but what I do hear of
you," said Agnes with a sigh.

"Then, my child," he replied gently, "list thou the better.  And here is
a word for thee, and for all other in thy place: `If any man do desire
to do God's will, he shall know whether doctrine be truth or no.'  Keep
that desire ever sharp on the whetstone of prayer.  Then, surely as God
is in Heaven, thou shalt know."

The next minute he was gone.

"Agnes, sweet-heart!" demanded Dorothy that evening, in the sugary style
which she only used when she was in a particularly tormenting mood,
"prithee do me to wit of the name of thy dear friend, Master Black
Friar?  I beheld him and thee in so sweet converse at the Cross, it
caused me to sigh that I had no such a friend as he.  I pray thee
lovingly of his goodly name?"

The answers which Dorothy usually received from Agnes to questions of
this kind were as short as civility permitted.

"Master John Laurence," said she.

"And how long hast been of his cognisance, sweeting?" demanded Dorothy,
with more honey on her tongue than ever.

"I have wist him some six weeks," said Agnes.

"Six weeks! woe worth the day!" cried Dorothy, putting on an aspect of
sentimental sorrow.  "And thou never spakest word, when thou wist how
dear all we do love thee, and the least we might do for joy of thy
finding a new friend were to have the great bell rung at Paul's!  Agnes,
my fairest one, this is to entreat us but evil."

Agnes held her peace.  She never felt any doubt of the exceedingly low
price to be set upon Dorothy's affections towards her.

"Is he a priest, darling?" inquired Dorothy in her most coaxing tone.

"Ay," replied Agnes as curtly as before.

"Good lack, how delightsome!" exclaimed Dorothy, clasping her hands in
mock rapture.  "Do, of thy sweet gentlehood, bring me of his cognisance.
But to think what it were to have a priest thy friend, and alway get
absolution without no trouble at all!"

But about the last thing which Agnes had any intention of doing was to
introduce Dorothy to John Laurence.

After that interview at the Cross, Agnes often met the Black Friar.
Sometimes he passed her with a simple blessing in answer to her
reverence; but more frequently he stopped her, and inquired into her
spiritual welfare.  She had many a difficulty in which to ask his
counsel; many a trouble in which it was a relief to seek (and always to
find) his sympathy.  He was the only friend she had who spoke the
language of Canaan.  And it was far less as a priest than as a friend
that Agnes regarded him.  He was as different from old Father Dan, the
Cordelier, as Mistress Flint differed from Mistress Winter.  Agnes never
knew, when preparing for one of those abhorred periodical interviews
with the Cordelier, what he might say to her, or rather, what he might
not say.  She shrank with horror from his inquisitive questioning, and
not much less from his petty humiliating penances.  Father Dan's remedy
for angry words was to fast for a week on bread and water; for pride, to
lick a cross in the dust of the church floor; for envy and covetousness,
the administration of a cat-o'-nine-tails on the shoulders.  The Black
Friar, on the contrary, led Agnes out of herself altogether.  He had
only one topic, of infinite variety, for it was Jesus Christ.  Only once
had Agnes asked him whether he would recommend her to administer "the
discipline" to herself, as a cure for discontent and murmuring.

"If thy shoulders be discontented, why, by all means," answered Friar
Laurence, with his grave smile; "but if it be thine heart that
murmureth, wherefore chastise thy shoulders?"

Agnes never put the question again, and never had recourse to the
discipline.  Of fasting, poor girl, she had already too much for her
bodily profit, without any adventitious use of it.  And when she began
to pray in reality, the rosary was very soon dropped.  When a man's
heart is in earnest, to keep count of his words is not possible.

Meanwhile, in the outer world, the downward progress was very rapid.
One after another the Protestant Bishops were committed to prison, and
the chief preachers shared their fate.  The first mass was sung at Saint
Bartholomew's on the eleventh of August, when the people were ready to
tear the officiating priest in pieces; but by the twenty-fourth of the
same month it was heard in other churches in London, and the hearers
were becoming reconciled to the innovation.  The once powerful Duke of
Northumberland was beheaded on Tower Hill, notwithstanding his
profession of Popery at the last hour; the married priests were
deprived; the French Protestant residents were banished; the altar was
replaced in Saint Paul's; the Latin services, processions, palms, ashes,
candles, holy bread, holy water, and all the rest of the rubbish swept
away at the Reformation, came back one by one.  That portion of the
populace which had no particular religion was well pleased enough with
these changes.  The shows and the music were agreeable to them, and the
Gospel sermons which they displaced had not been agreeable.

Some tell us in the present day that young people must be attracted to
church, and that if music and pageant be not given them, their
attendance is not likely to be secured.  But what have we gained by thus
going down to the Philistines to sharpen our weapons?  Are these young
people attracted to any thing but the music and the pageant?  They are
quite clever enough to realise the inconsistency of the man who serves
them with bread in the pulpit, while he hands out husks from the
chancel.

How many of us mean what we say, when the familiar words fall from our
lips, "I believe in the Holy Ghost"?  Should we think it necessary, if
we really did so, to add all these condiments and spices to the pure
Bread of Life?  Would it not be easier to discern the real flavour of
the heavenly ambrosia, if we might have it served without Italian
cookery?

And is there to be no thought taken for those who are won to Christ
already? to whom He is in Himself the all-sufficient attraction, and
these veils and gewgaws are but annoyances, or at least superfluities?
Where is the building up of the saints, the edifying of the Body of
Christ?  Once was it said to Peter, "Feed My lambs;" but twice "Feed My
sheep."  How is it that so many are satisfied with a state of things in
which the sheep of Christ are starved and disgusted for the sake of the
lambs, or in many cases rather for the sake of those who are not in the
fold at all?

In February, 1554, a great commotion was caused in the City and suburbs
by the insurrection of Wyatt, which had for its object to arrest the
Queen's projected marriage with Prince Philip of Spain.  The Londoners
did not show themselves particularly valiant on this occasion, and the
doughty Doctor Weston--one of the most active and prominent of the
Popish clergy--sang mass to them with a full suit of armour under his
vestments.  The Duke of Suffolk, whose sad fate it was to be perpetually
getting himself into trouble in the present, for fear of calamities
which might never occur in the future, ran away in terror lest he should
be suspected of complicity with the rebellion; a proceeding which of
course roused suspicion instantly, and sealed not only his own fate, but
that of his daughter, Lady Jane Grey.  The latter was beheaded on the
twelfth of February, the former on the twenty-third.  For weeks the
prisons were full, and the gallows perpetually at work.  The Londoners
were in so excited and frightened a state--is it any marvel?--that when
the phenomena of a mock sun and an inverted rainbow occurred on the
fifteenth, they were terrified beyond measure.  There was enough to
terrify them on the earth, without troubling themselves about the sky.
No man's property, liberty, or life was safe for a moment unless he were
a devout servant of holy Church; and even in that case he held them by a
frail tenure, for private spite might accuse him of heresy, and then for
him there was little hope of mercy.  One after another, the few who had
hitherto remained staunch either fled from England, fell from the faith,
or suffered at the stake.

These being the awkward circumstances of the case, Mistress Winter
thought it desirable not only to gild Saint Thomas, but to put on a
cloak of piety.  The garment was cheap.  It was not difficult to attend
evensong as well as matins, and that every day instead of once in the
week; the drama performed in the Cathedral was very pretty, the music
pleasant to hear, the scent of the incense agreeable.  It was easy to be
extremely cordial to Father Dan, and to express intense subservience to
his orders.  This kind of religion was no inconvenient bridler of the
tongue, nor did it in the least interfere with the pride of the natural
heart.  Humiliation is one thing, and humility is quite another.

Dorothy began seriously to consider whether she should take the veil.
Her disposition was a mixture of the satirical and the sentimental.
There would be a good deal of _eclat_ about the proceeding.  It was
pleasant to be regarded as holier than other people.  Nevertheless there
were drawbacks; for Dorothy was not fond of hard scrubbing, and was
uncommonly fond of venison and barberry pie.  And she had a suspicion
that rather more scrubbing than venison generally fell to the lot of the
holy sisters of Saint Clare.  But the idea of the implicit obedience to
authority which would in that case be required of her decided Dorothy to
remain "in the world."  She thought there was more hope of managing a
husband than a lady abbess.

Nearly two years had passed away since Agnes had first heard Friar
Laurence preach at Saint Paul's Cross, and once more Corpus Christi had
come round.  Since that time she had grown much in the spiritual life,
though she had received no outward help beyond those rare Sunday
readings, and her occasional interviews with the Friar.  Though Corpus
Christi was still "uncertainly" kept, it naturally fell in with Mistress
Winter's new policy of veneered piety to be exceedingly respectful to
all fasts and festivals.  Accordingly she gave a grand banquet to some
dozen acquaintances, and sent Agnes about her business.  There was
likely to be reading on a holy day, and Agnes bent her steps towards the
Cathedral; but finding when she reached it that it was a little too
early, she sat down on the steps of the Cross to wait.  There was no one
about; for most of those who cared to keep the feast did not care to
hear sermons or Bible-readings; and Agnes was thinking so intently as
hardly to be conscious whether she was alone or not.

"Good morrow, friend!" said a voice beside her; and John Laurence sat
down a little way from her on the steps.

"Good morrow, Father," answered Agnes.

"Agnes, I would seek thy counsel."

Agnes looked up in astonishment.  He seek her counsel!  Was it not she
who had always sought his?

"Good lack, Father!" she exclaimed in her surprise.

John Laurence leaned his head thoughtfully on his hand, and made no
further communication for some seconds.

"I know a Black Friar, Agnes," he said, speaking slowly, as if weighing
each word, "who seeth no cause, neither in God's Word, neither in common
reason, wherefore priests should not be wedded men, as thou wist that
many, these ten years past, have been.  But he is yet loth to break his
mind unto the maid, seeing that many perils do now seem to lie in the
way of wedded priests, and he cannot tell if it were well done or no,
that he should speak unto her.  If penalty fell on him, being thus wed,
it should not leave her scatheless.  Tell me, now, how thinkest thou?--
should he do well to break his mind, or no?  A maid may judge better
than a man how a maid should take it."

"I would think, Father," answered the astonished Agnes, "that a maid
which did truly love any man should not suffer uncertain sorrow to stand
betwixt her and him."

"Yet how, if it were certain?"

"Nay, nor so neither."

"Go to!  Put it this case were thine own.  Shouldst thou be afeared to
wed with a priest?"

Agnes did not quite like such a home question.  Yet she replied calmly,
without any idea of the other question which was coming.

"Methinks, no; not if I truly loved him."

"And couldst thou truly love--_me_, Agnes?"

For an instant Agnes gave no answer.  She had as little expected to have
that question asked her as she had expected to be created a duchess.

"Say sooth, if thou shouldst be feared," said John Laurence; and the
faint suspicion of pain in his tone unloosed her lips at once.

Afraid!  Afraid to leave all her dreary past behind her, and to begin a
new life, with her cup of gladness full to the very brim?  John Laurence
was satisfied with his answer.  But, for the first time, not one word of
reading or comment reached Agnes's mind in an intelligible form.

"May be, my gracious Lady, your good Ladyship should like your palfrey
called!" were the words that greeted Agnes when she made her
reappearance in Mistress Winter's kitchen, having certainly been more
forgetful than usual of the flight of time.  "Or, may be, it might
please your honourableness to turn your goodly eyes upon the clock, and
behold whether it be meet time for a decent maid to come home of a
feast-day even?  By my troth, I would wager thou hadst been to
Westminster and hadst danced a galliardo in the Queen's Grace's hall,
did I not know that none with 's eyes in 's head should e'er so much as
look on thee.  Thou idle doltish gadabout!  Dost think I keep thee in
board and lodgment and raiment for to go a-gossiping with every idle
companion thou mayest meet?  Whither hast been, thou dawdlesome patch?
Up to no good, I warrant thee!"

"I have been to Paul's, Mistress, an' it like you," was all that Agnes
answered.

"Soothly, it liketh me well, sweeting!  Alisting some fat pickpurse
friar, with his oily words, belike?"

"I have been a-talking with a friend," said Agnes boldly.

"Marry come up!  So my sweet young damosel hath made friends, quotha!
Prithee, was it my Lady's Grace of Suffolk thou wentest forth to see, or
my Lady of Norfolk, trow?  Did she give thee a ride o' her velvet
pillion, bestudded with gold?"

Agnes thought it would be best to get it over.  The storm which must
come might as well fall soon as late.  She stood up, and looked the
terrible Mistress Winter in the face.

"Please it you, Mistress Winter, I am handfast to wedlock; and he that
shall be mine husband it is that I have talked withal this even."

And having so spoken, Agnes waited quietly for the tempest.



CHAPTER SIX.

THE SHADOW BEFORE.

  "Oh for the faith to grasp Heaven's bright For Ever,
  Amid the shadows of earth's Little While!"

  _Jane Crewdson_.

Sheer amazement kept Mistress Winter silent for one moment after Agnes
had made her startling revelation.  That her bondslave should have dared
to dream of freedom was almost too preposterous for belief.  And she was
powerless to stop this most insubordinate proceeding; for, never
anticipating such a calamity, and not fond of spending money, except on
herself and her daughters, she had not, as she might have done, bound
Agnes her apprentice.  But after that minute of astonished silence, a
thunderstorm such as even Agnes had never before experienced, burst upon
her devoted head.  If Mistress Winter might be believed, no such
instance of rebellion, perversity, ingratitude, and all imaginable
wickedness, had ever before occurred since Adam and Eve quitted
Paradise.  Agnes was asked to what she expected to come in this life,
and where she expected to go after it.  When Mistress Winter became
weary of scolding, which was not soon, Joan took up the tale, and when
she was tired Dorothy succeeded, and as all were gifted with
considerable powers of speech, the ball was kept going until bedtime.
Then Agnes was allowed to creep to her coarse rug and bundle of straw,
feeling herself in peace at last.

Thenceforward there was not much peace left, at least in the day-time.
Having been interrogated as to the name and calling of her suitor, Agnes
was at once dubbed Madam Dominic, my Lady's Grace of Blackfriars, and
various similar titles.  Dorothy, clasping her hands in mock rapture,
falsely averred that she had foreseen this delightful ending to the
story, when she caught sight of Agnes and Friar Laurence talking at the
Cross; and proceeded to give an ironical description of the Friar's
personal charms, sufficiently spiced to be very amusing to her mother
and sister, and just sufficiently seasoned with truth to be exceedingly
galling to Agnes.  Henceforth she took every opportunity to play
ill-natured practical jokes on the latter.  It was not likely that Agnes
would particularly enjoy having shreds of dirty flannel and linen flung
into her lap, with a tittering remark that they would enrich her
trousseau; nor feeling, when she sat at needlework, a rotten egg gently
broken over her head, with the bland intimation that it was to dress her
hair for the wedding; nor the presentation, in solemn form, of torn and
faded ribbons, accompanied by the information that they would become her
sweetly on her bridal.  Of all approach to wedding attire poor Agnes was
devoid.  She had but two gowns in the world--the washed-out linen
bed-gown and stuff petticoat in which her work was generally done, and
the well-patched serge which replaced it upon holy days.  But Agnes bore
all these outrages with a patience born of long practice, and nourished
by glad hope.  It was now May, and it had been agreed with John Laurence
that the twenty-ninth of the following March was to set her free.

They would gladly have made arrangements for an earlier date, had it
been possible.  But John Laurence was not much richer than Agnes
herself, and they had to wait till he thought that he could reasonably
afford to marry.  Beside this, it was a most perilous time for a priest
to think of wedlock.  Things might change.  Hope told that "flattering
tale" which she is so fond of recapitulating to young people--often most
unjustifiably.  Who could tell what might happen, if they waited?

Meanwhile, what was happening was not particularly cheering, at least to
the apprehension of the Gospellers.  Wyatt's insurrection had been put
down, and its leader beheaded; and its fruitlessness was shown by the
setting out of the Queen's envoys to escort Philip to England, while
Wyatt yet lay in prison waiting for his trial.  The Princess Elizabeth,
sent to the Tower in March, on charge of complicity in Wyatt's evil
deeds--who will ever know whether it was true?--had been released (at
Philip's request, it was said) a few days before Corpus Christi.
Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer lay imprisoned at Oxford, and under
sentence of death.  Nearly every day somebody was exhibited in the
pillory--women as well as men--the most frequent charge being, as it
appears in the diary of that comical speller, Mr Henry Machyn--"spekyng
yll of good Qwen Mare."  The difficulty which presents itself to the
present generation is, how else her subjects could well speak of her
proceedings.  However, they could have held their peace.  Probably the
discreet portion of the community did so.

It may seem a little strange, on the surface, when one considers how it
was that the reign of Mary was felt so galling, that the accession of
Elizabeth was welcomed with such a fever of delight and triumph, such a
sense of relief and freedom, as was undoubtedly the case--and yet that
men bore the former and made no sign, waited for the latter with
indescribable longing, but without any attempt to bring it about.
Perhaps we must attribute this partly to that law-abiding instinct
inherent in the ordinary Englishman: yet I think still more to the fact
that as a rule, at all times, in all respects, the majority of the
nation are indifferent.  There were men who died at the stake in defence
of the free Gospel.  There were men who kindled those fires, and stamped
out the truth, so far as in them lay.  But these, even when put
together, were still a minority.  The majority were the watchers who
stood round the stake, and who cared nothing for the cause on either
side--who went to see a martyrdom as a Spaniard goes to see a
bull-fight, with neither sympathy nor enmity towards the martyr.  Of
course, these would be, as to religious profession, what they found it
to their own interest that they should be.  The most popular and crowded
of all the Seven Churches is the Church of Laodicea.

"_Because_ thou art lukewarm...  I will spue thee out of My mouth."

It was not without some difficulty that Agnes contrived to enjoy an
occasional, and always short, interview with her betrothed.  Such
interviews were generally followed by forced audiences of Dorothy, who
professed an entirely hypocritical interest in the progress of the
love-match, and did her best to make Agnes recount what her lover had
said to her.  Agnes, however, was wise enough to keep out of the trap
laid for her, and Dorothy took little by her motion.

Sometimes the lovers met for a few minutes before or after the reading
in the Cathedral; sometimes there could be a few words as Agnes carried
her pails to and from the Horsepool; once or twice, when Mistress Winter
had barred the door on her for misdemeanour, they walked to some quiet
nook in the fields near Clerkenwell, refreshing themselves with converse
on the one grand subject nearest to both hearts--nearer even than each
other.  But the readings in the Cathedral were becoming much fewer than
of old.  It was a perilous thing to do now, and John Laurence was a
marked man.  Not that he feared danger: his motto was that of the old
French knight--"Fais ce que dois, advienne que pourra!"  But his brother
clergy were afraid lest it should be known that such compromising
proceedings as regular Scripture lessons were permitted at Saint Paul's.
Some from dislike of the Bible-reading, a few from honest kindly
feeling towards the reader, managed to take care that the lectern was
otherwise occupied, during the hour which alone John Laurence could
usually spare from other duties.

At last King Philip landed in England, and his meeting and marriage with
the Queen took place at Winchester.  The City and suburbs blazed with
bonfires, and rang with bells; the _Te Deum_ was chanted in every
church; the utmost delight had to be felt, or at any rate professed, by
all who did not wish to be reported as disaffected persons.  On the
twelfth of August, the royal bride and bridegroom made their state entry
into London.  A heretic had been burnt at Uxbridge four days previous.

Every house in Cow Lane, imitating every other street in London, poured
forth its members to see the procession.  The good folks locked their
doors, and left their houses to take care of themselves.  Agnes, who
liked a pretty sight as well as other people, had taken her stand with
the crowd, and was looking out with interest as the first of the
advancing horsemen who opened the procession became visible, when
suddenly she felt a hand upon her own.  She looked up into the welcome
face of John Laurence.

"Art come to see the sight, John?" she asked with a smile.

"I am come to see two sights," said he, returning it,--but his smiles
were always grave.  "To wit, the King's and Queen's Graces of the one
hand, and Agnes Stone of the other.  Hast a mind for a walk toward the
Clerks' Well, when all be gone by?"

"With a very good will," she answered.

But the pageant was coming past now, and they exchanged the use of their
tongues for that of their eyes.  It was entirely equestrian, and came
over London Bridge, from Suffolk Place, where the King and Queen had
passed the night.  Our friends were not prepossessed by the royal
bridegroom, whose low stature, want of beauty, and gloomy expression,
struck them in the same light that they did most Englishmen, as denoting
neither grace nor graciousness.  Only two persons are recorded ever to
have loved Philip--Queen Mary herself, and her successor, the fair and
sagacious Elizabeth of France.

Just opposite the place where Agnes and the Friar stood was an
allegorical group, of which one painted figure, supposed to be Henry the
Eighth, was holding out to the Queen an open Bible, inscribed with the
words _Verbum Dei_.  But before night a warning had been conveyed to the
authorities that the Queen was offended with this representation of her
father, and the Bible was painted out so hastily that the hand of the
figure was partly obliterated with it.

When the pageant had gone by, and the crowd had sufficiently dispersed,
John Laurence and Agnes set out for their walk to Clerkenwell.  They
found a shady field, in a corner of which they sat down, and the Friar
drew from his pocket a Latin Psalter,--the only form of the Bible with
which it was then safe to be caught.  From this he read to Agnes the
hundred and seventh Psalm, translating it as he went on into the only
tongue she knew.

"And He led them forth by the right way, that they might go to the City
of Habitation."

He paused at that seventh verse, and half closing the book, sat looking
thoughtfully into the blue heaven.

Very vaguely did Agnes enter into his deeper thoughts.  Her ideas
concerning public events, and possible future dangers, were of a very
misty description.  She kept silent a moment.  Then, when he did not
speak, she said--

"Well, John?"

"By the right way!" he said dreamily, rather as if speaking to himself
than to her.  "And He leads them, too, _inportum voluntatis eorum_--to
the haven of their desire."

"That is, Heaven?" said Agnes questioningly.  Her admiration for his
knowledge and wisdom was high.

"That is Heaven," he replied in the same tone as before.

"John, what thinkest Heaven shall be like?"

"Like God!" said the Black Friar slowly.  "Therefore, glorious--
wonderful--perfect in every part--holy--satisfying."

"And right fair and beauteous, doubtless," she added, by way of
completing the picture.

"That which is perfect must be fair," said John Laurence.  "He saith to
His Church, `Thou art all fair, My love, and a stain is not in thee.'
That is, to thee, and me, Agnes."

"To _me_?" she repeated, in an awe-struck voice.  "Nay, how so, trow?  I
am all o'er a stain with my sins."

The answer was in inspired words.  "`For perfect wert thou, in My beauty
which I put upon thee, saith the Lord God.'"

Agnes sat still, trying to take in the idea.

"Hear yet again another His saying to the Church: `Thou hast wounded
Mine heart, My sister-spouse; thou hast wounded Mine heart in one of
thine eyes, and in one chain of thy neck.'  Now what is the eye?--is it
not a member of the body?  Doth not this learn us that every one of
Christ's members hath his proper and peculiar love of Him, that cannot
belong to any other?  Yea, more; for the chain of the neck is not a
member, but only the ornament of a member.  Wherefore one grace--for the
ornaments of the soul be his graces--one grace of one Christian soul is
enough to delight Christ's heart."

Both were silent for a while, Agnes learning her new lesson.

"Mine heart!" said John Laurence suddenly, "the right way at times looks
like the wrong."

"What meanest thou, John?" said Agnes, looking into his face, and
startled by its expression of pain.

"Dear heart, we know not what lieth afore us.  We be so blind, Agnes!
But He knows.  It is enough, if we are ready to follow Him.  Canst thou
dare follow, as well through the flood and the fire as through the
flowery mead?"

"I cannot tell," she said tremulously.  "I would try."

"There be two staves to lean on in our weariness," he said.  "The one is
for earth: `Fear not, because I am with thee.'  And the other is of
Heaven, but gildeth earth with hope: `Where I am, there shall My servant
be.'  There must be glory and sweetness, where is Jesus Christ."

Long years afterwards, Agnes recalled those words.



CHAPTER SEVEN.

SAD TIDINGS.

  "But of all sad words by tongue or pen,
  The saddest are these--`It might have been!'"

Though the majority of the nation were comparatively indifferent to the
religious changes that had been effected, there were certain political
occurrences which they viewed with less equanimity.  One of these was
the vast number of Spaniards brought over by Philip.  It was reckoned--
doubtless with some exaggeration--that in September, 1554, three
Spaniards might be seen in London to every Englishman.  The rumour ran
that five thousand more were on the way.  The nation was both vexed and
alarmed.  Was England to be reduced, like the Netherlands, to the
condition of a mere outlying province of Spain?

Before eight weeks had run out from the day of Philip's arrival in
London, his hand upon the reins was plainly visible.  He had been heard
to say that if he believed a member of his own body to be tainted with
heresy, he would amputate it immediately and without remorse.  The
Gospellers were not left quite ignorant of what they might reasonably
expect.

It was on a quiet morning in October that Agnes was on her way to
Horsepool, when she was overtaken by Cicely Marvell, carrying a yoke of
water-pails like herself.

"Good morrow, Mistress Marvell!" said the former.  "Dear heart! but you
look something troubled belike.  Is any sick with you?"

Cicely and Agnes were quite aware that their religious sentiments were
alike.  It is in the cloudy and dark day that those who fear the Lord
speak often one to another.

"Heavy news, my maid!" said Cicely in a low voice, and shaking her head.
"Yesternight sixty folk were arrest in London for reading of Lutheran
books."

"Poor folk, trow?"

"All manner, as I do hear."

Neither high nor low, in those days, were safe, if suspicion of heresy
were once roused against them.  The higher class were the more likely to
be detected; yet there was a little more hesitation in bringing them to
the stake.  But it was easy to see, then as now, that as a rule it was
the poor of this world whom God had chosen to be rich in faith.  For
every rich man or titled lady who incurred bodily danger through
faithfulness to the truth, there were at least fifty of those whom the
world regards as "nobody."

There was a strange mixture of comedy and tragedy in the events of those
days.  The miracle-play alternated with the pillory, and the sight-seers
went from the burning of a heretic in the morning to see the new
athletic games, introduced by the Spaniards, in the afternoon in Palace
Yard.  A grand tournament at Court preceded, and a bear-baiting
followed, the humiliating spectacle of the Parliament of England
kneeling at the feet of Cardinal Pole, and abjectly craving absolution
from Rome.  One man--Sir Ralph Bagenall--stood out, and stood up, when
all his co-senators were thus prostrate in the dust.  He was religiously
a Gallio, not a Gospeller; but he was politically a sturdy Englishman,
and no coward.  Strange to say, no harm came to him.  Nay, is it
strange, when we read, "Them that honour Me, I will honour," and
"Whosoever shall lose his life for My sake and the Gospel's, the same
shall save it?"

There were no longer any sermons preached at the Cross that a Gospeller
cared to hear.  One was forthcoming regularly every Sunday; but the
preachers were Pendleton the renegade, Feckenham the suave, or Gardiner
the man of blood.  The uneasy feeling of a section at least of the
populace was shown by frays at Charing Cross, incipient insurrections in
Suffolk, assaults on priests at the altar, and unaccountable
iconoclasms.  The image of Becket was twice found broken by mysterious
means; and a cat, tonsured, and arrayed in miniature vestments, was
discovered hanging on the gallows in Cheapside, while the offer of a
large reward failed to reveal the offender.

During this time, Mistress Winter's piety had been blooming in a
wonderful manner.  She kept Saint Thomas of Canterbury on a small table,
with a lamp burning before it, and every morning diligently courtesied
to this stock and stone.  When her hands were not otherwise busied, a
rosary was pretty sure to be found in them, on which she recounted
Paters and Aves with amazing celerity.  The bitterness of her tongue
kept pace with her show of religiousness.  Ugly adjectives, and uglier
substantives, were flung at Agnes all the day long, and whether she
deserved reproof or not appeared to make no difference.  But though
words and even blows were not spared, Mistress Winter went no further.
Agnes was much too useful to be denounced as a heretic, at least so long
as she remained at her post in Cow Lane.  She did all the unpleasant
work in the house, besides filling the convenient offices of a vent for
Joan's temper, and a butt for Dorothy's ridicule.  But though getting
rid of her was not to be thought of, words were cheap, however peppery,
and a box on the ear was a great relief to the feelings of the giver--
those of the recipient not being taken into account.  So Agnes got
plenty of both.

"Sweet-heart, how earnest by yonder black eye?" anxiously demanded John
Laurence, on the last Sunday afternoon in January, when Agnes and he
were coming back from their favourite stroll towards Clerkenwell.

"'Tis nought new, belike," said she with a smile.

"Please God," returned he, "it shall be ancient matter and by-gone, very
soon."

He stood still a moment, looking over the crowded chimneys of the City,
just beyond the green field through which they were walking.

"Doth the thought e'er come to thy mind, Agnes," asked he, "how soon all
things shall be bygones?  At the most afore many years,--yea, afore many
days, it may be,--thou and I shall be away hence from this world.  And
even this great city, that doth look thus firm and substantial, ere long
shall not be left thereof one trace.  Yea, heaven and earth shall pass
away: but Christ's words shall not pass away."

Agnes listened with interest, but gave no answer beyond a gesture of
assent.

"I have fallen to think much of late," said the Black Friar, "of one
word of His,--assuredly not to pass away, nor be forgotten--`Whosoever
shall deny Me before men, him will I also deny before My Father which is
in Heaven.'  Verily, it were awful matter, to draw down on a man's head
this public denying of Jesu Christ."

"Dear heart!" said Agnes, at once sympathetically and deprecatingly.

"Ah!" he replied, with a sigh of self-distrust: "hope is one matter, and
belief another."

"Dost fear some ill work, trow?" she asked doubtfully.

John Laurence did not answer at once.  He spoke after a minute,
dreamily, as if to himself; a habit to which Agnes was now quite
accustomed.

"`Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have no more
that they can do.  But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear Him,
which after that He hath killed hath power to cast into Hell.'"

The Friar walked on for a few seconds with his usual rapidity, and then
suddenly stopped again.

"Men think lightly of these things, dear heart," said he.  "Most men
have a far greater care lest they break a limb, or lose an handful of
gold, than lest they be cast into Hell.  Yet see thou how Christ took
the same.  And He knew,--as we cannot know,--what is Hell."

"The good Lord keep us!" ejaculated Agnes fervently.

"Amen!" responded the Black Friar.  "`He shall keep the feet of His
saints.'  It is not we that keep ourselves.  'Tis not we that hold Him,
no more than the babe holdeth himself in his mother's arms.  And the
mother were more like to leave the babe fall into the fire or the water,
than He to loose hold upon His trustful child."

He was trying to prepare her for what might come.  But she was not
prepared.

Cold though it was, they had a pleasant walk that afternoon.  The time
of release was drawing so near, that Agnes felt almost as bright and
glad as if it were already come.  At Cow Cross, her betrothed bade her
farewell, saying with his grave smile that he would not come further,
lest it should cost her an extra taunt from Mistress Dorothy.

Agnes was quite satisfied to be saved the small torment in question.
She did not realise how soon the time might come when it would seem to
her a lighter thing to endure Dorothy's ridicule for a calendar year,
than to miss one glimpse of that face.

We recognise such facts as these--when they come.

The next day passed over uneventfully.  The Tuesday morning rose,
bright, clear, and frosty.  Agnes was in spirits perfectly marvellous,
considering what she had to endure.  She was making melody in her heart
as she carried her pails to the pump, thinking gladly how short her time
of trial was growing, and how bright her future would be.  It mattered
nothing to her that she would have to work as hard as ever; nothing,
that she must live in a single room of a crowded street in the heart of
the City; nothing, that John Laurence was a worn, gaunt man of more than
twice her years, and utterly unattractive in the eyes of the world;
nothing, that the day was bitterly cold, and her thin bed-gown a very
insufficient protection.  Everything was rose-colour to her.  Had she
not Christ in Heaven, and one honest heart that loved her upon earth?

When Agnes came in sight of the pump, she perceived a little child
sitting crouched upon the step of the trough, and evidently crying.  Her
heart was not hard to touch, and setting down her pails she laid her
hand on the boy's shoulder.  He had been too much absorbed in his grief
to notice her approach, but when she spoke he looked up, showing the now
tear-stained face of little Will Flint.

"Why, Will, my little lad!--what matter now?"

Will burst into a fresh paroxysm without answering.

"Metrusteth thou hast not been an ill lad?"

Will shook his curly head.

"Nay, what then?  Is Mother sick?"

Another shake.

"Come, tell me what it is.  Mayhap we shall find some remedy."

"O Mistress Agnes!" came with a multitude of sobs.

"Nay, then, tell me now!" pleaded Agnes.

"O Mistress Agnes, they have ta'en him!"

"Ta'en whom, my lad?  Sure, thy little brother Dickon is not stole
away?"

"No!" sobbed Will.  "But, O Mistress!--they've ta'en him to yon ugly
prison, afore those wicked folk, and they call him an here--heretic, and
they say he'll ne'er come out again--nay, never!"

This was manifestly something serious.

"But ta'en whom, Will, dear?--not thy father?"

"Oh nay, nay!--the Black Friar."

"What Black Friar, Will?"  Agnes hardly knew her own voice.

"Why, our Black Friar--Father Laurence.  There was only one."

For a minute there was dead silence in reply--a minute, during which the
rose-colour died out of sky and earth, and the glad music was changed to
funeral bells.  Then Agnes rose from her stooping position.

"There was only one!" she repeated, with a far-away look in her eyes,
which were fixed on the tower of the Cathedral, but saw nothing.

"He was so good to me and Dickon!" sobbed Will.

"Child, wilt do thy best to find out whither they have ta'en him, and
when he is to be had afore the Bishops, and then come and tell me?"

Will, occupied in rubbing his eyes with his small sleeve, nodded assent.
Agnes filled her pails mechanically, and carried them home.  The world
must go on, if the sun would never rise any more for her.

Early the next morning Will brought her news that the six prisoners, of
whom John Laurence was one, had been taken to the Counter, and that on
the eighth of February they were to appear before Bishop Gardiner at
Winchester Palace, Southwark.  Knowing that Mistress Winter would soon
hear of the arrest, if she had not already done so, Agnes made no
attempt to conceal the news.  She told it herself, and requested
permission to go and hear the examination.

"What, on a brewing-day!" cried Mistress Winter.  "Good sooth, nay!
They be right sure to be put by to another day.  If that be not brewing,
nor baking, nor cleaning, nor washing-day, may be thou canst be let go
for an half-hour then."

"Prithee, Mistress Sacramentary, don thy velvet gown!" spitefully added
Dorothy.

The hall of the Bishop's Palace was crowded that morning.  The six
prisoners were led out in order, according to their social rank:--first,
William Hunter, the apprentice-boy of Brentford, only sixteen years of
age; then Thomas Tomkins, the weaver; Stephen Knight, the barber of
Maldon; William Pygot, the butcher of Braintree; John Laurence, the
Black Friar; lastly, Thomas Hawkes, the only one in the group who wrote
himself "gentleman."  They were such common, contemptible people, that
Gardiner thought them beneath his august notice, and scornfully referred
them to Bonner's jurisdiction.  They were marched at once to the
Consistory sitting in Saint Paul's Chapter-House, whither the crowd
followed.

The Consistory demanded of the accused persons--

"Do ye believe that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, without any
substance of bread and wine remaining?"

The prisoners replied that this doctrine was not agreeable to Scripture.

"Do ye believe that your parents, your sponsors, the King, Queen,
nobility, clergy, and laity of the realm, believing this doctrine, were
true and faithful Christians, or no?"

"If they so believed," was the answer, "they were therein deceived."

"Did ye, yourselves, in time past, truly believe the same, or no?"

They said, "Ay, heretofore; but not now."

"Do ye believe that the Spirit of Christ has been, is, and will be, with
the Church, not suffering her to be deceived?"

"We do so believe," replied the prisoners.

"Have you," pursued Bonner, "being infamed to me as heretics, not been a
good space in my house, and been there fed, and instructed by those
desirous of your soul's welfare--and yet you refuse this belief?"

The accused admitted all this.

"Will ye now conform?"

"In no whit, until it be proved by Holy Scripture," came the decisive
answer.

"If not," demanded the Bishop, "what grounds have you to maintain your
opinion?  Who is of the same opinion?  What conference have ye had
therein with any?  What comfort and relief had you from any, and their
names and dwelling-places?"  [Note 1.]

This was a deliberate request that they would accuse their friends and
teachers.  But the prisoners did not respond.

"We have no ground but the truth," they said, "which we were taught by
Doctor Taylor, of Hadleigh, and such other."

Since Taylor of Hadleigh was already burnt to ashes, this admission
could do him no harm.

The accused persons were then remanded until nine o'clock the next
morning, and advised in the meantime to "bethink them what they would
do."

It was Cicely Marvell who told all this in a low voice to Agnes Stone,
as they stood together under a tree in the meadow behind Cow Lane.

"Keep a good heart, dear maid!" said Cicely encouragingly.  "May be it
shall be better than we might fear.  `The Lord is very pitiful, and of
tender mercy.'"

But Agnes shook her head.  To such a trial she at least anticipated no
other end than death.  Too well she knew that, like the Master whose
servant John Laurence was, "for envy they had delivered him."

Perhaps, too, her spirituality was of a higher type than that of Cicely.
She recognised that the Lord's tender mercy lies not in sparing pain to
His chosen, but in being with them when they pass through the purifying
waters, and bearing them in His arms through the fire which is to
consume their earthliness, but not themselves.  His is a love which will
inflict the pain that is to purify, and tenderly comfort the sufferer as
he passes through it.

Agnes hardly knew how she passed that Friday evening.  Her usual duties
were all done; but she went through them with eyes that saw not, with
deafened ears on which Mistress Winter's abuse fell pointless, for which
Dorothy's sarcasms had no meaning.  God was in Heaven, and John Laurence
and his persecutors were on earth: beyond this there was to her nobody
and nothing.  The vexations for which she used to care were such mere
insignificant pin-pricks that it was impossible even to notice them now.

So the Friday evening, and the sleepless night, wore away: and the
Saturday morning broke.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Note 1.  These questions, in point of wording, are very much condensed.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE CROWN OF LIFE.

  "Welcome scaffold for precious Christ."

  _Reverend James Renwick_.

It so happened that the 9th of February, to which the prisoners had been
remanded, was not a day devoted to baking, brewing, cleaning, or
washing, in the household of Mistress Winter; who, not in complimentary
language, gave Agnes her permission to spend half-an-hour in the
Chapter-house.

Already, before the sitting of the Consistory, Bishop Bonner had sent,
first for Pygot and Knight, and afterwards for Tomkins and Hunter, into
his "great chamber," and asked them if they were willing to recant.
They all refused, "not being persuaded in their consciences" that the
doctrines propounded to them were true.  These four were then brought
into the Consistory, and a paper was offered them to sign, containing a
synopsis of their belief.  The statement appears to have been a fair and
true definition of their creed, for all four attached their names to it
without hesitation.

It was just at this time that Agnes entered the Chapter-house, as these
prisoners were being removed, and John Laurence was brought forward.

"Pray you, come hither to me," said Bonner, with a show of friendliness,
due to his prisoner's priesthood.

Calmly enough, to outward show, Agnes looked on his face as he came up
to the Bishop,--that face so plain and uncomely to other eyes, so dear
and beautiful to hers.  There would be time enough for weeping
hereafter, in that dreary future, of which the vista seemed to stretch
before her in illimitable desert: but now she could afford to lose no
tone of that yoke, no moment of the time permitted for gazing on that
face.  She might never see him again until they should stand together
before the throne of God.

John Laurence answered every question asked of him calmly and firmly.
He admitted that he was a priest, eighteen years in orders, and sometime
a Black Friar professed.  But Bonner's spies had told him more than
this; and it was not his wont to omit the wringing of a heretic's heart.

"Art thou not ensured unto a maid in way of marriage?"

"I am so, my Lord," said John Laurence.

"Didst thou truly propose to wed with her?"

"By God's leave, I did."

And Agnes Stone, standing in the crowd, heard herself thus confessed
before God and man--a confession which, she full well knew, stamped him
who made it, in the eyes of these his judges, with indelible disgrace.

"And what is thine opinion on the Sacrament?" inquired Bonner in a
confidential manner.

"It is a remembrance of Christ's body."

"Then what sayest thou of them which believe, as we do, that it _is_
Christ's body?"

"I say that they are deceived."

"Thinkest thou that all do err which believe not as thou dost?" said
Bonner with his usual bluster.

"I do say so, my Lord," was the determined answer.

Once more the prisoners were remanded, but only until afternoon.  Agnes
did not dare to stay.  She had ascertained from Cicely Marvell, whom she
saw in the crowd, that prisoners' friends were often permitted a
farewell interview between sentence and execution; and if she meant to
apply for that, she must not risk Mistress Winter's anger by remaining
now.  Cicely promised to bring her news of the sentence.

"Lo' you now! here cometh my fair Lady Dominica!" was Dorothy's
salutation, as Agnes re-entered the kitchen.  "What news, sweet Mistress
Blackfriars?  Is thy goodly sweet-heart consecrate Lord Bishop of
Duneery, or shall he but be Master Doctor Dean of Foolscap?"

Agnes vouchsafed no answer.

"Woe betide us! here is Madam Gospeller hath lost her tongue!" cried
Dorothy.  "Do but give me to wit, prithee, sweetest Sacramentary!  So
dear love I all Black Friars, I may never sleep till I know."

"They be yet again remanded," replied Agnes dreamily.

Though she felt sure what the end would be, it was impossible to realise
it.  Surely all that was passing must be some dreadful dream, from which
she would presently awake, perhaps in the little bed which used to be
hers in her aunt's pretty cottage, and find that all the past, for eight
years, had been a groundless vision.

Yet Dorothy's torturing pin-pricks were real enough.  All day long she
persisted in worrying Agnes by pretended sympathy--so patently pretended
that it was excessively annoying.  The towel was snatched from her as
she was washing her hands, with an entreaty that Dorothy might take that
trouble for her; the mop was hidden where she could not find it, with an
assurance that it would but increase the bitterness of her sorrow to
discover it; invisible strings were stretched across the kitchen where
she was sure to fall over them,--in order, as Dorothy tenderly
intimated, to turn her thoughts from the painful anxiety which she must
be enduring.  It seemed to Agnes as if night and certainty would never
come.  Yet how could she wish it, when she felt so sure what the awful
certainty would be?  The hours wore on; the dark came at last; and when
the night had fairly set in, Cicely Marvell's soft tap was heard on
Mistress Winter's door.  Agnes opened it herself.  Dorothy had indeed
rushed to do it, but fortunately Agnes contrived to reach it before her.
It was evident that Cicely was loth to tell her terrible news, though
Dorothy begged her, over Agnes' shoulder, to relieve her heartrending
suspense.  Was it from one faint throb of womanly feeling in her usually
hard heart, that Mistress Winter, in sharp tones, summoned Dorothy
within, and left Agnes to hear the news alone?

"Speak, Mistress Marvell," said Agnes, in that preternaturally calm
manner which she had worn from the first.  "It is death."

"Ay, poor Agnes!  It is death by fire."

"And in the meantime?--"

"They lie in Newgate.  He shall be taken to Colchester to suffer, being
he was there born, the 28th of this March."

"Then he dieth on the 29th?"

"E'en so."

He was to die on the very day they had fixed for their marriage.  To
_what_ had Agnes been looking forward so joyfully during those past
weary months?

When the prisoners had reappeared before Bonner in the afternoon, they
were asked, for the last time, if they would recant their heresy.

"We are not heretics," they replied; "the contrary is heresy."

Then, on these six contumacious men, was passed in due form the sentence
of death.

Each was to suffer at the place of his birth: Thomas Tomkins in
Smithfield, on the 16th of March; William Hunter, the poor
apprentice-boy, at Brentford, on the twenty-sixth; William Pygot at
Braintree, and Stephen Knight at Maldon, on the twenty-eighth.

It was only one interview with the prisoner for which Agnes dared to
hope, and she waited for it until the day before he was to be degraded
from his priestly office.  Mistress Winter's momentary sympathy, if it
had existed, was over, and she grumbled a good deal when Agnes preferred
her request for a few hours' leave of absence.  But she granted the boon
at last.

"It will be the last time," said Agnes quietly.

No more meetings at Paul's Cross,--no more summer walks to
Clerkenwell,--no more readings from the Cathedral lectern!  Instead of
that, for him the chariot of fire, and then the King's welcome home, the
white robe, and the palm of victory, and the crown of life.  And for
her,--ah! what?  It might be a forty years' wandering in the Wilderness
of Sinai, with the River of Jordan at its close, ere she could come to
the shore of the Promised Land.  Yet the Promised Land was sure, as was
the Promiser.

A strange specimen of human nature was Alexander, the keeper of Newgate
prison: a man who could request Bishop Bonner to burn some more heretics
because the cells were inconveniently crowded, and then, after a good
supper, sit down and play the fiddle.  He was extremely fond of music,
though it scarcely exercised a soothing influence in his exceedingly
savage breast.

Happily for Agnes, this gentleman happened to be in a good temper when
she presented herself at his gates.  He admitted her into the great
hall, and after a short delay took her down to the low damp cell where
condemned prisoners were confined.  There she found John Laurence.

They were both very calm,--these two, to each of whom in that hour's
last meeting the bitterness of death was passing.  Each tried to be
brave for the other's sake; each strengthened the other's hand in God.

"This is scarce what we looked for, sweet-heart," said the Black Friar.
"We had gathered a fair dish of honey, but our good Master saw it should
harm us, and appointed us in the stead thereof a dish of wormwood.
Neither is all the honey gone from us, for it is sweet to suffer for His
sake."

"I am glad thou hast stood firm," said Agnes quietly.

"Thou shalt have the bitterer portion, my poor heart!  Yet it is for no
long season.  We must meet soon, in our Father's House."

"Truly.  And the time may be very short," she answered.

"And canst thou give me up, mine Agnes, for Christ's sake?  For mark
thou, that which is wrenched away is not given."

She looked up with fixed, tearless eyes.

"Ay, John.  I can give thee up for Christ's sake.  But I could not for
any other."

So they parted--for the last time.  For when they should meet again in
the Father's House, they would part no more for ever.

"Not for any other!"  Is there no special tenderness in the heart of the
loving Saviour, for those who have given up that one thing which would
not, could not, be resigned for any sake but His?

The next day there was the bitter mockery of degradation.  Every
vestment of the priesthood was put upon the martyr; one by one they were
torn from him with curses.  The crown of his head, where the tonsure had
been cut, was defaced; the anointed head and hands were roughly scraped,
to deprive them of the sacred unction.  But the unction from the Holy
One was beyond their reach.

Then came the journey to Colchester, and, lastly, the _auto da fe_.
"Not able to go, his legs sore worn with heavy irons, as also his body
weakened by evil keeping," John Laurence was borne in a chair to his
chariot of fire.  We are told that at this martyrdom there were seen
little children running round the stake, crying, "Lord, strengthen Thy
servant, and keep Thy promise!"  God did keep His promise, and
strengthened His servant.

It was soon over; and they had no more that they could do.

There were martyr-crowns for such men as John Laurence.  But were there
none for women such as Agnes Stone, whose martyrdom lasted, not an hour,
but a lifetime,--who laid on the Lord's altar, not their lives, but all
that made life precious?

We are not told what became of her.  Nor does it much matter.  Rather
than sketch a fancy future for such a life as hers, let us remember the
true end, when that life was over.  For three hundred years, more or
less, these two, who gave each other up for Christ, have been given back
by Christ to each other: together they have followed the Lamb
whithersoever He goeth; the Lord has been their everlasting light, and
the days of their mourning have been ended.






End of Project Gutenberg's For the Master's Sake, by Emily Sarah Holt

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FOR THE MASTER'S SAKE ***

***** This file should be named 24105.txt or 24105.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/1/0/24105/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
