The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Price of a Soul, by William Jennings Bryan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Price of a Soul

Author: William Jennings Bryan

Release Date: January 23, 2008 [EBook #24406]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRICE OF A SOUL ***




Produced by Andrew Sly







THE PRICE OF A SOUL

By

WILLIAM JENNINGS BRYAN


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY

NEW YORK AND LONDON

1914



PUBLISHERS' NOTE

"The Price of a Soul" is an address delivered by Mr. Bryan, first
at the Northwestern Law School Banquet in Chicago, then as a
Commencement Oration at the Peirce School in Philadelphia and,
in 1909, extended into a lecture.




THE PRICE OF A SOUL


The fact that Christ dealt with this subject is proof conclusive that
it is important, for He never dealt with trivial things. When Christ
focused attention upon a theme it was because it was worthy of
consideration--and Christ weighed the soul. He presented the subject,
too, with surpassing force; no one will ever add emphasis to what He
said. He understood the value of the question in argument. If you
will examine the great orations delivered at crises in the world's
history, you will find that in nearly every case the speaker
condensed the whole subject into a question, and in that question
embodied what he regarded as an unanswerable argument. Christ used
the question to give force to the thought which he presented in
regard to the soul's value.

On one side He put the world and all that the world can contain--all the
wealth that one can accumulate, all the fame to which one can aspire,
and all the happiness that one can covet; and on the other side he
put the soul, and asked the question that has come ringing down the
centuries: "What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and
lose his own soul?"

There is no compromise here--no partial statement of the matter. He
leaves us to write one term of the equation ourselves. He gives us all
the time we desire, and allows the imagination to work to the limit,
and when we have gathered together into one sum all things but the
soul, He asks--What if you gain it all--_all_--ALL, and lose the soul?
What is the profit?

Some have thought the soul question a question of the next world only,
but it is a question of this world also; some have thought the soul
question a Sabbath-day question only, but it is a week-day question as
well; some have thought the soul question a question for the ministers
alone, but it is a question which we all must meet. Every day and every
week, every month and every year, from the time we reach the period of
accountability until we die, we--each of us--all of us, weigh the soul.

And exactly in proportion as we put the soul above all things else we
build character; the moment we allow the soul to become a matter of
merchandise, we start on the downward way.

Tolstoy says that if you would investigate the career of a criminal it
is not sufficient to begin with the commission of a crime; that you must
go back to that day in his life when he deliberately trampled upon his
conscience and did that which he knew to be wrong. And so with all of
us, the turning point in the life is the day when we surrender the soul
for something that for the time being seems more desirable.

Most of the temptations that come to us to sell the soul come in
connection with the getting of money. The Bible says, "The love of
money is the root of all evil." If I had been making the statement,
I think I would have said that the love of money is the root of
_nearly_ all evil. But that is probably due to the fact that I am
so conservative in thought and in method of statement, that, in
stating a proposition, I prefer to leave a margin, so that if
anybody disputes it I can bring proof of more than I said. But
the Bible says, "The love of money is the root of _all_ evil"
and I shall not attempt to weaken the statement. If it is a mistake
at all it is so slight a mistake that we need not spend time in
correcting it.

And because so many of our temptations come through the love of money
and the desire to obtain it, it is worth while to consider the laws
of accumulation. We must all have money; we need food and clothing
and shelter, and money is necessary for the purchase of these things.
Money is not an evil in itself--money is, in fact, a very useful
servant. It is bad only when it becomes the master, and the love of
it is hurtful only because it can, and often does, crowd out the love
of nobler things.

But since we must all use money and must in our active days store up
money for the days when our strength fails, let us see if we can
agree upon the rules that should govern us in the accumulation of
the money that we need. How much money can a man rightfully collect
from society? Surely, there can be no disagreement here. He can not
rightfully collect more than he honestly earns. If a man collects
more than he honestly earns, he collects what somebody else has earned,
and we call it stealing if a man takes that which belongs to another.
Not only is a man limited in his collections of what he honestly earns,
but no honest man will desire to collect more than he earns.

If a man can not rightfully collect more than he honestly earns, it is,
then, a matter of the utmost importance to know how much money a man can
honestly earn. I venture an answer to this and say that a man can not
honestly earn more than fairly measures the service which he renders to
society. I can not conceive of any way of earning money except to give
to society a service equivalent in value to the money collected. This is
a fundamental proposition and it is important that it should be clearly
understood, for if one desires to collect largely from society he must
be prepared to render a large service to society; and our schools and
colleges, our churches and all other organizations for the improvement
of man have for one of their chief objects the enlargement of the
capacity for service.

There is an apparent exception in the case of an inheritance, but it is
not a real exception, for if the man who leaves the money has honestly
earned it, he has already given society a service of equivalent value
and, therefore, has a right to distribute it. And money received by
inheritance is either payment for service already rendered, or payment
in advance for service to be rendered. No right-minded person will
accept money, even by inheritance, without recognizing the obligation
it imposes to render a service in return. This service is not always
rendered to the one from whom this money is received, but often to
society in general. In fact, most of the blessings which we receive come
to us in such a way that we can not distinguish the donors and must make
our return to the whole public.

But I need not dwell upon this, because in this country more than
anywhere else in the world we appreciate the dignity of labor and
understand that it is honorable to serve. And yet there is room for
improvement, for all over our land there are, scattered here and there,
young men and young women--and even parents--who still think that it
is more respectable for a young man to spend in idleness the money
some one else has earned than to be himself a producer of wealth.
And as long as this sentiment is to be found anywhere, there is
educational work to be done, for public opinion will never be what
it should be until it puts the badge of disgrace upon the idler, no
matter how rich he may be, rather than upon the man who with brain or
muscle contributes to the nation's wealth, the nation's strength
and the nation's progress. But, as I said, the inheritance is an
apparent, not an actual, exception, and we will return to the
original proposition--that one's earnings must be measured by the
service rendered. This is so important a proposition that I beg leave
to dwell upon it a moment longer, to ask whether it is possible to fix
in dollars and cents a maximum limit to the amount one can earn in a
lifetime.

Let us begin with one hundred thousand dollars. If we estimate a
working life at thirty-three years--and I think this is a fair
estimate--a man must earn a little more than three thousand dollars
per year for thirty-three years to earn one hundred thousand dollars
in a lifetime. I take it for granted that no one will deny that it is
possible for one to earn this sum by rendering a service equal to it
in value. What shall we say of a million dollars? Can a man earn
that much? To do so he must earn a little more than thirty thousand
dollars a year for thirty-three years. Is it possible for one to
render so large a service? I believe that it is. Well, what shall we
say of ten million? To earn that much one must earn on an average
a little more than three hundred thousand a year for thirty-three
years. Is it possible for one to render a service so large as to earn
so vast a sum? At the risk of shocking some of my radical friends I
am going to affirm that it is possible. But can one earn a hundred
million? Yes, I believe that it is even possible to serve society to
such an extent as to earn a hundred million in the span of a human
life, or an average of three million a year for thirty-three years.
We have one man in this country who is said to be worth five hundred
million. To earn five hundred million one must earn on an average of
fifteen million a year for thirty-three years. Is this within the
range of human possibility? I believe that it is. Now, I have gone as
high as any one has yet gone in collecting, but if there is any
young man with an ambition to render a larger service to the world,
I will raise it another notch, if necessary, to encourage him. So
almost limitless are the possibilities of service in this age that I
am not willing to fix a maximum to the sum a man can honestly and
legitimately earn.

Not only do I believe that a man can earn five hundred million, but I
believe that men have earned it. I believe that Thomas Jefferson
earned more than five hundred million. The service that he rendered
to the world was of such great value that had he collected for it
five hundred million of dollars, he would not have been overpaid. I
believe that Abraham Lincoln earned more than five hundred million,
and I could go back through history and give you the name of man after
man who rendered a service so large as to entitle him to collect more
than five hundred million from society, but if I presented a list
containing the name of every man who, since time began, earned such
an enormous sum, one thing would be true of all of them, namely: that
in not a single case did the man collect the full amount. The men who
have earned five hundred million dollars have been so busy earning it
that they have not had time to collect it; and the men who have
collected five hundred million have been so busy collecting it that
they have not had time to earn it.

Jefferson did not collect all he earned; in fact, he began public
life well-to-do for a man of that period, and died poor--impoverished
by visits of those who called to tell him how much they loved him and
how much they appreciated his work. Lincoln did not collect the full
amount; neither Jefferson nor Lincoln would have cared to collect
five hundred million. What would either one have done with such a
sum? Or, what is more important, what would five hundred million of
dollars have done with Jefferson or Lincoln?

In that wonderful parable of the sower, Christ speaks of the seeds that
fell and of the thorns that sprang up and choked them, and He himself
explained what he meant by this illustration, namely: That the cares of
this world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the truth. If the great
benefactors of the race had been burdened with the care of big fortunes,
they could not have devoted themselves to the nobler things that gave
them a place in the affection of their people and in history.

It seems, therefore, that while one can not rightfully collect more
than he honestly earns, he may earn more than it would be wise for
him to collect. And that brings us to the next question: How much
should one desire to collect from society? I answer, that no matter
how large a service he may render or how much he may earn, one should
not desire to collect more than he can wisely spend.

And how much can one wisely spend? Not as much as you might think,
and not nearly as much as some have tried to spend. No matter how
honestly money may be acquired, one is not free to spend it at will.
We are hedged about by certain restrictions that we can neither
remove nor ignore. God has written certain laws in our nature--laws
that no legislature can repeal--laws that no court can declare
unconstitutional, and these laws limit us in our expenditures.

Let us consider some of the things for which we can properly spend
money. We need food--we all need food, and we need about the same
amount; not exactly, but the difference in quantity is not great.
The range in expenditure is greater than the range in quantity, for
expenditure covers kind and quality as well as quantity. But there is
a limit even to expenditure. If a man eats too much he suffers for
it. If he squanders his money on high-priced foods, he wears his
stomach out. There is an old saying which we have all heard, that
"The poor man is looking for food for his stomach, while the rich man
is going from one watering place to another looking for a stomach for
his food." This is only a witty way of expressing the sober truth,
namely, that one is limited in the amount of money he can wisely
spend for food.

We need clothing--we all need clothing, and we need the same
amount. The difference in quantity is not great. The range in
expenditure for clothing is greater than the range in quantity,
because expenditure covers style and variety as well as quantity, but
there is a limit to the amount of money one can wisely spend for
clothing. If a man has so much clothing that it takes all of his time
to change his clothes, he has more than he needs and more than he can
wisely spend money for.

We need homes--we all need shelter, and we need about the same amount.
In fact, God was very democratic in the distribution of our needs,
for he so created us that our needs are about the same. The range of
expenditure for homes is probably wider than in the case of either food
or clothing. We are interested in the home. I never pass a little house
where two young people are starting out in life without feeling a
sympathetic interest in that home; I never pass a house where a room is
being added without feeling interested, for I know the occupants have
planned it, and looked forward to it and waited for it; I like to see a
little house moved back and a larger house built, for I know it is the
fulfilment of a dream. I have had some of these dreams myself, and I
know how they lead us on and inspire us to larger effort and greater
endeavor, and yet there is a limit to the amount one can wisely spend
even for so good a thing as a home.

If a man gets too big a house it becomes a burden to him, and some
have had this experience. Not infrequently a young couple will start
out poor and struggle along in a little house, looking forward to the
time when they can build a big house. After a while the time arrives
and they build a big house, larger, possibly, than they intended to
and it nearly always costs more than they thought it would, and then
they struggle along the rest of their lives looking back to the time
when they lived in a little house.

We speak of people being independently rich. That is a mistake; they
are dependently rich. The richer a man is the more dependent he is--the
more people he depends upon to help him collect his income, and the more
people he depends upon to help him spend his income. Sometimes a couple
will start out doing their own work--the wife doing the work inside the
house and the man outside; but they prosper, and after a while they are
able to afford help. They get a girl to help the wife inside and a man
to help the husband outside; then they prosper more--and they get two
girls to help inside and two men to help outside, then three girls
inside and three men outside. Finally they have so many girls helping
inside and so many men helping outside that they can not leave the
house--they have to stay at home and look after the establishment.
And this is not a new condition. One of the Latin poets complained of
"the cares that hover about the fretted ceilings of the rich," and it
was this condition that inspired Charles Wagner to write his little
book entitled "The Simple Life," in which he entered an eloquent
protest against the materialism which makes man the slave of his
possessions and presented an earnest plea for the raising of the
spiritual above the purely physical. I repeat, there is a limit
to the amount a man can wisely spend upon a home.

But a man can give his money away. Yes, and no one who has ever tried
it will deny that more pleasure is to be derived from the giving
of money to a cause in which one's heart is interested, than can
be obtained from the expenditure of the same amount in selfish
indulgence. But if one is going to give largely he must spend a great
deal of time in investigating and in comparing the merits of the
different enterprises, and I am persuaded that there is a better life
than the life led by those who spend nearly all the time accumulating
beyond their needs and then employ the last few days in giving it
away. What the world needs is not a few men of great wealth, doling
out their money in anticipation of death--what the world needs is
that these men shall link themselves in sympathetic interest with
struggling humanity and help to solve the problems of to-day, instead
of creating problems for the next generation to solve.

But you say, a man can leave his money to his children? He can, if he
dares. But a large fortune, in anticipation, has ruined more sons
than it has ever helped. If a young man has so much money coming to
him that he knows he will never have to work, the chances are that it
will sap his energy, even if it does not undermine his character, and
leave him a curse rather than a blessing to those who brought him
into the world. And it is scarcely safer to leave the money to a
daughter. For if a young woman has a prospective inheritance so
large that, when a young man calls upon her, she can not tell whether
he is calling upon her or her father, it is embarrassing--especially
so if she finds after marriage that he married the wrong member of
the family. And, I may add, that the daughters of the very rich are
usually hedged about by a social environment which prevents their
making the acquaintance of the best young men. The men who,
twenty-five years from now, will be the leaders in business, in
society, in government, and in the church, are not the pampered sons
of the rich, but the young men who, with good health and good
habits, with high ideals and strong ambition, are, under the spur of
necessity, laying the foundation for future achievements, and these
young men do not have a chance to become acquainted with the
daughters of the very rich. Even if they did know them they might
hesitate to enter upon the scale of expenditure to which these
daughters are accustomed.

I have spoken at length in regard to these limitations, altho we all
know of them or should. The ministers tell us about these things
Sunday after Sunday, or should, and yet we find men chasing the
almighty dollar until they fall exhausted into the grave. A few
years ago I read a sermon by Dr. Talmage on this subject; he said a
man who wore himself out getting money that he did not need would
finally drop dead, and that his pastor would tell a group of
sorrowing friends that, by a mysterious dispensation of Providence,
the good man had been cut off in his prime. Dr. Talmage said that
Providence had nothing to do with it, and that the minister ought to
tell the truth about it and say that the man had been kicked to death
by the golden calf.

A few weeks ago I read a story by Tolstoy, and I did not notice until
I had completed it that the title of the story was, "What shall it
profit?" The great Russian graphically presented the very thought
that I have been trying to impress upon your minds. He told of a
Russian peasant who had land hunger--who added farm to farm and land
to land, but could never get enough. After a while he heard of a
place where land was cheaper and he sold his land and went and bought
more land. But he had no more than settled there until he heard of
another place among a half civilized people where land was cheaper
still. He took a servant and went into this distant country and
hunted up the head man of the tribe, who offered him all the land he
could walk around in a day for a thousand rubles--told him he could
put the money down on any spot and walk in any direction as far and
as fast as he would, and that if he was back by sunset he could have
all the land he could encompass during the day. He put the money down
upon the ground and started at sunrise to get, at last, enough land.
He started leisurely, but as he looked upon the land it looked so
good that he hurried a little--and then he hurried more, and then he
went faster still. Before he turned he had gone further in that
direction than he had intended, but he spurred himself on and started
on the second side. Before he turned again the sun had crossed the
meridian and he had two sides yet to cover. As the sun was slowly
sinking in the west he constantly accelerated his pace, alarmed at
last for fear he might have undertaken too much and might lose it
all. He reached the starting point, however, just as the sun went
down, but he had overtaxed his strength and fell dead upon the spot.
Then his servant dug a grave for him and he only needed six feet of
ground then, the same that others needed--and the rest of the land
was of no use to him. Thus far Tolstoy told the story of many a
life--not the life of the very rich only, but the story of every
life in which the love of money is the controlling force and in which
the desire for gain shrivels the soul and leaves the life a failure
at last.

I desire to show you how practical this subject is. If time permitted I
could take up every occupation, every avocation, every profession and
every calling, and show you that no matter which way we turn--no matter
what we do--we are always and everywhere weighing the Soul.

In the brief time that it is proper for me to occupy, I shall apply the
thought to those departments of human activity in which the sale of a
soul affects others largely as well as the individual who makes the
bargain.

Take the occupation in which I am engaged, journalism. It presents a
great field--a growing field; in fact, there are few fields so large.
The journalist is both a news gatherer and a molder of thought. He
informs his readers as to what is going on, and he points out the
relation between cause and effect--interprets current history. Public
opinion is the controlling force in a republic, and the newspaper
gives to the journalist, beyond every one else, the opportunity to
affect public opinion. Others reach the readers of a newspaper
through the courtesy of the owner of the paper, but he has full
access to his own columns, and does not fear the blue pencil. The
journalist occupies the position of a watchman upon a tower. He is
often able to see dangers which are not observed by the general
public, and because he can see these dangers he is in a position of
greater responsibility. Is he discharging the duty which superior
opportunity imposes upon him? I might mention a number of temptations
which come to the journalist, but I shall content myself with a few.
First, there is the temptation to conceal the name of the real owner
of the paper. The proprietor of a paper should be known, but his
identity is not always disclosed. The corporate entity which plays so
large a part in the business world has entered the newspaper field.
The names of the stockholders are not published and we do not always
know what individuality directs the paper's policy. Year by year the
disclosures are bringing to light the fact that the predatory
interests are using the newspapers and even some magazines for the
defense of commercial iniquity and for the purpose of attacking those
who lift their voices against favoritism and privilege. A financial
magnate interested in the exploitation of the public secures control
of a paper; he employs business managers, managing editors, and a
reportorial staff. He does not act openly or in the daylight but
through a group of employes who are the visible but not the real
directors. The reporters are instructed to bring in the kind of news
which will advance the enterprises owned by the man who stands
back of the paper, and if the news brought in is not entirely
satisfactory it is doctored in the office. The columns of the paper
are filled with matter, written not for the purpose of presenting
facts as they exist, but for the purpose of distorting facts and
misleading the public. The editorial writers, whose names are
generally unknown to the public, are told what to say and what
subjects to avoid. They are instructed to extol the merits of those
who are subservient to the interests represented by the paper, and to
misrepresent and traduce those who dare to criticize or oppose the
plans of those who hide behind the paper. Such journalists are
members of a kind of "Blackhand society"; they are assassins, hiding
in ambush and striking in the dark; and the worst of it is that the
readers have no way of knowing when a change takes place in the
ownership of such a paper. Editorial poison, like other poisons, can
be administered more successfully if the victim is in ignorance as to
who administers it.

There are degrees of culpability and some are disposed to hold an
editorial writer guiltless even when they visit condemnation upon
the secret director of the paper's policy. I present to you a
different--and I believe higher--ideal of journalism. If we are going
to make any progress in morals we must abandon the idea that morals
are defined by the statutes; we must recognize that there is a wide
margin between that which the law prohibits and that which an
enlightened conscience can approve. We do not legislate against
the man who uses the printed page for the purpose of deception
but, viewed from the standpoint of morals, the man who, whether
voluntarily or under instructions, writes what he knows to be
untrue or purposely misleads his readers as to the character of a
proposition upon which they have to act, is as guilty of wrong-doing
as the man who assists in any other swindling transaction.

Another method employed to mislead the public is the publication of
editorial matter supplied by those who have an interest to serve.
This evil is even more common than secrecy as to the ownership of the
paper. In the case of the weekly papers and the smaller dailies,
the proprietor is generally known, and it is understood that the
editorial page represents his views. His standing and character give
weight to that which appears with his endorsement. A few years ago,
when the railroad rate bill was before Congress, a number of
railroads joined in an effort to create a public sentiment against
the bill. Bureaus were established for the dissemination of
literature, and a number of newspapers entered into contract to
publish as editorial matter the material furnished by these bureaus.
This can not be defended in ethics. The purchase of the editorial
columns is a crime against the public and a disgrace to journalism,
and yet we have frequent occasion to note this degradation of the
newspaper. Senator Carter, of Montana, speaking in the United States
Senate, caused to be read several printed slips which were sent out
by a bankers' association to local bankers with the request that
they be inserted in the local papers, suggestion being made that the
instructions to the local bankers be removed before they were handed
to the papers. The purpose of the bankers' association was to
stimulate opposition to the postal savings bank, a policy endorsed
affirmatively by the Republican party, and, conditionally, by the
Democratic party, the two platforms being supported at the polls by
more than ninety per cent of the voters. The bankers' association
opposed the policy, and, in sending out its literature, it was
endeavoring to conceal the source of that literature and to make it
appear that the printed matter represented the opinion of some one
in the community.

The journalist who would fully perform his duty must be not only
incorruptible, but ever alert, for those who are trying to misuse the
newspapers are able to deceive "the very elect." Whenever any movement
is on foot for the securing of legislation desired by the predatory
interests, or when restraining legislation is threatened, news bureaus
are established at Washington, and these news bureaus furnish to such
papers, as will use them, free reports, daily or weekly as the case
may be, from the national capitol--reports which purport to give
general news, but which in fact contain arguments in support of the
schemes which the bureaus are organized to advance. This ingenious
method of misleading the public is only a part of the general plan
which favor-holding and favor-seeking corporations pursue.

Demosthenes declared that the man who refuses a bribe conquers the
man who offers it. According to this, the journalist who resists the
many temptations which come to him to surrender his ideals has the
consciousness of winning a moral victory as well as the satisfaction
of knowing that he is rendering a real service to his fellows.

The profession for which I was trained--the law--presents another
line of temptations. The court room is a soul's market where many
barter away their ideals in the hope of winning wealth or fame.
Lawyers sometimes boast of the number of men whose acquittal they
have secured when they knew them to be guilty, and of advantages won
which they knew their clients did not deserve. I do not understand
how a lawyer can so boast, for he is an officer of the court and, as
such, is sworn to assist in the administration of justice. When a
lawyer has helped his client to obtain all that he really deserves
he has done his full duty as a lawyer, and if he goes beyond this,
he goes at his own peril. Show me a lawyer who has spent a lifetime
trying to obscure the line between right and wrong, trying to prove
that to be just which he knew to be unjust, and I will show you a man
who has grown weaker in character year by year, and whose advice, at
last, will be of no value to his clients, for he will have lost the
power to discern between right and wrong. Show me, on the other hand,
a lawyer who has spent a lifetime in the search for truth, determined
to follow where it leads, and I will show you a man who has grown
stronger in character day by day and whose advice constantly becomes
more valuable to his clients, because the power to discern the truth
increases with the honest search for it.

Not only in the court room, but in the consultation chamber the
lawyer sometimes yields to the temptation to turn his talents to a
sordid use. The schemes of spoliation that defy the officers of the
law are, for the most part, inaugurated and directed by legal minds.
President Roosevelt, speaking at Harvard a few years ago, complained
that the graduates of that great university frequently furnished the
brains for conspiracies against the public welfare. I was speaking
on this very subject in one of the great cities of the country some
months ago, and at the close of the address, a judge commended my
criticism and declared that most of the lawyers practising in his
court were constantly selling their souls. The lawyer's position
is scarcely less responsible than the position of the journalist,
and if the journalists and lawyers of the country could be brought
to abstain from the practises by which the general public is
overreached, it would be an easy matter to secure the remedial
legislation necessary to protect the producing masses from the
constant spoliation to which they are now subjected by the privileged
classes.

If a man who is planning a train-robbery takes another along to hold a
horse at a convenient distance, we say that the man who holds the horse
is equally guilty with the man who robs the train; and the time will
come when public opinion will hold as equally guilty with the plunderers
of society the lawyers and journalists who assist the plunderers to
escape.

Most of you are, I presume, engaged in what is known as business,
altho I confess that I have no sympathy with the narrow definition
which is often given to the word business. Every person who
contributes by brain or muscle to the nation's wealth and greatness
is engaged in business and is a necessary factor in the world's
progress.

Commerce is an increasing factor in the business world. It includes
both exchange and transportation and stands next in importance to
production. Production comes first, but production could only be
conducted on a limited scale without the exchange of merchandise. To
desire to gain an honorable distinction in this department of labor
is a worthy ambition. He who improves the instruments of trade by
bringing purchaser and consumer nearer together, thus facilitating
exchange, may count himself a real benefactor. But even here there
are temptations to be avoided. Let me suggest three. First,
speculation. I do not mean to say that the element of chance can be
entirely eliminated from any kind of business. The farmer takes his
chances upon the seasons; the merchant takes his chances upon the
market; the railroad owner takes his chances upon both the season and
the market; and we all take our chances upon sickness and death.
Uncertainty enters into every human calculation, but a distinction
can be drawn between those uncertainties which are unavoidable and
those uncertainties which are of the very essence of the transaction.
There is a legitimate work for the stock exchange and for the chamber
of commerce, but there is an illegitimate and vicious speculation on
the stock exchange and the produce market which has lured many
business men to their fall. The ordinary methods of accumulation are
necessarily slow when competition is left free to regulate profits,
while the gambler is spurred on by the hope of quickly realizing a
large profit upon a small investment. It is not strange that many are
charmed by the siren song of the stock ticker, but it means ruin, and
to the extent that a man yields to the temptation his morals are
weakened. There is but one sure measure of rewards, viz., one that
compensates each in proportion as he serves society. The securing of
something for nothing by a lucky turn of a card, or by a sudden
change in the market paralyzes one's purpose, and, in time, renders
him unfit for patient and persistent effort. I might emphasize the
fact that gambling in stocks and farm products often leads to
embezzlement, larceny and suicide, for these are the fruits of
speculation when it becomes a disease. But I prefer to put my
argument against gambling upon the broader ground that it is, in all
cases, a demoralizing influence, whether the gambler wins or loses.

I might dwell upon the evil effects of speculation upon innocent
parties whose property is juggled up or juggled down by the
manipulations of the market, but I would appeal, not only to the
innocent outsider, but to those who may be tempted by the profits
promised to the inside ring. I would suggest, however, that those
who by cornering the market suspend the law of supply and demand,
add crime to vice and defraud those who are induced to invest in
a "chance" which has no actual existence.

Monopoly is the second commercial temptation. Monopolies have been
attempted ever since trading began, and they are more common to-day
than ever before because more money can be made out of them. Many
well-meaning business men permit themselves to be drawn into
practises which are not only indefensible in the realm of conscience,
but which violate the statutes. The officers of the law are
constantly engaged in an effort to prevent the monopolizing of trade.

It is strange that anyone should attempt to defend a private
monopoly, for its plan and operation can be easily understood by any
one who knows either human nature or history. No judge would be
permitted to preside in his own case; no juror would be allowed to
serve in a suit to which he was a party, and yet the head of a
monopoly arbitrarily decides, every-day, questions where his
interests are on one side and public interests on the other. Can he
be trusted to decide impartially and to exact only a reasonable
profit? It is absurd to expect him to do justice to those whith whom
he deals. The student of history knows that the monopolist has always
been an outlaw. Three centuries ago, under Queen Elizabeth, the House
of Commons protested against the monopolies which she had authorized,
and I found, when in the Holy Land, that a very complete monopoly
existed there some seventeen hundred years ago. Josephus tells how
John of Gishala secured a monopoly in olive oil and charged ten times
as much for the oil as he paid for it. For the benefit of those who
think that all monopolies are traceable to the rebate, I venture to
suggest that the oil trust of Palestine was successfully operated
before railroads existed. But even tho John had nothing better than a
fast freight line of donkeys and distributed the oil in goat skins,
he showed as correct an understanding of the possibilities of
monopoly as any trust magnate has to-day, and I have wondered whether
our John secured his idea of an oil trust from John of Gishala.

We need laws making the private monopoly impossible, but we must have
back of these laws a moral sentiment which will condemn the club
wielded by the monopolist, as moral sentiment now condemns the
highwayman's bludgeon.

The third temptation to which the commercial man is subjected is the
corruption of politics. Just in proportion as a corporation secures a
monopoly of the business in which it is engaged, in that proportion
the necessity for government regulation increases, and I may add, the
difficulty of securing regulation increases in proportion to the
necessity for it. Municipal corruption has become a byword, and the
lobbyist has made his evil presence felt at the national and State
capitals. Bribery is becoming a fine art, and neither the voter nor
his representative is spared. The one lesson that must be taught is
that the man who gives a bribe is as wicked as the man who accepts
it--I am not sure but that he is more wicked, for the necessities
of the man who accepts the bribe--if need can palliate such an
offense--are usually greater than those of the man who offers it.
I appeal to you to assist, in every possible way, in the creation of
a public sentiment which will ostracise the business man who
purchases legislation with the profits derived from privileges
already secured, or who advances corruption money in anticipation of
the profits which governmental favors promise.

In the counting room as well as in the editor's library and in the
lawyer's office one hears the heart-searching question: "What shall
it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own
soul?"--and happiness, honor and usefulness all hang upon the answer.

I would not be forgiven if I failed to apply my theme to the work of the
instructor. The purpose of education is not merely to develop the mind;
it is to prepare men and women for society's work and for citizenship.
The ideals of the teacher, therefore, are of the first importance. The
pupil is apt to be as much influenced by what his teacher is as by
what the teacher says or does. The measure of a school can not be
gathered from an inspection of the examination papers; the conception of
life which the graduate carries away must be counted in estimating the
benefits conferred. The pecuniary rewards of the teacher are usually
small when compared with the rewards of business. This may be due in
part to our failure to properly appreciate the work which the teacher
does, but it may be partially accounted for by the fact that the teacher
derives from his work a satisfaction greater than that obtained from
most other employments.

The teacher comes in contact with the life of the student, and,
as our greatest joy is derived from the consciousness of having
benefited others, the teacher rightly counts as a part of his
compensation the continuing pleasure to be found in the knowledge
that he is projecting his influence through future generations.
The heart plays as large a part as the head in the teacher's work,
because the heart is an important factor in every life and in the
shaping of the destiny of the race. I fear the plutocracy of wealth;
I respect the aristocracy of learning; but I thank God for the
democracy of the heart. It is upon the heart-level that we meet; it
is by the characteristics of the heart that we best know and best
remember each other. Astronomers tell us the distance of each star
from the earth, but no mathematician can calculate the influence
which a noble teacher may exert upon posterity. And yet even
the teacher may fall from his high estate, and, forgetting his
immeasurable responsibility, yield to the temptation to estimate
his work by its pecuniary reward.

Let me turn for a moment from the profession and the occupation to the
calling. I am sure I shall not be accused of departing from the truth
when I say that even those who minister to our spiritual wants and, as
our religious leaders, help to fix our standards of morality, sometimes
prove unfaithful to their trust. They are human, and the frailties of
man obscure the light which shines from within, even when that light is
a reflection from the throne of God. The ministers have for years
considered the liquor question a moral question, and I would not
chide them for their activity; but I think too little emphasis has
been placed upon the importance of total abstinence. Whether a
Christian can drink in moderation without harm to himself is purely
a physical question, and some Christians have overestimated their
ability to confine their drinking within safe limits; but there is a
moral question which is much larger, namely, can a Christian afford to
indulge the appetite for drink if his example leads weaker men to ruin?

The great apostle said that, if eating meat made his brother to
offend, he would eat no meat. It is a part of the minister's work
to cultivate such a love of brother in the Christian heart that the
Christian will paraphrase the language of the apostle and say: If
drinking maketh my brother to offend, I shall not drink.

Then, too, we have not sufficiently considered man's social needs.
Man must have communion with his friends, and we have left the saloon
to furnish about the only meeting place in the cities and towns.
Rooms should be opened where men can meet with wholesome surroundings
and free from the temptations that are ever present where men meet in
a room provided by one who has a pecuniary interest in cultivating an
appetite for drink.

The ministers must deal with all questions that involve morals, and
every great question is in its final analysis a question of ethics.

We need more Elijahs in the pulpit to-day--more men who will dare to
upbraid an Ahab and defy a Jezebel. It is possible, ay, probable, that
even now, as of old, persecution would follow such boldness of speech,
but he who consecrates himself to religion must smite evil wherever he
finds it, altho in smiting it he may risk his salary and his social
position. It is easy enough to denounce the petty thief and the
back-alley gambler; it is easy enough to condemn the friendless rogue
and the penniless wrong-doer, but what about the rich tax-dodger, the
big law-breaker and the corrupter of government? The soul that is
warmed by divine fire will be satisfied with nothing less than the
complete performance of duty; it must cry aloud and spare not, to the
end that the creed of the Christ may be exemplified in the life of
the nation.

Not only does the soul question present itself to individuals, but it
presents itself to groups of individuals as well.

Let us consider the party. A political party can not be better than its
ideal; in fact, it is good in proportion as its ideal is worthy, and its
place in history is determined by its adherence to a high purpose. The
party is made for its members, not the members for the party; and a
party is useful, therefore, only as it is a means through which one may
protect his rights, guard his interests and promote the public welfare.
The best service that a man can render his party is to raise its ideals.
He basely betrays his party's hopes and is recreant to his duty to his
party associates who seeks to barter away a noble party purpose for
temporary advantages or for the spoils of office. It would be a
reflection upon the intelligence and patriotism of the people to assert,
or even to assume, that lasting benefit could be secured for a party
by the lowering of its standards. He serves his party most loyally who
serves his country most faithfully; it is a fatal error to suppose that
a party can be permanently benefited by a betrayal of the nation's
interests.

In every act of party life and party strife we weigh the soul. That
the people have a right to have what they want is a fundamental
principle in free government. Corruption in government comes from the
attempt to substitute the will of a minority for the will of the
majority. Every measure which comes up for consideration involves
justice and injustice--right and wrong--and is, therefore, a question
of conscience. As justice is the basis of a nation's strength and
gives it hope of perpetuity, and, as the seeds of decay are sown
whenever injustice enters into government, patriotism as well as
conscience leads us to analyze every public question, ascertain the
moral principle involved and then cast our influence, whether it be
great or small, on the side of justice.

The patriot must desire the triumph of that which is right above the
triumph of that which he may think to be right if he is, in fact,
mistaken; and so the partizan, if he be an intelligent partizan, must
be prepared to rejoice in his party's defeat if by that defeat his
country is the gainer. One can afford to be in a minority, but he can
not afford to be wrong; if he is in a minority and right, he will
some day be in the majority.

The activities of politics center about the election of candidates to
office, and the official, under our system, represents both the party
to which he belongs and the whole body of his constituency. He has
two temptations to withstand, first, the temptation to substitute
his own judgment for the judgment of his constituents, and second,
the temptation to put his pecuniary interests above the interests
of those for whom he acts. According to the aristocratic idea, the
representative thinks _for_ his constituents; according to the
democratic idea, the representative thinks _with_ his constituents. A
representative has no right to defeat the wishes of those who elect
him, if he knows their wishes.

But a representative is not liable to knowingly misrepresent his
constituents unless he has pecuniary interests adverse to theirs.
This is the temptation to be resisted--this is the sin to be avoided.
The official who uses his position to secure a pecuniary advantage at
the expense of those for whom he acts is an embezzler of power--and
an embezzler of power is as guilty of moral turpitude as the
embezzler of money. There is no better motto for the public official
than that given by Solomon: "A good name is rather to be chosen than
great riches, and loving favor rather than silver and gold." And
there is no better rule for the public official to follow than
this--to do nothing that he would not be willing to have printed
in the newspaper next day.

One who exercises authority conferred upon him by the suffrages
of his fellows ought to be fortified in his integrity by the
consciousness of the fact that a betrayal of his trust is hurtful to
the party which honors him and unjust to the people whom he serves,
as well as injurious to himself. Nothing that he can gain, not even
the whole world, can compensate him for the loss that he suffers in
the surrender of a high ideal of public duty.

Permit me, in conclusion, to say that the nation, as well as the
individual and the party, must be measured by its purpose, its ideals
and its service. "Let him who would be chiefest among you be the
servant of all," was intended for nations as well as for citizens.
Our nation is the greatest in the world and the greatest of all
time, because it is rendering a larger service than any other nation
is rendering or has rendered. It is giving the world ideals in
education, in social life, in government and in religion. It is the
teacher of nations, it is the world's torch-bearer. Here the people
are more free than elsewhere to "prove all things and hold fast that
which is good"; "to know the truth" and to find freedom in that
knowledge. No material considerations should blind us to our nation's
mission, or turn us aside from the accomplishment of the great work
which has been reserved for us. Our fields bring forth abundantly and
the products of our farms furnish food for many in the Old World. Our
mills and looms supply an increasing export, but these are not our
greatest asset. Our most fertile soil is to be found in the minds and
the hearts of our people, and our most important manufacturing plants
are not our factories, with their smoking chimneys, but our schools,
our colleges and our churches, which take in a priceless raw material
and turn out the most valuable finished product that the world has
known.

We enjoy by inheritance, or by choice, the blessings of American
citizenship; let us not be unmindful of the obligations which these
blessings impose. Let us not become so occupied in the struggle for
wealth or in the contest for honors as to repudiate the debt that we
owe to those who have gone before us and to those who bear with us
the responsibilities that rest upon the present generation. Society
has claims upon us; our country makes demands upon our time, our
thought and our purpose. We can not shirk these duties without
disgrace to ourselves and injury to those who come after us. If one
is tempted to complain of the burdens borne by American citizens, let
him compare them with the much larger burdens imposed by despots upon
their subjects.

I challenge the doctrine, now being taught, that we must enter into
a mad rivalry with the Old World in the building of battleships--the
doctrine that the only way to preserve peace is to get ready for wars
that ought never to come! It is a barbarous, brutal, unchristian
doctrine--the doctrine of the darkness, not the doctrine of the dawn.

Nation after nation, when at the zenith of its power, has proclaimed
itself invincible because its army could shake the earth with its tread
and its ships could fill the seas, but these nations are dead, and we
must build upon a different foundation if we would avoid their fate.

Carlyle, in the closing chapters of his "French Revolution" says
that thought is stronger than artillery parks and at last molds the
world like soft clay, and then he adds that back of thought is love.
Carlyle is right. Love is the greatest power in the world. The
nations that are dead boasted that their flag was feared; let it be
our boast that our flag is loved. The nations that are dead boasted
that people bowed before their flag, let us not be content until our
flag represents sentiments so high and holy that the opprest of every
land will turn their faces toward that flag and thank God that there
is one flag that stands for self-government and for the rights of man.

The enlightened conscience of our nation should proclaim as the
country's creed that "righteousness exalteth a nation" and that
justice is a nation's surest defense. If there ever was a nation it
is ours--if there ever was a time it is now--to put God's truth to
the test. With an ocean rolling on either side and a mountain range
along either coast that all the armies of the world could never climb
we ought not to be afraid to trust in "the wisdom of doing right."

Our government, conceived in liberty and purchased with blood, can be
preserved only by constant vigilance. May we guard it as our children's
richest legacy, for what shall it profit our nation if it shall gain the
whole world and lose "the spirit that prizes liberty as the heritage of
all men in all lands everywhere"?






End of Project Gutenberg's The Price of a Soul, by William Jennings Bryan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRICE OF A SOUL ***

***** This file should be named 24406.txt or 24406.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/4/0/24406/

Produced by Andrew Sly

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
