The Project Gutenberg eBook, Between the Lines, by Henry Bascom Smith


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Between the Lines
       Secret Service Stories Told Fifty Years After


Author: Henry Bascom Smith



Release Date: February 7, 2008  [eBook #24541]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETWEEN THE LINES***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Barbara Kosker, Irma Spehar, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 24541-h.htm or 24541-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/5/4/24541/24541-h/24541-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/5/4/24541/24541-h.zip)


      +--------------------------------------------------------+
      | Transcriber's Note:                                    |
      |                                                        |
      | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has  |
      | been preserved.                                        |
      |                                                        |
      | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For  |
      | a complete list, please see the end of this document.  |
      |                                                        |
      | A list of illustrations is provided for the reader's   |
      | benefit.                                               |
      |                                                        |
      +--------------------------------------------------------+





BETWEEN THE LINES

Secret Service Stories
Told Fifty Years After

by

BVT. MAJOR H. B. SMITH

Chief of Detectives and Assistant
Provost Marshal General with
Major General Lew Wallace
Civil War







[Illustration: H. B. SMITH.]




Booz Brothers
114 West Fifty-Third Street
New York

Copyright, 1911, by
Henry Bascom Smith

Press of J. J. Little & Ives Co.
New York




                                 DEDICATED
                                    TO
                            SAMUEL GRAHAM BOOZ


                  TO WHOSE PERSISTENCY IN THUMPING OUT ON
                    HIS TYPEWRITER THE WORDS HEREIN HAS
                  RENDERED IT POSSIBLE FOR ME TO INFLICT
                  MY FIFTY-YEAR-OLD STORIES ON MY FRIENDS




CONTENTS
                                                                      PAGE

APOLOGY                                                                 17

                                  FILE I

The Harry Gilmor Sword--General Wallace's Comments                      21


                                  FILE II

1861-1862 New York Harbor--Fort Schuyler--Fort Marshal--Aunt Mag        25


                                  FILE III

1862-1863 Fort McHenry--General Morris--Colonel Peter A. Porter--
Harper's Ferry--Halltown--Trip to Johnson's Island--Lieutenant-General
Pemberton and other Confederate Officers--Ohio Copperheads--Incident
of York, Pa., Copperheads--Dramatic incident on July 4th, 1863, at
Fort McHenry                                                            30


                                  FILE IV

A taste of the Draft Riots, July 13th, 1863, when conveying wounded
Confederates from Gettysburg to David's Island, New York Harbor--
Governor Seymour's questionable conduct--A mysterious Mr. Andrews of
Virginia--"Knights of the Golden Circle"--"Sons of Liberty" and a
North Western Confederacy--Uncle Burdette--The Laurel incident          37


                                  FILE V

Appointed Assistant Provost Marshal at Fort McHenry, where I began
my first experience in detective work--Somewhat a history of my
early life--Ordered to execute Gordon by shooting                       50


                                  FILE VI

Detective work required an extension of territory--A flattering
endorsement by Colonel Porter--Introducing Christian Emmerich and
incidentally Charles E. Langley, a noted Confederate spy                57


                                 FILE VII

Investigator's education--I branded E. W. Andrews, adjutant-general
to General Morris, a traitor to the Colors                              63


                                 FILE VIII

Initial trip down Chesapeake Bay after blockade runners and contraband
dealers and goods, incidentally introducing Terrence R. Quinn, George
G. Nellis and E. W. Andrews, Jr.--A description of a storm on the
Chesapeake                                                              66


                                  FILE IX

General Wallace assumes command of the Middle Department--General
Schenck's comments on Maryland--Colonel Woolley                         79


                                  FILE X

Here begins my service as an Assistant Provost Marshal of the
Department and Chief of the Secret Service--Confederate General
Winder's detectives--E. H. Smith, special officer, War Department
--Mrs. Mary E. Sawyer, Confederate mail carrier--W. V. Kremer's
report on the "Disloyals" north of Baltimore                            83


                                  FILE XI

Mrs. Key Howard, a lineal descendant of the author of "The Star
Spangled Banner," forgetting her honor, prepared to carry a
Confederate mail to "Dixie"--Miss Martha Dungan--Trip on the steam
tug "Ella"--Schooner "W. H. Travers" and cargo captured--James A.
Winn, a spy--Trip to Frederick, Maryland                                92


                                 FILE XII

F. M. Ellis, Chief Detective U. S. Sanitary Commission--Arrest of
W. W. Shore, of the New York "World"--John Gillock from Richmond       100


                                 FILE XIII

Ordered to seize all copies of the New York "World," bringing in one
of the great war episodes, the Bogus Presidential Proclamation--
Governor Seymour's queer vigor appears                                 103


                                 FILE XIV

Arrest of F. W. Farlin and A. H. Covert--The Pulpit not loyal,
reports on Rev. Mr. Harrison and Rev. Mr. Poisal--Comical reports
on a religious conference and a camp meeting--Seizure of Kelly &
Piet store with its contraband kindergarten contents--Sloop "R. B.
Tennis" one of my fleet, and an account of a capture of tobacco,
etc.--Arrest of Frederick Smith, Powell Harrison and Robert
Alexander--Harry Brogden                                               109


                                  FILE XV

General pass for Schooner "W. H. Travers"--Trip down the Bay after
blockade runners and mail carriers--Gillock and Lewis, two of my
officers captured by Union pickets--Commodore Foxhall A. Parker--
Potomac flotilla--Arrest of J. B. McWilliams--My watch gone to the
mermaids--The ignorance of "poor white trash"                          121


                                 FILE XVI

Captain Bailey makes a capture--Sinclair introduces me (as Shaffer)
to Mr. Pyle                                                            132


                                 FILE XVII

A Confederate letter                                                   136


                                FILE XVIII

Confederate army invades Maryland in 1864--General Wallace's masterly
defence of Washington--Trip outside our pickets--Confederate General
Bradley Johnson and Colonel Harry Gilmor--The Ishmael Day episode--
Uncle Zoe--Arrest of Judge Richard Grason--Report on certain
"Disloyals"                                                            138


                                 FILE XIX

Trip to New York regarding one Thomas H. Gordon                        149


                                  FILE XX

Thomas Bennett, a U. S. mail carrier, disloyal--Samuel Miles, a
prominent Baltimore merchant, a blockade runner--A laughable letter
about an overdraft of whiskey--Dr. E. Powell, of Richmond              151


                                 FILE XXI

Terrence R. Quinn                                                      155


                                 FILE XXII

The Great Fraud attempted in the Presidential Election of 1864,
wherein the misplacing of a single letter led to its detection and
may be said to have saved our Nation from disruption--Involving
Governor Seymour and Adjutant General Andrews--Arrest of Ferry,
Donohue and Newcomb, one of the most successful kidnappings on
record                                                                 159


                                FILE XXIII

John Deegan, a forger, captured--A report that led to a historic
raid by Colonel Baker on the Bounty Jumpers and Bounty Brokers of
New York                                                               175


                                 FILE XXIV

General Wallace's letter to Secretary of War, Charles A. Dana
(afterwards editor of the New York "Sun") asking for an extension
of territory for my work, incidentally introducing Colonel John S.
Mosby, giving a list of his men and their home addresses--A train
robbery, paymasters robbed--I recapture part of the money--Commissions
in promotion declined                                                  184

                                 FILE XXV

Capture of Confederate bonds and scrip--Arrest of Pittman, Brewer
and Fowler; Lieut. Smith, alias I. K. Shaffer, alias George Comings,
led them, victims, into a maze, to their undoing                       193


                                 FILE XXVI

Arrest of T. A. Menzier and expose of a prominent railroad official
--Arrest of Barton R. Zantzinger, involving Milnor Jones--Arrest of
John Henry Skinner Quinn, alias J. Y. Plater, alias Simpson, a spy--
Arrest of E. R. Rich, a spy                                            200


                                FILE XXVII

Statement of Illinois Crothers, giving valuable and reliable
information, implicating Mr. William Mitchell and a Mrs. Keenan of
Winchester, Virginia--Report on Daniel W. Jones, and Joseph Bratton
--Am given unlimited access to prisoners in Baltimore City jail        205


                                FILE XXVIII

Statements of Jeremiah Artis, a real deserter from the Confederates
--William J. Bradley, an honest refugee--Charles E. Langley, an
official Confederate spy--Langley personating a correspondent of the
"New York Tribune," was a most successful and dangerous spy            210


                                 FILE XXIX

Patrick Scally, an honest deserter from the Confederate service--A
sketch of the defences of Richmond                                     222


                                 FILE XXX

Confederate Colonel Harry Gilmor, the raider, telling how he did not
"come back" as a conquering hero; of the sword he never received; of
his capture, etc.--The arrest and conviction of the fair donor         227


                                 FILE XXXI

Steam tug "Grace Titus"--Statement of George Carlton, containing
valuable confirmatory information                                      236


                                FILE XXXII

The pungy "Trifle" (one of the captures)--Colonel McPhail---Major
Blumenburg and his corrupted office--"Boney" Lee, Bob Miller, and
other thugs                                                            243


                                FILE XXXIII

Statement of James Briers, Bollman, McGuarty and Welsh--United
States marine corps                                                    246


                                FILE XXXIV

General W. W. Morris in command in General Wallace's absence--General
Sheridan's order to arrest E. W. Andrews, formerly adjutant general
to General Morris                                                      250


                                 FILE XXXV

Ordered to New York--Interviewed Secretary of War Stanton relative
to an independent command and extension of our territory--Major
Wiegel's weakness exposed                                              252


                                FILE XXXVI

Paine, who was afterwards one of the conspirators in the assassinators'
plot, in my custody--Miss Branson appeared to plead for him--Paine
released on parole, lacking evidence to prove him a spy                255


                                FILE XXXVII

Missionary E. Martin, an agent of the Confederate Treasury Department,
arrested, his big tobacco smuggling scheme exposed--Kidnapped him
from General Dix's department--Manahan involved                        259


                               FILE XXXVIII

Secretary of War consulted about the extension of our territory to
include the district between the Rappahannock and the Potomac Rivers
--Robert Loudan, alias Charles Veal, a boat-burner and spy--A
kidnapped colored boy                                                  271


                                FILE XXXIX

The chase after the steamer "Harriet Deford," which was captured by
pirates, supposedly to supply a means of escape to Jefferson Davis
from the crumbling Confederacy--Captain Fitzhugh                       275


                                  FILE XL

Ordered to Northern Neck of Virginia the day before President
Lincoln's assassination--Martin Van Buren Morgan's statement, and
order for his disposal                                                 281


                                 FILE XLI

I am introduced to General Grant--The assassination--Capture of Samuel
B. Arnold, one of the conspirators, sent to Dry Tortugas--Arrested the
Bransons and their household, uncovering Paine's pedigree; thereafter
he was Lewis Paine Powell--Paine had my parole on his person when
arrested--Paine hung                                                   290


                                 FILE XLII

Richmond had fallen--Class of detective work entirely changed--
Counterfeiters--Secretary McCullogh--Go to steamboat of the Leary
Line and capture a youthful murderer--Arrest of Mrs. Beverly Tucker    312


                                FILE XLIII

Camp Carroll rioting--Troops being mustered out                        317


                                 FILE XLIV

Indicted for assault with intent to kill, the only clash between
the Military and Civil Authorities during General Wallace's
administration                                                         322


                                 FILE XLV

Trip to Norfolk and Richmond--Ralph Abercrombie--Miss Elizabeth L.
Van Lew                                                                324


                                 FILE XLVI

My muster out--Reemployment as a civilian--Ordered to Philadelphia--
Twice ordered to Washington with horse-thieves                         327


                                FILE XLVII

Captain Beckwith convicted--Gambling--Order to take Beckwith to
Albany penitentiary                                                    331


                                FILE XLVIII

Trip to Carlisle, Illinois, to unravel a fraudulent claim--John H.
Ing                                                                    335


                                 FILE XLIX

Brevetted major--Governor Fenton's letter                              342




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

         H. B. Smith                                  frontispiece
                                                       after page
         The Monitor Waxsaw                                 28
         Lieutenant Joseph H. (Joe) Barker                  30
         The Maples, Laurel, Md.                            48
         Major General M. W. Lew Wallace                    78
         John Woolley                                       82
         Ishmael Day                                       144
         Lucius F. Babcock                                 162
         Charles E. Langley                                218
         Map of Richmond Defences                          224
         Colonel Harry Gilmor                              226
         Lewis Paine                                       256
         Samuel B. Arnold                                  292



APOLOGY.


Fifty years ago! Gracious me! It makes me think of my age to talk of it.
Yes, just fifty years ago was enacted the greatest tragedy the world
ever saw, THE CIVIL WAR.

I entered the service at twenty and one-half years of age and served
three and one-half years.

At different times I have told of some of my experiences, which seemed
to interest. Sometimes I have talked to literary men, story writers, who
have expressed a desire to write me up in magazines and newspapers, but
lack of the romantic in my make up, notwithstanding romance might be
seen in the stories which to me were but cold facts, has kept me from
consenting.

I am actuated now by other reasons. I have a lot of documents and
memoranda that are wearing out, liable to be mislaid or lost. In fact I
have already lost one document, a letter from General Lew Wallace, a
very valuable and important one (to me); it was his letter of
presentation to me of the Harry Gilmor sword, written on the eve of his
departure for Texas (on a secret mission, known only to Lincoln and
Grant), to receive the capitulation of the Confederate General
Slaughter, hence I feel that these matters ought to be recorded
somewhere.

The New York Historical Society and Columbia University have offered
some of these documents place in their archives. The affidavit and
signature of Paine, the Conspirator who attempted to assassinate
Secretary Seward, ought to be in some substantial depository as a link
in history. I presume it is the only finger mark extant of any of the
conspirators. The reason why I have not deposited it is that the
statement appears garbled, requiring me to explain the gaps and hidden
meanings between the lines, which I shall try to do in these pages.

Another motive for putting these experiences in writing, is in the
interest of Graham, and his children, Curtis, Evelyn and her children,
Nettie and DeLos. It is to be expected these younger ones will remain
longer here under the old Flag, and perhaps they may get some
consolation from the fact that some of their ancestors did something in
simple patriotism. Nettie has complained that her school history did not
mention her uncle. I told her I could only be found by reading "between
the lines," because there were so many "pebbles on the beach" besides
her uncle.

But how can I make it interesting? I am afraid I shall injure the facts
in trying to write them. A story writer might make a romance out of
almost any one of my stories, for he would dress it up so. Every day and
hour of my Secret Service experience was crowded with events; they came
swift one after another; for instance the Election Fraud case of 1864 to
which Appleton's Encyclopedia devotes columns, took less than five days
to develop; the story would take nearly as long to tell.




BETWEEN THE LINES

SECRET SERVICE STORIES




FILE I.

The Harry Gilmor sword--General Wallace's comments.


The sword of Harry Gilmor, the Confederate colonel, which General
Wallace had given me, had aroused Graham's interest so much that I
presented it to him; I had, prior to this, presented to Curtis, my
Creedmoor rifle trophies. I had become tired of telling the history of
that sword and how it came into my possession, having no other evidence
than my word for the truth of the story, since I had lost General
Wallace's letter. However, quite unexpectedly, the story was revived in
the following manner:

Evelyn, who was but a baby in those days, remembering that I was with
General Wallace, on Christmas day, 1908, presented me with his
Autobiography (two volumes) much to my delight. A few days later Aunt
Mag, glancing through the second volume, discovered that I was
remembered by the General and the sword incident was there officially
described, so that now the sword is really vouched for in history, for
Wallace's volumes will be in every important library in the world.

I quote from General Lew Wallace's Autobiography, page 687 and on:

     "From what has been said, it would seem my friend, General
     Schenck, had found a disturbing element in the Secession
     ladies of Baltimore, and in some way suffered from it. His
     description of them, and the emphasis with which he had dwelt
     upon their remarkable talent for mischief in general, I
     accepted as a warning, and stood upon my guard.

     "Every one into whose hands these memoirs may fall will see
     almost of his own suggestion how necessary it was that, of the
     inhabitants of the city, I should know who were disloyal with
     more certainty even than who were loyal; of the latter there
     was nothing to fear, while of the former there was at least
     everything to suspect. We knew communication with the enemy
     across the line was unceasing; that interchange of news
     between Richmond and Baltimore was of daily occurrence; that
     there were routes, invisible to us, by which traffic in
     articles contraband of war was carried on with singular
     success, almost as a legitimate commerce--routes by water as
     well as by land. General Butler, at Norfolk, exerted himself
     to discover the traders operating by way of the Chesapeake
     Bay, but without success; with a like result I tried to
     unearth the landward lines.

     "_Captain Smith, my chief of detectives, a man of ability and
     zeal_, at last brought me proof incontestable that Baltimore
     was but a way-side station of the nefarious commerce, the
     initial points of active transaction centering in
     Philadelphia.

     "As to Baltimore, this simplified our task, and shortly
     General Schenck's sagacity was again vindicated--those working
     in the prohibited business were ladies who moved in the upper
     circles of society.

     "Should I arrest the fair sympathizers? What was the use? The
     simple appearance of distress was enough with the President;
     and if that were so with a man in concernment, what would it
     be with a woman? In sight of the hopelessness of effort on my
     part, over and over, again and again, in the night often as in
     the day, I took counsel of myself, 'What can be done?' At last
     an answer came to me, and in a way no one could have
     dreamed--the purest chance.

     "A woman in high standing socially, alighted from a carriage
     at the Camden station of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad,
     carrying a mysterious-looking box. At the moment she was
     stepping into a car my chief of detectives arrested her. The
     box being opened, there, in velvet housings, lay a sword of
     costly pattern inscribed for presentation to Colonel ----, a
     guerilla officer of Confederate renown.

     "A commission was immediately ordered for the woman's trial.
     The word and the inscription upon it were irrefutable proofs
     of guilt, and she was sent to a prison for females in
     Massachusetts. The affair was inexcusably gross, considering
     the condition of war--so much, I think, will be generally
     conceded--still, seeking the moral effect of punishment alone,
     I specially requested the officials of the institution not to
     subject the offender to humiliation beyond the mere
     imprisonment. In a few days she was released and brought home.
     _The sword I presented to Captain Smith._"

General Wallace makes a slight error. I did not arrest the woman at the
station, but captured her messenger with the sword, and upon his person
were credentials to Gilmor, which I used myself, and of which I will
tell later on. Later on I arrested the woman herself.




FILE II.

1861-1862 New York Harbor--Fort Schuyler--Fort Marshal--Aunt Mag.


During the first year of the war ('61) I remained at home, but I was
really ashamed to be found there when service called. Burdette was
already in the Army, and A. P., though equally patriotic, was compelled
to remain home to "fight for bread" for the family. I started to go but
mother restrained me; finally, however, Olive persuaded mother to
consent, and on January 10th, 1862, I began my service as 2d Lieutenant
in the 5th N. Y. Heavy Artillery. In the early part of '62 our Regiment
garrisoned the forts of New York Harbor. I was stationed first at Fort
Wood (Bedloe's Island), and afterwards at Fort Schuyler, where I was
Post Adjutant.

Fort Schuyler is a very extensive fortification guarding the entrance to
New York from the east, situated on a peninsula called Throggs Neck,
where there is an abrupt turn from the waters of the East River as it
enters Long Island Sound; the channel is quite narrow at that point. The
fortification comprises two tiers of casemates surmounted by a parapet,
and on the landward side barbette batteries. A first-class formidable
defence for the arms of those days. The interior of Fort Schuyler was
large enough to enable a battalion to form in line. At that time there
was under construction on the opposite, or Long Island, shore, on
Willet's Point, a fortification which has since been completed and is
called Fort Totten.

In May, '62, we were withdrawn from the forts in New York Harbor. We
were ordered to the front, to join the army at Fortress Monroe,
Virginia. We were assembled, taken by steamers to Amboy, thence by the
old Camden and Amboy Railroad to Camden and Philadelphia, thence by the
Philadelphia, Wilmington and Baltimore Railroad to Baltimore. We were
handsomely treated to a meal in the "Soldiers' Rest" in Philadelphia, by
the patriotic ladies. God bless them! We were transported in box freight
cars, rough board benches for seats. No drawing-room cars in those days.

On arriving in Baltimore we were loaded upon a steamer for Fortress
Monroe. At this point our orders were changed. Being a heavy artillery
regiment, we were ordered to garrison Fort Marshal (near Baltimore),
relieving the 3d Delaware, an infantry regiment. We were marched through
the city to Fort Marshal. Later we learned that the Baltimoreans dubbed
us the "toughest" they had seen. Our appearance was misleading, we
thought.

Fort Marshal was an earth work, a parapet with bastions, erected on an
eminence just east of Baltimore, commanding the harbor and the city. It
has since been demolished, crowded out by commerce and residences.

When we arrived at the fort our men were hungry, having had but "one
square meal" in forty-eight hours--the one the Philadelphia ladies had
given us, plus what was picked up from pie peddlers on the way. We
learned the lesson all green troops must learn, when inefficiency of the
commissary is shown. I volunteered to get feed for the men; the Colonel
accepted my tender. I went down to the city limits, pressed three wagons
(those deep box-wagons in use in Baltimore) into service, drove to the
Quartermaster's Department in South Gay Street, represented myself as
Acting Quartermaster (which was a little out of "plumb" but excusable by
the emergency) and drew three wagon loads of aerated bread and coffee,
drove back to camp, turned the kettles up and had the men banqueting
inside of two hours. Inefficiency was surely our Commissary's right
name.

At this point I want to tell something about Aunt Mag, my "Star in the
East," who has ever since guided me.

Union people and the Star Spangled Banner were not so plenty in
Maryland. Not far from Fort Marshal I espied a cheerful looking house.
In its yard from a flagstaff was unfurled our glorious emblem. That was
the house of Aunt Mag. I fell in love with the premises, and very soon
with its occupant. Later on I was stricken down with that dreadful army
plague, typhoid fever, and I was very near to death. That house was my
hospital, and Aunt Mag was my nurse. I lived, and so here we are after
fifty years. Many friends have remarked, how romantic! but we say it is
just love. If the "Over-ruling Hand" was not in it, it certainly has
proven a fortunate "happen so" for our lives have so nicely matched in
the "pinions" as to have needed no other lubrication than love for all
these years.

The house referred to was the home of Thomas Booz (the father of Graham
and Curtis). He was a real "19th of April" Union man; and on that
eventful day he defended his premises with a gun. He was of the firm of
Thos. Booz & Brother, shipbuilders; also he was a member of the
Legislature, and was talked of for Governor. Their firm built the
pontoons that McClellan used to recross the Potomac at Harper's Ferry in
1862, after Antietam; they also built one of the first turreted monitors
(the Waxsaw), patterned after Ericsson's Monitor which fought the battle
with the Merrimac.

[Illustration: THE MONITOR WAXSAW]

What do I mean by an "April 19th" Union man? Well, I will tell you: On
that day was shed the first blood of the war. A mob attacked the 6th
Massachusetts Regiment in Pratt Street, as it was proceeding to
Washington (April 19th, 1861). Like magic all Marylanders took sides,
one part for the Union, the other for Rebellion. Ever after the prime
question or test of loyalty was, how did you stand on April 19th? A
Union man on that day was ever after one. Families were divided. It cost
a deal to be a Union man there or in any of the border States. I have
often thought they deserved as much consideration as those who fought
battles.

In August, 1862, two companies, A and F, of our Regiment were detailed
to go to Harper's Ferry to man batteries there. There being a vacancy in
the line (in Co. A) I requested to be detailed to it, but my superior
objected, claiming I was necessary with my own company. I was not
permitted to go. Had I gone I would have been in that fight and would
have been in the Colonel Miles surrender, along with Joe Barker and the
rest. Joe's story of spiking the guns of The Naval Battery on Maryland
Heights, preparatory to surrender was always interesting. His story of
the four days' fighting, sustained as it is by Confederate documents,
makes new history. He makes it quite plain that the detention of the
enemy there saved us Antietam and perhaps Washington.




FILE III.

Fort McHenry in 1862-1863--General Morris--Colonel Peter A. Porter--
Harper's Ferry--Halltown Trip to Johnson's Island--Lieutenant-General
Pemberton and other Confederate Officers--Ohio Copperheads--Incident of
York, Pa. Copperheads--Dramatic incident on July 4th, 1863, at Fort
McHenry.


In the winter of '62-'63 our Regiment was removed to Fort McHenry, where
Confederate prisoners of war were detained. General W. W. Morris, an old
regular, commanded the Brigade (Headquarters were there) and Colonel
Peter A. Porter (whose monument is at Goat Island, Niagara Falls)
commanded the Post. We were carrying there about one thousand
Confederate and political prisoners. A large percentage of them were
commissioned officers.

Early in '63 our Regiment was ordered to the front by way of Harper's
Ferry. When we arrived at the Ferry I was the first officer detailed for
a two-days' turn of picket duty on Bolivar Heights.

[Illustration: LIEUTENANT JOSEPH H. (JOE) BARKER.]

Harper's Ferry is situated at the confluence of the Potomac and
Shenandoah rivers. The Potomac cuts through the Blue Ridge Mountains
there. The Chesapeake and Ohio Canal runs along the north bank of the
Potomac, rugged mountains enclose it, presenting an alpine appearance.
Here the "John Brown raid" began. It was formerly the location of one of
the great national arsenals. When encamped there in '63 the Regiment was
in tents on Camp Hill; the officers were quartered in a building which
had been the home of the officers of the arsenal.

Our Regiment, nominally a heavy artillery regiment, was thoroughly
schooled in the heavy tactics and also as light or field artillery and
infantry; able or qualified to be used in either arm of the service with
equal facility. The order to proceed to the front was hailed with
delight, duty in the field being a panacea for garrison bickerings.

Later the regiment was moved to Halltown, encamped on the Miller farm,
and threw out pickets. I was on first detail there. I learned how to get
a fair sleep on top of a "herring-bone" rail fence. My proclivity for
"prying into things" manifested itself there. An attack was expected, so
our regiment slept on arms, anxiously waiting; it became tedious. I
asked permission to reconnoitre alone, and was permitted. In the dark I
sneaked out about a mile, and listened; three or four cavalrymen came
whirling down the road as if riding for life; they roused the regiment.
They were blood stained, but upon examination the blood was found to
have come from one of their own horses. Such scares and mistakes were
frequent, especially with fresh troops. I was in a dilemma to get back
into line without being shot, but it was accomplished. The regiment was
ordered back to Baltimore for garrison duty.

I was detailed to convey prisoners away many times. Once I took ninety
odd Confederate officers to Johnson's Island, Sandusky, Ohio. Among them
was Lieutenant General Pemberton, who had commanded at Vicksburg, and
who had, on July 4th, surrendered Vicksburg with thirty-seven thousand
men, fifteen general officers and sixty thousand stand of arms. I was
surprised at the great number of "Copperheads" we met in crossing Ohio.
My exhibition of Confederate prisoners was treated as a first-class
circus; it "drew" the "Copperheads" and they flocked to the stations
along the route to express sympathy and admiration. What was a
"Copperhead"? I will try to tell you: he stood, relatively, as the
Tories to the Revolution. They were composed of several elements; some
wore so greedy of gain they wanted no war that might interfere with
their finances; some were too cowardly; some were too partisan
politically, really thinking their fealty was due to those who were
fighting against an administration nominally representing an opposing
political party; all of them forming a mass to be influenced by
conspirators who were pursuing an intelligent purpose to destroy the
Union; just such material as was needed by Vallandigham, Seymour,
Andrews, Morgan and Lee to help their projects of further disruption.
What became of them? They sank out of sight when the Confederate cause
was lost. Naturally they were scorned by the men who had fought for the
Union. As time goes on, they and their work is being forgotten. Future
historians may be more kind to them than we who suffered because of
them, but it is not likely that the descendants of any Copperhead will
claim public honors for their anti-Union forbears.

I am reminded of an incident that was told widely through the armies:
When Lee's army reached York, Pa., on the way to Gettysburg, these
Copperheads went out to meet the Confederates, and assure them "how they
had always loved them." The Confederates wanted tangible proof of this
love; they demanded that one hundred thousand dollars in gold be paid at
once; else the town of York would be burned. Now, wasn't that unkind!
but lovers must ever be ready to prove, you know.

On our way home we had a railroad smash at Mifflin, Pa. I was curled up,
asleep in my seat, but received only a scratch on my forehead. I crawled
out of a window and helped recover bodies from the wreckage.

Fort McHenry is an historic spot. The scene described in our "Star
Spangled Banner" was dedicated to it. It was its ramparts Key referred
to in his first verse. In 1812 the fort was garrisoned by one thousand
men under Major Armisted, to guard Baltimore from an attack by sea.
September 13th, 1814, the British admiral, with sixteen heavy war
vessels, opened bombardment upon the fort. Its guns failed to reach the
fleet till some of the vessels approached nearer. He met so warm a
reception that they withdrew, badly damaged. A force of one thousand men
landed to surprise the fort in the rear, but they were repulsed. At
midnight the firing ceased. Next day the fleet withdrew and Baltimore
was safe. During the bombardment Francis Scott Key, a prisoner on board
the British fleet, wrote the "Star Spangled Banner."

I shall never forget July 4th, 1863. The crucial battle of the war,
Gettysburg, was being fought. Meade had just succeeded Hooker in command
of the army. Anxiously the wisdom of the change was being watched by
every soldier. It was my fortune to be detailed as officer of the guard
at Fort McHenry that day. Guardmount is always an inspiring exercise,
for then troops are carefully inspected and instructed before entry on
their tour of duty. Fort McHenry is an ideally beautiful spot, situated
on the point of a peninsula formed by the confluence of the north and
south forks of the Patapsco river. The spot is loved by every American.
A picture, a combination of events, produced the most strikingly
emotional effect upon me. We were formed on the exact ground overlooked
by Key when he wrote:

    "Oh, say, can you see, by the dawn's early light,
    What so proudly we hailed at the twilight's last gleaming,
    Whose broad stripes and bright stars, thro' the perilous fight,
    O'er the ramparts we watched, were so gallantly streaming?
    And the rockets' red glare, the bombs bursting in air,
    Gave proof thro' the night that our flag was still there.
    Oh, say, does that star spangled banner yet wave,
    O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave?"

I was trying to examine arms. Our Post Band, the 2d Artillery Band, one
of the grandest in the service, was playing that soul lifting piece. The
north fork of the Patapsco was filled with transports, carrying bronzed
veterans (I think the 19th Corps), who were hurrying to Gettysburg, and
these boys were yelling for twice their number; cheers upon cheers. On
the balcony of one of our prison buildings was a prisoner of war, a
lineal descendant of Francis Scott Key, overlooking the scene. And I
thought of our flag over yonder to the northwest, forty miles away at
Gettysburg. Yesterday and day before we had listened, straining our ears
to hear the guns. Was our flag still there? Had our boys with Meade
stood fast against the lion of the Confederacy, or had the Stars and
Bars been flaunted victorious upon the battle ground? God knows how our
hearts were strained in those hours. And when I heard the cheers of our
soldiers upon the transports and thought of Francis Scott Key and how he
had watched to see if Old Glory still waved, my eyes were blinded with
tears. I had to suspend my inspection to dry them. I was not alone
affected; there were many. Such tears one need not be ashamed of; they
are not evidence of weakness. An army of men inspired by such emotions
would be best to avoid.

I shall never forget the relief which came to our anxiety the next
morning (July 5th), Gettysburg was ours. Lee was started back to
Virginia. Vicksburg, too, was ours. Indeed, crucial was the day, July
4th, 1863. Every one of our ninety millions of united Americans should
ever give thanks for the events of that day.




FILE IV.

A taste of the Draft Riots, July 13, 1863, when conveying wounded
Confederates from Gettysburg to David's Island, New York Harbor--Governor
Seymour's questionable conduct--A mysterious Mr. Andrews of Virginia--
"Knights of the Golden Circle"--"Sons of Liberty" and a North Western
Confederacy--Uncle Burdette--The Laurel incident.


I had a little taste of the draft riots during that memorable week
beginning July 13th, 1863. I was ordered to David's Island, New York
Harbor, with seven hundred wounded Confederates from Gettysburg. The
demonstrations of the mob of onlookers in Philadelphia were so very
unfriendly that we had to use the butts of our muskets to control the
crowd. They threatened us saying, "to-morrow will be our day." I
understood the threat when I learned later of the rioting. We were
advised that our train was to be intercepted before reaching New York,
and transportation was, therefore, furnished on the steamer "Commodore,"
by the outside course. After leaving our prisoners at David's Island, we
landed at the Battery, and there I addressed my men, cautioning them not
to reply to any assault unless ordered by me. We marched up Broadway to
the City Hall Barracks (where the New York Post Office now stands) and
stacked arms inside the enclosure. I was proud of my men. Each one
appeared a giant, steady, firm of step, lips compressed; two-thirds of
them were foreign born, yet no better Americans ever paraded Broadway.

Immediately after stacking arms, a lot of rioters who had just overcome
their guards, seized our stacks. Our boys jumped on them and I had a big
job to keep them from crushing their ribs. Exceeding my orders, I
permitted my men to visit their homes, to report back at midnight. The
cars were running but had no passengers. I rode on the Eighth Avenue car
to 48th Street, my home. Our house was locked, but Cousin Wilbur F.
Strong was there alone. He said Brother A. P. had taken the family into
the country for safety. A. P.'s loyalty had made him a "marked man," and
he had been threatened. After eating, Wilbur and I walked down to John
Hardy's, in 35th Street. Stores were all closed, no one on the streets
but an occasional corner loafer, who snarled at us. Hardy had been
hiding his colored servant in the coal cellar, to save her life. Wilbur
afterwards entered the service, and went on the "Hunter raid" up the
Shenandoah Valley in 1864. He died from the exhaustion of the marches.

At midnight every man was behind his stacked arms, ready for duty. The
city was deserted, as if plague stricken. I shall never forget the
desolation.

Ostensibly the draft was the excuse, but with the moving spirits it was
but a subterfuge. The ring-leader of the mobs in New York was a
mysterious stranger, a "Mr. Andrews" of Virginia. On July 13th, 1863, at
40th Street and Fourth Avenue, while the firemen were at work in Third
Avenue, he ascended a shanty which stood opposite the burning ruins.
Thousands were assembled behind this shanty in an open space of untilled
ground, and the Virginian orator proceeded to address them. He cried out
that he wished he had the lungs of a stentor and that there was a
reporter present to take down his words; he said he had lately addressed
them in Cooper Institute, where he told them Mr. Lincoln wanted to tear
the hardworking man from his wife and family and send him to the war; he
denounced Mr. Lincoln for his conscription bill which was in favor of
the rich and against the poor man; he called him a Nero and a Caligula
for such a measure, etc. He then advised the people to organize to
resist the draft and appoint their leader, and if necessary he would be
their leader (uproarious cheers). Immediately after, the mob destroyed a
beautiful dwelling at Lexington Avenue and 47th Street. And they did
organize. Mounted leaders were seen to give orders to subordinate
leaders of mobs; one of these mounted men rode on horseback into the
hardware store of Hiram Jelliffe in Ninth Avenue and seized what arms
and powder he had. Mr. Jelliffe afterwards identified him as a clerk in
one of the City departments.

Governor Horatio Seymour, in answer to a call from Washington, had
hurried off the militia to Pennsylvania. He made a memorable speech
standing upon the City Hall steps, in which he addressed the rioters as
"my friends." A report of it says: "Standing near him on the steps was a
ring-leader of a mob, who had just made an inflammatory speech and who
had recently come from an assault on the 'Tribune.'" The "Tribune"
(editorially) said practically that: "the sending of the militia out of
New York was with a knowledge that it would be desirable to have them
away when his (the Governor's) 'friends' wanted to riot." I am aware
that Governor Seymour has been a sort of idol with many, and that if I
lay my poor weak tongue on his fair name, I will incur their
displeasure; but I have always disliked shams.

Not wishing to be tedious, I want to recall that when the war broke out
the Confederacy was thoroughly equipped to take its place as a fully
organized nation at once. This fact was commented on and efforts were
made to explain how it was accomplished. No comprehensive history of the
struggle can be written that does not include the secret societies that
abetted. They played as important a part as did the army which opposed
us, and was vastly more dangerous by reason of the insidious character
of its movements.

One State after another swung into line under some mysterious talisman,
although there was a strong sentiment against leaving the Union.

In delving into affairs generally, I became possessed of information
that, so far as I know, has never been in print. I learned that a secret
organization known as the "Knights of the Golden Circle" was the nucleus
of the Confederacy. That under its secret fostering the Confederacy was
fully developed, ready to take its place among the nations. That the
Knights were an outgrowth of the defunct "Know Nothing" society that had
become disrupted on the subject of the extension of slavery (which also
divided churches). That as soon as the Confederacy was in the saddle, no
longer were there any initiations into the "Knights of the Golden
Circle," but a subordinate society was organized to do further work,
i. e., to further disrupt the Union. This society was known as the "Sons
of Liberty."

The purpose of the "Sons of Liberty" was to form a northwestern
confederacy. My source of information said that it was understood in
that circle, that Governor Horatio Seymour was to give the signal for
disruption, which was to be a refusal from New York to furnish its quota
of soldiers. Seymour failed them. He did not refuse, but he protested
and procrastinated. He obstructed the draft as adroitly as he could,
claiming inequities. And on August 7th, 1863, Mr. Lincoln in a
communication to Seymour regarding these claims, said: "We are
contending with an enemy who, as I understand, drives every able-bodied
man he can reach into his ranks, very much as a butcher drives bullocks
into a slaughter pen; no time is wasted, no argument is used." And Mr.
Lincoln repeatedly wrote Governor Seymour of the cost in blood and
treasure by the delays he was causing.

The bloodiest and most brutal riots this country ever saw ensued in New
York, Boston, Portsmouth and other cities. The draft riots were, in
fact, but the first step of the "Sons of Liberty" in uprising, towards
forming another rupture. To this secret movement of the "Sons of
Liberty" I refer to the following documents:


     Head Quarters, District of Indiana,
     Indianapolis, Sept. 3, 1864.

     1st. Large numbers of men of suspected loyalty to the United
     States, have heretofore, and still are immigrating to the
     State of Indiana, and in some localities their open and avowed
     hatred to the Government, and treasonable designs are fully
     expressed....

     By order of
     Bvt. Major General Alvin P. Hovey,
     And. C. Cemper, A.A.G.


An order had previously been issued by General Heintzelman, Commander of
the Department, prohibiting the transport of arms into the Department by
Railroads.

Governor Oliver P. Morton, in his message to the Legislature in June,
1865, said:

     "Some misguided persons who mistook the bitterness of party
     patriotism and ceased to feel the obligations of allegiance to
     our Country and Government, conspired against the State and
     National Government and sought by Military force to plunge us
     into the horrors of revolution.

     A secret organization had been formed which by its lectures
     and rituals inculcated doctrines subversive of the Government,
     and which carried to their consequences would evidently result
     in disruption and destruction of the nation.

     The members of this organization were united by solemn oaths,
     which if observed, bound them to execute the orders of their
     Grand Commanders without delay or question, however
     treasonable or criminal might be their character.

     I am glad to believe that the great majority of its members
     regarded it merely as a political machine and did not suspect
     the ulterior treasonable action contemplated by its leaders,
     and upon discovery of its true character, hastened to abjure
     all connection with it.

     Some of the chief conspirators have been arrested and tried by
     the government, and others have fled, their schemes have been
     exposed and baffled."

The arrest of Clement L. Vallandigham, of Ohio, for treason, uncovered
part of the conspiracy; he was, in fact, the Grand Commander of the
Order. Of him Mr. Lincoln said:

     "I solemnly declare my belief that this hindrance of the
     military, including maiming and murder, is due to the course
     in which Mr. Vallandigham has been engaged, in a greater
     degree than to any other cause, and it is due to him
     personally, in a greater degree than to any other man."

The Indianapolis "Journal," July 2d, 1864, said:

     "Members of the Sons of Liberty were advised that Morgan (the
     Rebel raider) would be in Kentucky, and Vallandigham in
     Hamilton, on or about June 14th (1864). It was through
     information furnished by members of this order that Governor
     Bramlette of Kentucky was apprised of Morgan's intended raid
     and attack upon Frankfort.

     The rumor that there was collusion between the friends of
     Vallandigham and Morgan seems possible. In the letter of
     Governor Bramlette, which we append, significant allusion is
     made to it. It would seem strange indeed, that the Sons of
     Liberty should be so advised of the simultaneous raids of the
     Canadian and Kentucky Confederates unless a common
     understanding was had between the two traitors, and concerted
     action determined upon. That they were so advised is evident
     from the fact that certain of their number admonished Governor
     Morton of Indiana beforehand, who in turn advised Governor
     Bramlette of the approaching danger in time for him to provide
     for it.

     Commonwealth of Kentucky,
     Executive Department,
     Frankfort, June 22, 1864.

     Governor Oliver P. Morton,
     Indianapolis, Ind.

     Dear Sir.--I return you my most grateful thanks for your
     prompt assistance during Morgan's recent raid. The timely
     arrival of the 43d Regiment, Indiana Volunteers, gave us
     entire relief against apprehension of danger.

     Although the citizens had repulsed the Rebels, yet the large
     numbers still infesting this section at the time of their
     arrival kept us upon constant vigil and serious apprehension
     of another assault.

     The patriotism and kindly feeling which prompted the gallant
     veterans of the Forty-third to rush to our relief without
     delaying after their long and arduous labors to even greet
     their families, deserves the highest commendation from their
     countrymen, and will ever command from us of Kentucky, the
     profoundest gratitude.

     The appearance of Vallandigham, of Ohio, simultaneously with
     Morgan's raid in Kentucky, fully confirms the matter made
     known to me through General Lindsey, by you.

     The defeat of Morgan has frustrated their movements for the
     present, but vigilance in the future must still guard us
     against the machinations of evil doers.

     Yours truly,
     THOMAS E. BRAMLETTE."


Arms for the Sons of Liberty were seized in Indianapolis and New York,
and at many other places. The organization was said to have a membership
of one million members, all bound, by oath, to sustain the Southern
Confederacy.

In many instances, to outward appearances, they were merely social or
political clubs that could be attended by the unsuspecting, when they
were not in executive session.

The draft riots, hotel burnings, attempts to destroy our water supply,
and kindred work, down to and including the assassination conspiracy,
are all to be charged to the Sons of Liberty. They are also to be
charged with the presidential election fraud of 1864. Its virus
permeated all. No man has ever admitted being a member of it.

And Governor Seymour was expected to be its "bell wether" in the
disruption movement. Evidently his nerve failed him. The riots in New
York probably demonstrated to him that real war is real h----l, and it
scared him. I do not assume that any considerable portion of the
Confederates were members of either of the secret societies; soldiers
are seldom conspirators.

There were characters in the Confederate service whom a Union man could
well admire: Lee, "Stonewall" Jackson, Alexander H. Stevens and others,
but there should be contempt only for men who, while holding office
under the protecting arm of a magnanimous government, bent every nerve
to trip up their benefactor.

Uncle Burdette's service was exclusively with troops. First with the
90th Regiment at Key West (Graham has yet a bottled scorpion that he
sent home from there, found in his sleeping blanket), then with the 16th
Cavalry in Virginia, and finally with the 162d Regiment in the assault
on Port Hudson. He was also with the Banks Red River expedition. No
better man ever straddled a horse; he could have acquitted himself as a
champion "bronco buster."

The following incident belongs right here:


     Headquarters, Fort McHenry, Md.,
     Sept. 18th, 1863.

     Special Order No. 190.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, of Co. D, 5th N. Y. Arty, with a guard
     from Co. G., N. Y. Arty., consisting of one sergeant, two
     corporals and twenty-two men, with two days rations, will,
     when transportation is provided, proceed to Alexandria, Va, in
     charge of ninety-three soldier prisoners, and turn them over
     with lists and charges of same to the commanding officer of
     Camp of Distribution, near that place.

     II. This duty performed Lieut. Smith and guard will return
     without delay and report to the commanding officer of this
     post.

     Lieut. Thos. Grey, the quarter master, will furnish the
     necessary transportation.

     By command,
     Col. P. A. PORTER.
     Ford Morris,
     1st. Lieut. 6th N. Y. Arty.
     Post Adjutant.

     Lieut. SMITH,
     D. Co., 5th N. Y. Arty.


[Illustration: THE MAPLES, LAUREL, MD]

On our way to Washington, at Laurel, Md., we found the railroad bridge
crossing the Patuxent river had been washed away by a recent freshet.
We were forced to disembark, go down a high embankment and cross the
river by a foot bridge. By some means some of the prisoners had obtained
some "fire water" and were troublesome; some of them were fighting on
this foot bridge. I took a hand in it and tumbled a few into the river
(not very deep). Just then I noticed three or four of them scurrying
away, running through a field of grain. I really felt more sorry for the
owner of the field than for the loss of the men. Aunt Mag had often
spoke of our visiting her brother William and sister Mary at Laurel, but
we never went there until after our marriage, when I found, on arriving
there, that the owner of the grain field my prisoners had so ruthlessly
damaged was brother William. He could not remember the instance, as such
events were of frequent occurrence, but we had a laugh over it.




FILE V.

Appointed assistant provost marshal at Fort McHenry, where I began my
first experience in detective work--Somewhat a history of my early
life--Ordered to execute Gordon by shooting.


I was on duty with troops until detailed as Assistant Provost Marshal at
Fort McHenry. The administration of prisoners confined at Fort McHenry
had become unsatisfactory; escapes were frequent. Colonel Porter
selected Capt. Holmes of the 8th New York Heavy Artillery and myself to
reform the prison.


     Headquarters, Fort McHenry,
     October 25, 1863.

     General Order No. 51.

     I. Lieut. George Nellis, Co. D., 5th Arty., N. Y. V., is
     hereby relieved from duty as Asst. Provost Marshal and will
     without delay report to his Company Commander for duty.

     II. Lieut. H. B. Smith, Co. D., 5th Arty., N. Y. V., is hereby
     appointed Asst. Provost Marshal and will without delay assume
     the duties of that office.

     P. A. PORTER,
     Col. 8th N. Y. V. Arty.
     Com. Post.

     Lieut. H. B. SMITH,
     D. Co., 5th Reg., N. Y. V., Arty.,
     Fort McHenry, Md.


Right here was begun what led up to my ultimately becoming a
full-fledged secret service operator. Born in the green foot-hills of
the Catskill Mountains (near where Rip Van Winkle dozed), I learned my
"A B abs" in the little brown school house at Cornwallville. Father died
when I was four years old. Mother traded the farm for some New York
tenements, and we all located there, when I was ten years old. I
attended the public schools where I was properly "hazed" and got what
was "coming" to all country boys; finally I graduated under the tutelage
of Dr. Joseph Finch (a patriot indeed, who made a lasting impress for
earnestness on thousands of boys), and then went to business as an entry
clerk with a large importing metal house, where I remained until the war
broke out. You will therefore see I had had no former experience (my age
was 22 years) and whatever wit I had for such service was inborn or
home-made. Zeal I know I had; perhaps its birth was from a chalk legend
some pedagogue had inscribed over the door-frame in the little brown
school house, reading: "What man has done, man can do." At any rate I
have remembered it.

My education in the burning political questions had been sharply marked
by the presidential campaign of 1860. My brothers, A. P. and Burdette,
were "Douglas" Democrats. My fellow clerk, Clarence W. Meade (later
Judge Meade), was a "Bell and Everett" Democrat. I was a born "Lincoln"
Republican. So between the discussions at the house and the office, I
was somewhat sharpened. I remember how I struggled against their
arguments that Lincoln was an uneducated, uncultured rail-splitter. I
knew of his discussions with Douglas, but never did I completely
vanquish them until Mr. Lincoln delivered his Gettysburg oration, and
"that ball fetched all the pins and knocked a hole through the alley."
And it must be noted that I thought myself, somewhat like a Demosthenes,
for I had practiced in that little school house on "Twinkle, Twinkle,
Little Star" and two verses of "On Linden When the Sun Was Low," much to
mother's delight. So equipped, or so not equipped, I began my duties as
Assistant Provost Marshal.

Confederate mail carrying, spy promoting, blockade promoting, recruiting
for Confederate service, were being engineered right from among these
prisoners. I "under-grounded" it all. Through this channel I enlisted
for the Confederate service. Of course you know that when I enlisted in
the service of our enemies, I did so to discover their actions, and was
what most people call a "spy." I had often read the story of Nathan
Hale, the splendid patriot of the American Revolution who was a spy in
the service of General Washington and who gave up his life to the
service. (The Sons of the Revolution of the State of New York have
erected a fine monument to him in the New York City Hall Park). Perhaps
there would be less danger in being a soldier in the ranks who goes
forward with arms in hand and fights openly in battle and dies thus,
than to be a spy and constantly in the shadow of death, night and day,
and no soldier's death for him, but the death of the hangman's noose;
yes, I knew all this.

I worked a blockade running outfit, involving General Morris's adjutant
general, Capt. E. W. Andrews (of whom I will tell more later on), and I
captured Confederate mail carriers, none of which were any part of my
duty, but all contributed to the general good of the service. Strictly
speaking, my duties were completed by caring for the safe keeping,
discipline and comfort of the prisoners in our charge. To do more was
supererogation, and ought to be credited to zeal.

In a short time I found that these Confederates worked their escape
through the use of gold supplied them by their sympathizers in bribing
the guards. But we stopped that and thereafter the soldiers for sentry
duty at certain posts were selected for their known probity. Escapes
continued for a time (but they were always recaptured when they supposed
themselves safe outside our guards). When these escapes (?) were
accomplished there was great jubilation among the Confederates. They had
a great "laugh" on the Yankees; which laugh was changed to "the other
side of the mouth" when all the escaped (?) ones were marched back into
camp, one bright morning. About a mile down the road leading from our
exterior gate to Baltimore was a hotel called the "Vineyard." I engaged
the upper floors of it in which to domicile my escaped (?) prisoners.
When we had accumulated there about fifteen we marched them all back to
our prison.

After telling their fellows of the futility of their plans no more
escapes were attempted.

The government was kind to prisoners. We clothed them and gave them
blankets to keep them comfortable. I have receipted rolls now showing
such issues. They came to us in rags or worse than rags, in fact, and
left us fat and well clothed. On one occasion when an exchange of
prisoners was ordered, I judged that one good suit of clothes was enough
to start them off with; but orders came from Washington to allow them
to carry away all the clothing given them by their friends, which in
some instances was three or four suits to a man. Our prisoners were
confined in buildings known as the Ringgold Battery Barracks, quite
insecure for the purpose. We constructed about the premises a plank
fence twelve feet high, with balcony and sentry boxes on top, leaving no
good chance for communication between prisoners and guards.

The first unpleasant duty devolving on me is described in the following
order:


     Headquarters, Fort McHenry,
     Nov. 19. 1863.

     General Order No. 53.

     In pursuance of General Order No. 54 and 56 issued from
     Headquarters, Middle Department, 8th Army Corps, Oct. 26, and
     Nov. 3, 1863, and General Order No. 92, issued from
     headquarters 2d. Separate Brigade, Defences of Baltimore, Nov.
     19, 1863, William F. Gordon, a prisoner in confinement at this
     post, will be shot to death with musketry, between the hours
     of 12 M. and 3 o'clock P. M., on Friday, the 20th inst., on
     the Parade Ground at Fort McHenry, according to military usage
     in such cases, provided the approval of the President of the
     United States be received.

     The Asst. Provost Marshal of the Post, Lieut. H. B. Smith, is
     charged with the execution of this order.

     (Signed) By Command of
     Col. P. A. PORTER,
     8th N. Y. V. Arty., Com'd'g Post.

     GEO. WIARD,
     Lieut. 8th N. Y. V. Arty and Post Adjt.


A harder duty could not be directed. In cases where execution is by
shooting, a firing party is picked, and their rifles are loaded for
them. One gun among them is loaded with a blank cartridge, so that each
member of the firing party can hope he has it. In case death does not
result from the firing it becomes the duty of the officer commanding the
firing party to complete the execution of the order. That was not a
cheerful prospect for me. I had twenty-four hours for serious
contemplation; suppose the men should aim wrong? Then I would be
compelled to shoot the man as a mere cold duty. We were spared its
execution by the following telegraphic order:


     War Department,
     Nov. 20, 1863.

     Major General Schenck:

     The President directs that the execution of sentence of death
     against Gordon, now in Fort McHenry, be suspended until
     further orders.

     (Signed) E. M. STANTON,
     Sec. of War.





FILE VI.

Detective work required an extension of territory--A flattering
endorsement by Colonel Porter--Introducing Christian Emmerich and
incidentally Charles E. Langley, a noted Confederate spy.


For the purpose of showing how I grew in the service I will ask you to
read each order carefully. Sometimes they explain themselves, sometimes
not.

Investigations started in the prisons required work to be done outside
the garrison, throughout Maryland and perhaps into Virginia, which would
carry me outside our post limits and required authority from Department
commanders. The Department comprised Maryland, parts of Delaware and
Virginia. The following personal letter was addressed to Colonel W. S.
Fish, Provost Marshal under General Schenck:


     Headquarters, Fort McHenry,
     Nov. 27, 1863.

     Dear Colonel.--Our Assistant Provost Marshal, Lieut. Smith,
     has got hold of a sloop and her Captain. He was to be examined
     before you, but Smith says that McPhail's men have other and
     earlier accounts to settle with him. I suggest this as you may
     have a great deal to do and may prefer to transfer the case to
     those already familiar with it.

     Very truly,
     P. A. PORTER,
     Col. 8th N. Y. V. Arty.,
     Com'd'g Post.


The following will show my progress in such matters:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, Dec. 23, 1863.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, Assistant Provost Marshal, Fort McHenry,
     is hereby authorized to visit and search any house in the City
     of Baltimore that he has good reason to believe contains Rebel
     mail, or any treasonable matter.

     By order,
     W. S. FISH,
     Col. and Provost Marshal General,
     8th Army Corps.


My work at Fort McHenry absolutely required freedom to act outside.


     Office Provost Marshal,
     Fort McHenry, Jan. 8, 1864.

     _Confidential._
     Colonel Fish,
     Provost Marshal, 8th Army Corps.

     Dear Sir.--I am at last able to report that we have gotten
     underway an underground correspondence between Trought and
     Emmerich. At first the correspondence was unimportant (which
     was, of course, policy for them), but now they have become
     confidential. I, with some others, intend to enlist in the
     Rebel service, but my plan is too long to explain here.

     Now, Colonel, if you will drop a line to Colonel Porter,
     asking him to allow me to organize a squad of reliable men,
     say twelve or fifteen, and instruct them, whom we can call
     upon at any time, we will guarantee to show some rich
     developments inside of three weeks.

     Emmerich is not alone but is connected with some of the
     largest houses in Baltimore.

     Trusting this will meet your approval, I am, Col.

     Very resp'y,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. and Asst. Pro. Mar.


This was officially approved first by Colonel Fish, and then by Colonel
Porter.


     Office Provost Marshal,
     Fort McHenry, Jan. 26, 1864.

     Col. P. A. Porter,
     Commanding 2d Separate Brigade,
     Defences of Baltimore.

     I respectfully beg leave to lay before you the following and
     ask for authority to proceed further.

     Four recruits for the Rebel Army are in Baltimore, also two
     Rebel officers. I want authority to follow them and make the
     arrest when about to cross the Potomac, thus implicating all
     the parties connected in recruiting for the Rebel Army in and
     about Baltimore. I have it so arranged that it will be
     impossible for them to get away from me, if I am allowed to
     proceed. And as I have some more operations in process of
     development, I would respectfully ask to have the authority
     extended to cover them also.

     I could make some of these arrests in Baltimore, but as it is
     perfectly safe, by allowing them to get a little further, it
     would make the case a still more fatal one for the parties
     concerned.

     I am, Colonel, Very Resp'y,
     Your Ob'd't Serv't,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. and Asst. Pro. Mar.


The endorsement on the back of the above paper has always been a source
of gratification. No man from New York State was ever more highly
esteemed than Colonel Porter. He was talked of for Governor. A brave,
true, and generous man, loved by all. He was killed at Cold Harbor,
leading his regiment. His body was dragged back to our lines in the
darkness of the night.


     Headquarters, 2d Separate Brigade,
     Defences of Baltimore.
     Jan. 26, 1864.

     I approve of the proceedings of Lieut. Smith, who has my
     entire confidence as an upright and skillful officer. I have
     referred him to the Provost Marshal for advice, instruction,
     and authority.

     P. A. PORTER,
     Col. 8th N. Y. V. Arty.,
     Commanding 2d Separate Brigade.


On the same day the application was approved at Department Headquarters.

The centre around which this recruiting and other disloyal schemes
revolved was one Christian Emmerich, a fashionable shoemaker on South
Gay Street. His place was a convenient centre for all important
Confederate sympathizers. His residence was in a fashionable part of the
city. We were entirely successful, capturing the whole party, including
a conductor on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, who was caught
transporting these recruits, well knowing their character. We
simultaneously seized the Christian Emmerich store on South Gay Street,
and his residence; in the latter we found much incriminating evidence,
such as orders for Confederate uniforms, gold braid, buttons and
Confederate letters. Emmerich was not a common mender of "old soles,"
but was the shoemaker to the bon-ton of Baltimore. We entirely destroyed
the Confederate recruiting business conducted through that channel.

I have a photograph of the conductor referred to, taken together with
his pal or partner, who was a spy. The spy's name was Charles E.
Langley. I will tell you all about him and his mysterious backing when I
come to my regular work in December, 1864, where his statement is
printed.




FILE VII.

Investigator's education--I branded E. W. Andrews, adjutant general to
General Morris, a traitor to the colors.


In our prison were confined prisoners of all classes, Confederate
officers, spies, blockade-runners, pirates, civil and political
prisoners. Our office was the reception room where these persons
interviewed their "sympathizers," much of such interviewing taking place
in my presence. Their mail passed through our hands, what better place
could there have been to develop an "investigator?"


     War Department,
     Washington, Feb. 27, 1864.

     General Morris, commanding at Fort McHenry, will allow Mr. W.
     G. Woodside to see Thomas I. Hall and ---- Baylor, Rebel
     prisoners confined there. General Morris will be present at
     the interview.

     By order of the Secretary of War.

     (Signed) C. A. DANA,
     Asst. Secy. of War.


This was endorsed:

     To the Provost Marshal:

     You will allow Mr. W. G. Woodside, the bearer of this, to see
     the prisoners mentioned within, Hall and Baylor. Lieut. Smith
     will be present at the interview.

     (Signed) P. A. PORTER,
     Col. 8th N. Y. V. Arty.,
     Commanding-Brigade.

     Fort McHenry,
     Feb'y 28, 1864.




     Baltimore, Feb'y 15, 1864.

     Sir.--Will you be kind enough to deliver the joined letter to
     Jules Klotz, a French subject, detained at Fort McHenry. He
     wrote to me to direct my letters to yourself.

     I should be very obliged to you to let me know the reasons why
     he has been arrested and his true situation towards the
     American government.

     Very respectfully yours,
     (Signed) A. SAUVAN,
     French Vice Consul.

     To Mr. SMITH,
     Lieutenant, Fort McHenry.


You will see by these documents that my survey of prisoners and their
letters was always by authority and not merely to gratify my own
curiosity.

The Adjutant General is the confidential reliance of a commanding
officer. General Morris was advanced in years and depended implicitly on
his Adjutant General, Captain E. W. Andrews. I branded Andrews _a
traitor to the colors_. It was a serious position for a subaltern to
assume, but I had the evidence to substantiate the charge. In searching
the house of one Terrence R. Quinn, a noted blockade-runner, then a
prisoner in Fort McHenry, I found evidence that Andrews was a partner in
his crimes. And I found that my predecessor, the former Assistant
Provost Marshal, was also incriminated; then it became easier for me to
understand how so many prisoners had been allowed to escape (as many as
sixty-five in one night). Later on I will have two more references to
Andrews, which will explain what became of him.

Andrews was a man of brains. He started in life, I believe, as a
minister of the gospel, then turned to law. By his suavity and
impudence, he gained control of General Morris. The post was important
because it carried so great a number of prisoners. Andrews had his son
made Provost Marshal, and the escapes of prisoners by one means or
another, were made so easily that the scandal of it had appeared in many
Southern newspapers. When I finally imprisoned Andrews on General
Sheridan's order, in his half intoxicated condition he admitted his
Confederate sympathies.




FILE VIII.

Initial trip down Chesapeake Bay after blockade runners and contraband
dealers and goods, incidentally introducing Terrence R. Quinn, George G.
Nellis, and E. W. Andrews, Jr.--A description of a storm on the
Chesapeake.


My initial trip down the Chesapeake Bay after blockade-runners was made
under the following order:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, Mch. 22, 1864.

     Special Order No. 73.

     2d Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th Regt. N. Y. Artillery, is hereby
     ordered to proceed down the Eastern shore, Virginia, and
     arrest ---- Jacobs (citizen) and such other persons as may be
     found in company with him. If Lieut. Smith has reason to
     believe that they are engaged in the practice of smuggling or
     running the blockade, and seize all contraband goods in their
     possession.

     Lieut. Smith will seize and hold the following named vessels,
     viz.: Schooners "Trifle," "Frances E. Burgess," "Despatch,"
     "Washington," and "Glib," wherever he may find them, and will
     convey them to the nearest place of safety within our lines.

     Lieut. Smith will assume command of the steam tug placed at
     his disposal by orders from this office, and having
     accomplished the object of this order will return to this
     city, and make immediate report to the Commanding General.

     Lieut. Smith is permitted to use his discretion as to the
     disposition of the vessels named in case of emergency. By
     command of

     Major General LEW WALLACE,
     (Signed) SAM'L B. LAWRENCE,
     Asst. Adj. Gen'l.


Quinn, the prisoner referred to above was out on parole and was thus
able to pursue his business. He was in the habit of purchasing much of
his supplies from a certain ship chandler on Pratt street, a friend of
mine, and, in fact, a good Union man, who so concealed me in his
premises that I learned much of Quinn's plans from his (Quinn's) own
mouth; and this order was to enable me to develop the matters he had
disclosed.

Blockade running, mail carrying and "spy" carrying, along the Potomac
and Chesapeake, was carried on in such a cute manner as to necessitate a
peculiar service to meet and stop it. Gunboats nor troops could baffle
it; it was done in skiffs, canoes (called cunnas), small sail boats
with dirty sails hardly to be seen in broad day light. These little
"creepers" would run right up under the bows of gunboats unnoticed; as
soon as shore was touched, if a plug was pulled out of the bottom of a
boat it would immediately and entirely submerge itself, until wanted for
use again.

The price for carrying one person across the river was fifty dollars in
gold, which tempted to the business the most dare devil men on either
side of the line. As to merchandise, the plan was to "work" the local
storekeepers, for in the North it was perfectly legitimate to allow all
the merchandise desired to go to the line just on the borders of
territory patrolled by us, which might be only an hour's sail with fair
wind to put it at night within the reach of the Confederates. These
stores were not in villages, as was the case further north, but were
isolated, very frequently on a cross road in the woods.

Oystering was a favorite cloak for blockade-runners. Sometimes vessels
of little value (three hundred dollars or so) were loaded in Baltimore
with goods and purposely _swamped_ on the south side of the river to
allow the Confederates to confiscate. I was "on the inside" once when a
Captain was offered fifteen thousand dollars to allow his vessel to be
loaded and to permit its destruction when in reach of the Confederates.

There was some delay in the preparation of my written report which
caused anxiety at headquarters, which was expressed in the following:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, Apl. 5, 1864.

     Colonel.--I am directed by Major General Wallace to request
     you to inform him what is the latest information you have
     concerning Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. Arty., who was sent
     with a squad of men on the 22d ult. to make certain seizures.
     Please state near what point he was last known to be.

     Resp'y your ob'd't serv't,
     SAM'L B. LAWRENCE,
     A. A. G.

     To Col. Porter,
     Com'd'g 2d Sep. Brigade.


The above I find among my papers. I cannot understand it in view of the
fact that I reported March 30th (see following), and was appointed Chief
of the Secret Service by General Wallace on April 3d. The years are many
since then and it is hard to remember details, but my present theory is
that as General Wallace had but recently assumed command, the Adjutant
General's office was in confusion. "I am directed by Major General
Wallace" is the usual language for an _Adjutant General_ to use; at any
rate my report is dated March 30th, and I was interviewed by General
Wallace on April 2d, this I clearly remember.


     Fort McHenry, Mch. 30, 1864.
     To the General Commanding,
     8th Army Corps, Middle Department.

     General.--I have the honor to report that in compliance with
     Special Order No. 73, Mch. 22, 1864, I proceeded with a guard
     of 12 men on board the steam tug "Adriatic," but on account of
     the weather did not leave until the morning of the 23d.

     I was alongside the Cutter (Revenue) and notified the officer
     commanding to arrest any of the vessels named in my order. I
     was afterwards hailed, and ran back to the Cutter again, and
     learned that the schooner "Frances E. Burgess," Capt. J. J.
     Lewis, had left just one-half hour before. On the morning of
     the 22d, she came in and just touched at the wharf,
     immediately dropping out in the stream. This last fact,
     connected with the previous one, also the fact that Quinn was
     much worried about the "F. E. B." led me to believe that the
     "Burgess" was not all right, and that Captain Lewis had
     learned of my moves and had attempted to evade me. I made
     chase for her.

     At Hill's Point (below the Choptank river) I arrested the
     schooner "Trifle," and took her in tow to Point Lookout. By
     her papers she is with bonds given by E. R. Quinn, T. R.
     Quinn, and George G. Nellis, stated in her license, dated
     Feb'y 3, 1864. Her enrollment dated Feb'y 3d, 1864, shows that
     T. R. Quinn, master, is a citizen of the United States, and
     had sworn to it, when he was then on his parole as being a
     British subject.

     Her crew consisted of Captain Seward, Farrell, Reddick,
     Zervicks, and Bailey, deck hands. Captain Seward has
     acknowledged that he ran the blockade, and that he was in
     Richmond about last Christmas, but did not go on this vessel.
     I believe the balance of the crew are innocent men. I found
     Bailey to be of great service to me on the balance of my trip.

     I remained at Point Lookout on the night of the 23d. On the
     24th, went up to St. Mary's river for a harbor, on account of
     a heavy blow. On the evening of the 24th, I started for and
     arrived at Pocomoke Sound (Accomac), where we remained that
     night. On the 25th, went into Onancock Creek, where I landed
     with eight men, and sent the Steamer around to the Pungateague
     river to wait for us. In the evening we arrived at the house
     of one T. W. Jacobs, on the sea side. We entered and searched
     his house; next morning we learned our error, and although he
     is undoubtedly a Rebel, I released him.

     We then made our way to the house of one William E. Jacobs,
     on the bay side, where we arrived at 3 P. M., on the 26th. At
     this place I found the schooner "Frances E. Burgess"--Captain
     Lewis. I arrested Mr. Jacobs, and found him to be the man
     engaged with Quinn. I searched his house and barns but found
     nothing contraband, as they had been duly warned by the
     arrival of the "Burgess."

     Captain Lewis stated that he left Baltimore on the 11th of
     March, and arrived at Accomac Creek on the 14th, and said that
     was his last trip. Mr. Jacobs made same statement.

     Captain Lewis was arrested about last June, about the same
     time that Quinn was arrested. He said that he was caught in
     the act of leaving the Eastern shore with contraband goods and
     that his intention was to run the blockade; he said he was
     examined by Captain E. W. Andrews, and afterwards released
     after taking the oath of allegiance.

     Both Jacobs and Lewis say that Lieut. Andrews, Capt. Andrews'
     son, was to go into business on the Eastern shore; that they
     engaged two stores for the purpose, but that Andrews did not
     come down there.

     Mr. Jacobs said that Quinn had often remarked that he could
     get anything done at Fort McHenry with the Adjutant General.
     At first both Jacobs and Lewis denied all knowledge of any man
     named Andrews.

     Jacobs said that J. J. Hodge (the writer of some of the
     letters found in Quinn's possession) was arrested on the
     Eastern shore about the same time that he and Quinn were, on
     the charge of attempting to go south; said that he heard Quinn
     speak of letters that he had from Hodge, but did not know
     their contents. Quinn was the first man that employed him
     (Lewis) after his release, and said it was Quinn's own seeking
     (to employ a man of that character appears rather suspicious).

     The creek where we found the "Burgess" is one that no steamer
     can enter, or even a sailing vessel, unless piloted by an old
     residenter of that neighborhood. The creek is very crooked and
     the channel is very narrow.

     All the people about that country seem to be very closely
     united and watch a stranger's movements very closely. On the
     evening of the 27th, we left this creek with the schooner, and
     on the afternoon of the 28th, we arrived in the Pungateague,
     and started on the steamer, towing the schooner for Point
     Lookout, where we arrived at 9 P. M.

     On the morning of the 29th we left the Point with the two
     schooners, but afterwards let go the "Burgess," and sent her
     up under sail to Baltimore, where she arrived at 4 P. M.,
     after encountering a very heavy sea. We arrived here at 9.20
     P. M.

     I could find nothing of the schooners' "Despatch" or "Glib," I
     made many inquiries for the schooner "Washington," but could
     not find her.

     On our way back to the city Captain Seward, of the "Trifle"
     said that there was a sign "Washington" painted on it, in the
     hold of the "Trifle," which I afterwards found to be true. I
     think by the actions of all connected, that "Washington" was
     sometimes substituted for "Trifle"; this sign was hid away and
     only by accident found.

     Both the "Burgess" and "Trifle" have been confiscated before,
     two or three times.

     I have this day been on the Cutter, twice, to ascertain to a
     certainty if the "Burgess" left on the 23d inst., and the
     officers say they will swear she passed out on that day; that
     she was in here I know. I then went to the Custom House and
     found that she did not enter or clear on that trip but left
     without any papers, and did not stay in Port over 24 hours.

     I have the honor to be,

     Very respy. your obdt. servt,
     (Signed) H. B. SMITH,
     Lieut. 5th N. Y. II. A.


Lieutenant Andrews and George G. Nellis, "tied up" to Quinn and Lewis,
the blockade-runners, had been, respectively, Provost and Assistant
Provost Marshals at Fort McHenry, prior to the assignment of Captain
Holmes and myself to those offices.

It pleases me to note how vivid my memory is, after forty-seven years,
of the incidents connected with this expedition. Our party of eight,
after landing in Accomac, split up, and straggled over the country about
ten miles, through fields and timber, in snow and slush nearly ankle
deep, avoiding the highways and stopping only at negro huts to inquire
our way. We arrived at T. W. Jacobs' house quite late and began our
search; right here I want to say our search was orderly, endeavoring not
to unnecessarily annoy.

About midnight a great commotion was raised outside the house by the
tramping of horses, rattling of sabres, and loud voices. We were
surrounded by a troop of cavalry (our cavalry). They were very excited,
and they threatened us with everything, until I took the Commandant
aside and made him aware of who we were; even then he soundly upbraided
me for giving him such a scare. He finally departed.

The next day we went over to the Chesapeake Bay side of the peninsula.
When we arrived there we divided into two parties, in order to approach
the harbor from two directions. When we arrived on the bluff (about
twenty feet above water) my party of four was first to discover that
there were a number of sailing vessels at anchor in the little bay.
What to do was the question. I determined that we four must capture the
whole fleet. Which we did in this way: As quietly as possible we
possessed ourselves of one vessel and from it, under the persuasive
influence of our revolvers, we compelled the men on all the other
vessels to go below deck. Then we searched the vessels in detail,
detaining only the "Frances E. Burgess."

This harbor was an ideal place for such "traders," i. e.,
blockade-runners. It was perfectly land-locked, could not be seen from
the bay, and was very hard to get in or out of; it was impassable for
gunboats, and so it was well chosen for the business.

The Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries are indented almost continuously
with smaller estuaries, which make excellent hiding places. Beautiful
places for residence, and likely spots for romance.

While laying at Point Lookout on our way home a severe March storm came
up, dreadful to a land lubber like me. The point is where the Potomac
empties into the Chesapeake. Storms are felt there nearly as greatly as
at Old Point. It blew so hard I feared it would blow us over onto the
wharf. The water was up to the wharf's surface, and there was no sleep
for us that night. Next morning, when we started for Baltimore (ninety
miles away), as we were rounding the Point a big boiling sea took the
yawl of the "Burgess," davits and all, throwing it high in the air. But
to turn back spelled death. Our pilot was Captain Cannon, an old bay
pilot. He did not conceal that he was frightened. He said he never had
seen such weather. We breasted that storm for about twelve hours. The
only encouragement from Captain Cannon was that if our boat could live
until we got under the influence of North Point we would be all right;
we lived.

The heavens were never more unkind in appearance. I did not spend much
time in gazing that way, for the awful waves occupied me. Captain Cannon
kept the vessel as near head on as possible, first on top of the wave
and then in a trough of the sea. Half the time our screw was revolving
in the air. Everything loose on deck washed away. I never had a better
chance to contemplate my past and future than in that twelve hours. I
remember my great regret was that if we should go down, no one could
know what became of us, for I had not reported at Point Lookout and we
were unknown on the peninsula. The severity of this storm became a
matter of history. Seagoing steamers remained tied to their wharves. The
shores of the Chesapeake Bay were strewn with wrecks. The "Adriatic"
(our vessel) was iron bottomed and drew six feet of water. The
Chesapeake can kick up a sea, give it a northeaster, that would gratify
the most hungry tar.

When we were opposite the mouth of the Severn river we saw the steamer
"Nellie Pentz" headed out, her bow tossing up and down in the air like a
cork. She did not dare come out, to certain wreck, dared not turn
around, so she backed up the river again. When we got under the lee of
North Point I became courageous and generous; off towards the west was
in view a schooner, on the rocks. Her crew of four men were in the
rigging. I proposed to Captain Cannon to rescue them. He said it was
impossible, as our boat drew more water than theirs and would be wrecked
before we could reach them. However, we notified the revenue cutter and
they were rescued. When we arrived at Baltimore (nine o'clock P.M.) the
wharves were afloat. The big Bay Line steamers, sea-going vessels, had
not left the wharf. They had not dared to venture out in the storm our
little eighty-foot craft had passed through.

[Illustration: MAJOR GENERAL M. W. LEW WALLACE]




FILE IX.

General Wallace assumes command of the Middle Department--General
Schenck's comments on Maryland--Colonel Woolley.


General Wallace assumed command of the Middle Department, 8th Army
Corps, March 22d, 1864. The Department headquarters were located in a
large mansion on the northwest corner of Calvert and Fayette Streets,
just opposite Battle Monument. I can give no better description of the
Department than to quote General Schenck, who formerly commanded there,
in his words to General Wallace:

"Your trouble will have origin in Baltimore. Baltimore viewed socially
is peculiar. There is more culture to the square block there than in
Boston; actual culture. The question of the war divided the old
families, but I was never able to discover the dividing line. Did I put
a heavy hand on one of the Secessionists, a delegation of influential
Unionists at once hurried to the President and begged the culprit off.
The most unfortunate thing in connection with the Department and its
management is that it is only a pleasant morning's jaunt by rail from
Baltimore to Washington. There is another thing you should know, without
being left to find it out experimentally, Baltimore is headquarters for
a traffic in supplies for the Rebel armies the extent of which is simply
incredible. It is an industry the men have nothing to do with. They know
better, and leave it entirely to the women, who are cunning beyond
belief, and bold on account of their sex. They invent underground lines,
too many and too subtly chosen to be picked up by the shrewdest
detectives."

General Wallace exactly "fitted the niche," a soldier, lawyer,
statesman, and an even tempered man. He so ably administered the
Department as to overcome all obstacles. One permanent order was that
every prisoner should have a hearing at once. If evidence would stand
law, the prisoner was to be held; if not, to be at once released. The
Paine case is an apt illustration. I felt sure I could get evidence that
he was a spy, but had it not at hand and so had to let him go (I will
tell about this later on). There was never a suit for false arrest
during General Wallace's administration.

One of my duties was to collate the evidence in cases for trial. I
learned what was evidence. I was a witness almost constantly before
courts martial and military commissions. It was good experience for me
and it has served me ever after in civil life. I am proud to say (but
perhaps ought not to) that General Wallace gave me credit for aiding in
his able administration of the Department.

No better man could have been found for Provost Marshal General than
Colonel Woolley. He was a soldier and a thorough business man.

The Provost Marshal General's Department was located on the southwest
corner of Camden and Eutaw Streets. It was in a handsome three-story
brick building and had a massive marble entrance. Adjoining it was what
had formerly been a slave pen. Between the corner building and the slave
pen there was an open court which had been used for the slave mart. The
slave pen we used for our prison purposes. The first floor of the main
house was used as our public offices. The second floor was General
Woolley's headquarters. The third floor was my headquarters. In the rear
of the main front corner building was a three-story brick extension,
running back about a hundred feet (to an alley) in which were quartered
the troops (our guards). The buildings were admirably constructed and
centrally located for our purposes.

From now on I was Assistant Provost Marshal General and Chief of the
Secret Service. I had a corps of about forty (men and women) under my
direction. To illustrate my general lines of work I will give copies of
some memoranda which I have. To give all would take more room than I can
spare. In looking these memoranda over the greatest gratification I
feel comes from the evident fact that I was not a drone, but tried to do
my duty. And fifty years further along in our nation's history it may be
a satisfaction to my then living relatives to know it.

[Illustration: JOHN WOOLLEY]




FILE X.

Here begins my service as an assistant provost marshal of the department
and chief of the Secret Service--Confederate General Winder's detectives--
E. H. Smith, special officer, War Department--Mrs. Mary E. Sawyer,
Confederate mail carrier--W. V. Kremer's report on the "Disloyals" north
of Baltimore.


The Secret Service, as its name implies, is the most confidential arm of
the service. Its information intelligently guides the commanding
general. It gives him to know of the conduct of the enemy and discloses
weaknesses, if any exist, in his own armour. There is always a "cloud of
mystery" thrown around it by outsiders. But its pursuit, on the inside,
is not that of romance, but simply of cold facts; it deals with business
propositions. In telling my stories, not being a story writer, I shall
tell plain facts, leaving the reader to clothe them with the glamour
that a fiction writer would usually apply. Were I to attempt to tell
something of all my many stories it would weary a reader; so I will try
to select some that are really historic, or interesting from their
unusual character.


     Provost Marshal's Office,
     Fort McHenry, Apl. 10, 1864.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith,
     Asst. Provost Marshal 8th Army Corps.

     I have just been informed by Mrs. Myers that a detective of
     General Winder's staff from Richmond, Virginia, is in the city
     in disguise.

     Respy.,
     J. W. HOLMES,
     Capt. and Provost Marshal.


General J. H. Winder commanded the Department of Henrico, headquarters
at Richmond, Va. Many of his detectives were Marylanders, among them
were John Lutz, Wash Goodrich, T. Woodhall, ---- Taylor, and William
Byrne.

I perfectly imitated General John H. Winder's signature to passes which
we used with success. I had a close imitation of his stationery; only an
expert could detect our passes. If he is living I am sure he will pardon
the liberty I took, for it was all in the game.

Following is one of General Winder's genuine passes:


     Headquarters, Department of Henrico,
     Richmond, Va., March 26th, 1864.

     Mrs. James Gordon & (3) children, a citizen of Great Britain,
     having sworn, in good faith, not to reveal, either directly
     or indirectly, any information that may benefit the enemy, is
     hereby permitted to pass beyond the limits of the Confederate
     States, by the route herein designated: and none other.
     Strictly forbid to pass through General Lee's lines. Go by the
     lower Rappahannock.

     This passport is given, subject in all cases to the approval,
     delays and restrictions of military commanders through whose
     lines the persons or person may pass.

     By command of the Secretary of War,

     JNO. H. WINDER,
     General Comdg.

     Hair: light
     Eyes: blue.
     Age: 33.
     Complexion: florid.
     Height: ----


Our sources of information were numerous, as our own officers were
always on duty, and officers in other departments worked in conjunction
with us, thus forming an extended net work.


     Baltimore, April 14, 1864.

     Lt. Smith,

     Sir.--I am very unfortunate in always coming when you are out.
     How has Kremer progressed with the case, anything been done? I
     go to Washington per order of the Secretary of War. I am
     obliged to go to New York within two weeks. I wish the case
     here might be disposed of before I go to New York. Would you
     oblige me by writing P. O. Box 62, Washington?

     Very respy, your obdt servt.,
     E. H. SMITH,
     Special Officer, War Dept.


The following is Kremer's report of progress:


     United States Military Telegraph,
     War Department,
     April 17, 1864.

     H. B. Smith:

     Two men answering description but under different names left
     here for Leonardtown on the 16th. Shall I follow? If so,
     answer and send White.

     W. V. KREMER.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     April 22, 1864.

     Special Order No. 43.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. Arty., will proceed to
     Washington with Mrs. Mary E. Sawyer, Rebel mail carrier, turn
     her over to Supt. of Old Capitol Prison, taking receipt for
     prisoner. Will then deliver to Hon. C. A. Dana, Asst. Secy. of
     War, all the papers in her case, after which he will report
     without delay at these headquarters.

     Quartermasters will furnish transportation.

     By command of Major General Lew Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Col. and Provost Marshal.


Persons were not disturbed in the enjoyment of their opinions so long as
they did not become actively disloyal, but it was my duty to learn who
were disloyal for the purpose of keeping them under surveillance. The
following report I put in to illustrate that character of work:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, Apl. 24, 1864.

     H. B. Smith,
     Lieut. and Chief:

     I have the honor to report that I left Baltimore as per orders
     and proceeded to Reisterstown and stopped at a tavern and was
     accosted by a citizen who told me there were detectives in the
     house, and that he knew I was from the other side, and sent me
     to a woman named Mrs. Hofman, who keeps a hotel there. I went
     to her house and represented myself as a Rebel captain.

     I had been there a short time when Mrs. Hofman took me
     upstairs in a bedroom that was in the back part of the house
     and told me if the detectives came upstairs, to get out of the
     back window and take a horse that she would have saddled ready
     for me; she said she did not care for the horse as the
     citizens would make it up to her.

     The detectives did not come upstairs, but a man named C. L.
     Alder came up to the room and told me to get ready and come
     down stairs, that he had a buggy ready to see me safe and that
     he would die before I should be taken and that he had helped
     many of the Rebels out of just such scrapes by taking them to
     the Rebel lines.

     We went about a mile and a half from Reisterstown and stopped
     at the house of Dr. J. Larsh, and held a conversation with him
     and another man that I could not learn the name of; about the
     best plan for me to adopt was to keep away from the
     detectives; he, the Doctor, told me that he was very busy or
     he would take me safe through himself, but told Alder to take
     me to Charles T. Cockey's, and that he would see me all right.

     We then went to C. T. Cockey's and Alder explained to him who
     I was and Mr. Cockey then introduced me to John C. Brown, of
     Busson Parish, La., and lately manager of the Rebel Secretary
     of War's plantation. Mr. Cockey told me to remain there all
     night and he would see me safe, as he was engaged in the
     business ever since the war commenced, and had run off a great
     many men to the Rebel army; in fact he said that men from all
     parts of the country were sent to him to take across the
     lines, and that he always went into the Rebel lines with them.

     Among the rest that he had taken across was Capt. Simms and
     Capt. Beard and Gus Williamson. He said when General McClellan
     was following Lee into Maryland, a man came to him from
     Washington and gave him the number of men that McClellan had,
     and the direction he was going to take, and that he went to
     Frederick, and gave the information to Lee; and would, he
     said, do so again, if it would do any good to the Southern
     cause.

     Cockey receives papers regularly from Richmond. He also said
     that Capt. Harry Gilmor stops at his house whenever he comes
     over the lines, and that a great many men from the South come
     to his house, and he always helps them. I remained at his
     house all night, and listened to him and John C. Brown cursing
     the government for everything they could think of, and telling
     what they would do if the Rebel army would come into Maryland
     again. C. T. Cockey was also engaged at the time of Lee's raid
     into Pennsylvania; he took men to the Rebel army and was in
     the Rebel lines several times, and gave them all the
     information that he could get hold of that would do them any
     good.

     Mr. J. C. Brown gave me the name of his brother, Benj. F.
     Brown, of Frederick, Md., agent for the Baltimore and Ohio
     Railroad Co., and in charge of the government warehouse which
     he surrendered to the Rebels without endeavoring to destroy
     the goods, or to get them out of the way. J. C. Brown told me
     to go to his brother and let him know who I was and everything
     would be right, and that he would meet me there with a lot of
     recruits, and a Rebel mail to take south.

     The next day, 21st April, I expressed a wish to go into
     Pennsylvania for a few days, and promised to meet Mr. Brown in
     Frederick. Mr. C. T. Cockey took me in his buggy to T. D.
     Cockey of "I" at Ellingown, near Texas, on the Northern
     Central Railroad, where I met T. D. Cockey, of "I".

     T. Deye Cockey and Philip Fendel, who are violent Rebels, say
     they have been running men off ever since the war commenced.
     And T. Deye Cockey says that he has been in the Rebel lines
     several times, and at one time took three recruits from
     Harford County to Hanover Junction, when the Rebels were
     there, and gave them all the information he could.

     Richard Worthington, a very wealthy man, whom I met, offered
     me a horse, and any assistance in his power, to enable me to
     escape, and stated that he had rented his farm out, and was
     endeavoring to get his property fixed in such a way that the
     damned negro government could not confiscate it. He was going
     to leave the damned Yankees and go to Canada, and from there
     to Nassau, and take a vessel and go to the Confederacy, where
     he would be free to do as he pleased. He said he had invested
     a portion of his money in Confederate bonds, and only wished
     he had a chance to invest more in them, as the greenbacks, or
     Yankee shinplasters were not worth a damn.

     These men were under the impression that I was the Rebel Capt.
     Harry Thompson, who, as it was published, had made his escape
     from a Federal prison. I told them I had escaped from the Old
     Capitol.

     Very respy.,
     WM. V. KREMER,
     U. S. D. 8th A. C.



You will notice Mr. Kremer speaks of T. D. Cockey of "I." That is a
common way in Maryland and Virginia to designate the lineage of that T.
D. Cockey, to obviate confounding him with some other T. D. Cockey.

Later on, in July, when the Confederate Army swung around north and east
of Baltimore, the information contained in Mr. Kremer's report became
very valuable to us.




FILE XI.

Mrs. Key Howard, a lineal descendant of the author of "The Star Spangled
Banner," forgetting her honor, prepared to carry a Confederate mail to
"Dixie"--Miss Martha Dungan--Trip on the steam tug "Ella"--Schooner "W. H.
Travers" and cargo captured--James A. Winn, a spy--Trip to Frederick,
Maryland.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, Apl. 28, 1864.

     Special Order No. 48.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, Chief Officer, Secret Service Bureau, 8th
     Army Corps, will proceed to Washington, D. C., in charge of
     prisoners, Miss Martha Dungan and Mrs. Key Howard.

     On arrival you will deliver prisoners to Mr. Wm. P. Wood, in
     charge of Old Capitol Prison and receive receipt for same,
     after which you will report to Hon. C. A. Dana, Asst. Secy. of
     War, deliver all papers in prisoners' cases and return to
     these headquarters without delay.

     Quartermasters will furnish transportation.

     By command of Major General Lew Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. and Provost Marshal.



Here is a sad incident illustrating what Hamlet meant when he said: "To
what base uses may we return, Horatio!" Mrs. Key Howard, a lineal
descendant of Francis Scott Key, author of the "Star Spangled Banner,"
having obtained a personal pass direct from Mr. Lincoln, permitting her
to pass our lines, had actually gathered a Confederate mail, to carry
through, under its protection. Honor of a truly "Blue Blood?"--it was
absent.

The pass was written on a plain card, and read:

     Pass Mrs. Key Howard through the lines.
     A. LINCOLN.

I might have retained the card, but turned it in with the case. Mrs.
Howard, in discussing with me the lack of honor in so abusing a great
favor, became very angry; she said: "Lincoln was vulgar, not a polished
man; he sat with legs crossed while talking to me." Young and
inexperienced as I was, I was so forcibly struck with the shallowness of
_pretended culture_ that I have many times told the story to illustrate.

I have no doubt that Mrs. Howard traded upon her family name with
President Lincoln. He undoubtedly trusted her, believing that she had
honor in her composition.

Blockade running schemes were without limit as to variety or manner of
evasion. Vessels were loaded in Baltimore, clearing for any port.
Trading schooners were loaded, taking shipments for various stores on
the rivers and bays of the Chesapeake Bay; some of the shipments would
be honest transactions, but others would be especially designed for
Confederate consumption.

In April, 1864, the schooner "Wm. H. Travers" (Captain Rice) had been
under surveillance. She was loaded at Baltimore with a mixed cargo, part
of which was of honest shipments. I learned that it was intended to
swamp the vessel within reach of the Confederates, thus permitting them
to take the entire cargo regardless of ownership. I allowed its loading
and permitted the captain to leave port with her, but after she got well
down the stream I overhauled her with the steam tug "Ella," and brought
her back to Baltimore. Her cargo was worth about six thousand dollars.
Mr. Blackstone, of St. Mary's County, was the guilty party.


     Depot, Quartermaster's Office,
     Baltimore, Md., April 30, 1864.

     Captain,
     Steam Tug Ella:

     You will proceed with your tug under the orders of Lt. H. B.
     Smith, and render such service as he may require; after
     performing those duties you will return to Boston wharf and
     report to me.

     Respectfully,
     A. M. CUMMINGS,
     Chief Quartermaster.





     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 4, 1864.

     H. B. Smith,
     Lt. Comdg. Detective Corps.

     Lieutenant.--You will please order the guard in charge of the
     schooner "W. H. Travers" to remove and put her in such
     position at Boston Wharf as will not interfere with the
     vessels in the government service at the wharf, and not to
     interfere in any way with or be in the way of the vessels in
     public service.

     I have addressed a note to the Quartermaster asking to be
     allowed the privilege of unloading the vessel at the wharf.

     Very respy,
     Your obdt. servt,
     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. and Provost Marshal.





     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 11, 1864.

     Lieut. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report that I have completed the
     discharge of the goods on board the schooner "W. H. Travers"
     to the shippers, excepting those named on the enclosed list.

     I enclose herewith all the papers in connection with the case,
     two lists, one of goods not on the manifest, and one of goods
     not permitted, but on the manifest. I also enclose a note from
     Mr. McJilton, clerk of the Custom House, showing that some
     transactions there in this case are not all right.

     Mr. McJilton, the Surveyor of the Port, stated that he would
     not grant a permit for percussion caps, unless by permission
     of the military authorities. The impression at the Custom
     House is that the whole transaction of shipping these goods is
     a fraud, and they do not know what to think of their books and
     papers.

     I have a package of gold leaf in my possession, also two
     Confederate uniforms. Some of the cotton cards I found stored
     away in the cabin, and some away under the stairs. The second
     box on the manifest, shipped by Bolton to R. P. Blackstone,
     contained one box soap, and one box of glass. I have a
     certificate from Bolton to that effect. Mr. Passano, who
     shipped the box containing the glass, denies any knowledge of
     the contents of the box, as it was a cash bill and he had no
     record of it.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lieut Com'd'g, D. C.



We subsequently returned to the innocent shippers their goods, but
confiscated the balance, and also the vessel. I afterwards used the
"Travers" to capture other blockade runners, and quite successfully. A
sailor will recognize a vessel as far as the eye can reach, as surely as
a man can recognize any familiar object. She was known as a
blockade-runner to the fraternity; we used her to crawl upon others.

Any citizen or soldier from the Confederacy found within our lines was
considered a spy; some were executed. To escape such treatment it was
necessary to report to the nearest officer and take the oath of
allegiance. Even then we were not protected, but had to carefully
examine the purported refugee, or deserter, to ascertain their possible
honesty. We captured a great many spies.

An official spy, sent out by the Confederates to perform a specific
duty, had no conscience to answer to, that would prevent his taking our
oath.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore May 3, 1864.

     Lieut. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report that this evening we
     arrested James A. Winn, a member of Co. E. 1st Md. Rebel
     Cavalry, in a house, No. 42 Saratoga street. He was dressed as
     a citizen; under his coat, with the flaps rolled back, was his
     uniform jacket. His coat was buttoned, thus hiding his
     uniform. He wore a black slouch hat.

     I placed the inmates of the house, Mrs. Hall and Miss McAlden
     in arrest, and searched the premises.

     Both of these ladies admitted they were aware of Winn's
     character, and that their sympathies were with the South. I
     found nothing contraband in the house. They live neatly, but
     are evidently poor. Miss McAlden remarked that they were too
     poor to aid the South even if they were so disposed.

     I have a guard in charge of the house awaiting your
     disposition of the case.

     Messrs. Allen and Sampson, clerks at Department Headquarters,
     are, I am informed, boarding at this house.

     I am Colonel,
     Very respy, your obdt. servant,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. Com'd'g D. C.

     The papers and pocketbook that I handed you were found on his
     person.

Any incautious information dropped by Allen or Sampson was likely to be
immediately reported to the Confederate authorities. The Department was
honeycombed with just such points of insecurity, leaks which it was my
duty to stop.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 4, 1864.

     Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Send a good detective to Frederick, Md. He may possibly get
     track there of some of the 1st (Rebel) Maryland Spies. Send
     him on the first train.

     LEW WALLACE,
     Major General Commanding.


The above order is in General Wallace's handwriting. Winn, whom we had
arrested, was of that regiment and we were searching for others.




FILE XII.

F. M. Ellis, chief detective, U. S. Sanitary Commission--Arrest of W. W.
Shore, of the New York "World"--John Gillock from Richmond.



     United States Sanitary Commission,
     244 F Street, Washington, D. C.
     May 7, 1864.

     Lieut. Smith.

     Dear Sir.--Your favor was received in due time and after
     diligent search I am satisfied that no such man is now in
     Washington; however, I shall keep a close lookout, and any
     information worth while, I shall give you at once.

     When you have any business to be done here I shall esteem it a
     favor to assist you.

     Your obdt. servant,
     F. M. ELLIS,
     Chief Detective, U. S. Sanitary Com.


Mr. Ellis's offer of service was without price; in fact there was an
entire absence of what is called "commercialism" in those days. Loyalty
and zeal were the currency. After three and a half years in such
service it was hard for me to get down to a dollars-and-cents business
again.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 8, 1864.

     Lieut. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report that Officer Horner
     arrested William W. Shore, who is, or has been the
     correspondent of the New York World and News. He says he left
     Fort Monroe on Feb. 14, and used to forward Rebel papers to
     New York, until he was ordered away by General Butler.

     Enclosed herewith is the telegram on which he was arrested.

     I am Colonel,

     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lieut. Comdg. D. C.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 14, 1864.

     Special Order No. 40.

     Guard in charge of John Gillock, political prisoner, will
     proceed to Fort McHenry. On arrival you will report to
     Commanding Officer, deliver charge with accompanying papers,
     receive receipt and return to these headquarters without
     delay.

     By command, Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. and Provost Marshal.


I remember this young man very well. He was from Richmond. Subsequently,
after testing his reliability, I made use of him for detective purposes.
He was well acquainted with General Winder's men, hence his value to
us.




FILE XIII.

Ordered to seize all copies of the New York "World," bringing in one of
the great war episodes, the Bogus Presidential Proclamation--Governor
Seymour's queer vigor appears.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 18, 1864.

     Provost Guards,
     or U. S. Detectives.

     Seize all copies of the New York World of this date, that may
     arrive from New York, or that you can find in the city.

     By command, Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. and Provost Marshal.


This order is innocent enough in its appearance, but it is really the
executive action upon a subject almost as vital in its effects as any of
the great battles of the war.

Under date of May 17th a proclamation, calling for four hundred thousand
more troops, purporting to be from President Lincoln, was issued, and
was published in certain papers; among them the New York "World". The
following is a copy:


     Executive Mansion, May 17, 1864.

     Fellow Citizens of the United States:

     In all seasons of exigency it becomes a nation carefully to
     scrutinize its line of conduct, humbly to approach the throne
     of Grace, and meekly to implore forgiveness, wisdom, and
     guidance.

     For reasons known only to Him, it has been decreed that this
     country should be the scene of unparalleled outrage, and this
     nation the monumental sufferer of the nineteenth century. With
     a heavy heart, but an undiminished confidence in our cause, I
     approach the performance of a duty rendered imperative by my
     sense of weakness before Almighty God and of justice to the
     people.

     It is not necessary that I should tell you that the first
     Virginia campaign, under Lieut. General Grant, in whom I have
     every confidence, and whose courage and fidelity the people do
     well to honor, is virtually closed. He has conducted his great
     enterprise with discreet ability. He has crippled their
     strength and defeated their plans.

     In view, however, of the situation in Virginia, the disaster
     at Red river, the delay at Charleston, and the general state
     of the country, I, Abraham Lincoln, do hereby recommend that
     Thursday, the 26th day of May, A.D., 1864, be solemnly set
     apart throughout these United States as a day of fasting,
     humiliation and prayer.

     Deeming, furthermore, that the present condition of public
     affairs presents an extraordinary occasion, and in view of the
     pending expiration of the service of (100,000) one hundred
     thousand of our troops, I, Abraham Lincoln, President of the
     United States, by virtue of the power vested in me by the
     Constitution and the laws, have thought fit to call forth, and
     hereby do call forth the citizens of the United States between
     the ages of (18) eighteen and (45) forty-five years, to the
     aggregate number of (400,000) four hundred thousand, in order
     to suppress the existing rebellious combinations, and to cause
     the due execution of the laws.

     And, furthermore, in case any State or number of States shall
     fail to furnish by the fifteenth day of June next their
     assigned quotas, it is hereby ordered that the same be raised
     by immediate and peremptory draft. The details for this object
     will be communicated to the State authorities through the War
     Department.

     I appeal to all loyal citizens to favor, facilitate, and aid
     this effort to maintain the honor, the integrity, and the
     existence of the National Union, and the perpetuity of popular
     government.

     In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand, and caused
     the seal of the United States to be affixed. Done at the city
     of Washington, this 17th day of May, one thousand, eight
     hundred and sixty-four, and of the independence of the United
     States the eighty-eighth.

     ABRAHAM LINCOLN.

     By the President:
     WILLIAM H. SEWARD, Secretary of State.


This was immediately contradicted by the Government, as follows:


     To the Public.

     Department of State, Washington, D. C.
     May 18, 1864.

     A paper purporting to be a proclamation of the President,
     countersigned by the Secretary of State, and bearing date of
     the 17th inst. is reported to this Department as having
     appeared in the New York "World" of this date. This paper is
     an absolute forgery. No proclamation of this kind has been
     made, or proposed to be made, by the President, or issued, or
     proposed to be issued, by the State Department, or any other
     Department of the Government.

     WM. H. SEWARD,
     Secretary of State.


Under the head "Freedom of Press" Appleton's Encyclopedia for 1864
gives twelve columns of space to this matter. The excitement resulted in
the greatest distress. Gold advanced four or five per cent., a panic
prevailed, and great calamity, of course, followed.

Soon thereafter we seized every telegraph instrument and office record
in the Department, and arrested the officers and clerks. I became so
tired with the extraordinary labor and loss of sleep, that I actually
fell asleep while standing at a desk in one of the offices. I had heard
of such experiences, but had believed it impossible.

The object of seizing the newspapers, telegraphic instruments and
records, was to prevent the disaster that must follow the further
spreading of the impression created by the bogus message, that our
Government was in dire distress.

Copperhead conspirators and Confederate agents here and in Canada, had
been and were at work to undermine us by every means. Distress to us,
however brought about, was their purpose. They sought to create in the
minds of the masses the idea that the war was a failure.

These conspirators had tried to use the conscription, in 1863, to
disrupt us, and they were again trying to scare the people with a
prospective draft, in 1864, to unsettle the public mind before the
Presidential election, then soon to occur (in November).

Governor Seymour relentlessly pursued General Dix, seeking to have him
indicted for arresting (he claimed) illegally, persons party to the
fraud. But the grand jury refused to indict him. Seymour claimed that he
(Seymour) was trying to preserve _personal liberty_, from the general
government's encroachments, which was also his attitude in
Vallandigham's case in 1863.

The New York "World" and "The Journal of Commerce" were the newspapers
involved in the affair, but the odium should not attach to the present
papers.

The bogus proclamation spread faster and further than the denial of it
possibly could.




FILE XIV.

Arrest of F. W. Farlin and A. H. Covert--The Pulpit not loyal, reports on
Rev. Mr. Harrison and Rev. Mr. Poisal--Comical reports on a religious
conference and a camp meeting--Seizure of Kelly & Piet's store with its
contraband kindergarten contents--Sloop "R. B. Tennis" one of my fleet,
and an account of a capture of tobacco, etc.--Arrest of Frederick Smith,
Powell Harrison and Robert Alexander--Harry Brogden.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 21, 1864.

     Lt. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report the arrest of A. H.
     Covert and F. W. Farlin, as per order annexed.

     I have it from a reliable source that Mr. Alexander Civin went
     to Philadelphia this morning, I therefore telegraphed to the
     Provost Marshal there, for his arrest, and to send him under
     guard to this place.

     I am, Colonel,

     Very respy. your obdt. servant,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lieut. Comdg. D. C.


To discover persons engaged in creating sentiments of disloyalty, or in
pandering to such sentiments, was a part of our duty; the pulpit was not
always loyal.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 22, 1864.

     Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report in regard to the sermons
     of the Reverends Harrison and Poisal: Neither preached a
     political sermon nor dealt in any way with the affairs of the
     country, except in one or two instances Mr. Harrison spoke of
     the present deplorable condition of affairs in this country
     and seemed to be very much downcast in both preaching and
     praying. He (Mr. H.) did not utter one word of prayer for our
     President, Army or Government.

     I know of Mr. Poisal's being a correspondent of some of the
     Rebel prisoners in Fort McHenry.

     At both sermons they had very slim audiences.

     I am, Colonel,

     Very respy. your obdt. servant,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lieut. and Chief.


On one occasion it was my duty to attend a State conference in one of
the churches; it was rather slimly attended. We were invited to come
nearer the altar, and I, with the rest, complied.

We were then asked to in turn arise and announce what district in the
State we represented, and report on its condition. I was embarrassed,
but kept my eye on the ceiling or on the floor. I presume my dumbness
excused me. The closing hymn was No. 701, on page 417, and the first
verse was:

    "Jesus, great Shepherd of the sheep,
      To thee for help we fly,
    Thy little flock in safety keep,
      For O! the wolf is nigh."

They were correct in the guess, about the wolf, but I did not say so out
loud.

A very laughable report was made to me by one of my officers who was
sent into the country to a meeting in the woods. This officer knew more
about guns than about religious meetings. He reported nothing disloyal
was said, but urged the necessity of going there next Sunday, as they
said: "they would have some big guns there then." The officer was used
to guns, and so he assumed that they meant cannons, whereas they were
referring to popular speakers who were to be present there the following
Sunday.

General Wallace was just the man to administer the affairs of a
department so complex in sentiment. No better illustration can be
furnished than the following circular letter issued to the churches at a
time when the public mind was so wrought up by the assassination of the
President. It is too fine a document to be lost. To the General's memory
I insert it here:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, Md., April 19, 1865.

     Circular.

     The conduct of certain clergymen in this city has in some
     instances, been so positively offensive to loyal people, and,
     in others, of such doubtful propriety, to say nothing about
     taste, as to have become a cause of bad feeling with many
     well-disposed citizens.

     As you must be aware, the recent tragedy, so awful in
     circumstance, and nationally so calamitous, has, as it well
     might, inflamed the sensibilities of men and women who esteem
     their loyalty only a little less sacred than their religion.

     In this state of affairs you will undoubtedly perceive the
     wisdom of avoiding, on your own part, everything in the least
     calculated to offend the sensibilities mentioned. You will
     also perceive the propriety of requiring members of your
     congregation, male and female, who may be so unfortunate as
     to have been sympathizers with the rebellion, not to bring
     their politics into the church.

     So profound is my reverence for your truly sacred profession,
     that, in the sincere hope of avoiding any necessity for
     interfering with the exercise of your office, I choose this
     method of respectfully warning you of the existing state of
     public feeling, and calling upon you, in the name of our
     common Savior, to lend me your influence and energetic
     assistance, to be exerted in every lawful way, to soothe
     irritations and calm excitements. You know that what I thus
     request I have the power to enforce. You ought also to know
     that, to save the community from the dishonor and consequences
     of a public outbreak, it would be my duty to exercise all the
     power I possess, without regard to persons or congregations.

     If you feel that you cannot yourself comply with this
     fraternal solicitation, or that you are unable to control
     evil-disposed members of your flock, I suggest that it is
     better, far better, in every respect, that you should close
     the doors of your church for a season at least.

     I have no fear that the kindliness of my purpose in thus
     communicating with you will be mistaken; and that you may not
     understand yourself as accused, or specially selected from the
     mass of your professional brethren, you are informed that a
     copy of this note has been or will be addressed to every
     clergyman in the city.

     Very respectfully,
     Your friend,
     LEW WALLACE,
     Major General Commanding.


The firm referred to in the following two documents was one of the
largest stationers in the city. Their reputation for disloyalty was well
understood by us. An important part of their business was the
dissemination of articles which tended to have the kindergarten effect
of schools of disloyalty.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, Md., May 23, 1864.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith.

     Sir.--We have the honor to report that this afternoon we went
     into the book store of Kelly & Piet, No. 174 W. Baltimore
     street, and told them that we were book agents on the
     Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, and had just arrived from
     Frederick City. We asked Mr. Piet if he had any books of
     Abraham Lincoln Trials; he hesitated for a short time, then
     told us that he had. We then asked him if he had any of the
     Life of Jackson; he said he had a few, and said he would send
     and get us some more in half an hour. He then showed us some
     different books and also some playing cards with the
     different Rebel Generals on the face of them, which he offered
     to sell at $4.50 per dozen: also some writing paper and
     envelopes with the Rebel Flag on, which we bought and you will
     find the bill enclosed.

     We are, Lieut., your obdt. servants,
     I. W. STERN and
     GEO. R. REDMAN, U. S. D.

     The bill attached was $34.24.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, May 23, 1864.

     Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report that I this day seized
     and searched the store of Kelly & Piet, No. 174 West Baltimore
     street, and enclosed hand you a list of contraband articles
     seized. I also enclose the report of the detectives.

     Mr. Piet states that he has been arrested before on a similar
     charge.

     I brought to our office Messrs. Kelly & Piet, but did not lock
     them up. I have the key of their store in my possession.

     I am Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servant,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lieut. Comdg. D. C.

       List:

     90 Assortments of photos. 212 total.
     19 Vols. Morgan and His Men.
     2 Vols. Life Stonewall Jackson.
     1 Vol. 1st Year of the War.
     4 Vols. 2nd Year of the War.
     97 Pamphlets Trial Abraham Lincoln.
     2 Vols. Rebel Rhymes.
     4 Vols. Three months in Southern States.
     5 Vols. Confed. Reports of Battles.
     3 Vols. Southern History of the War.
     1 Package note paper, Rebel flag.
     1 Package envelopes, Rebel flag.
     8 Steel Engravings, Rebel Generals.
     57 Packages Playing Cards, Confed.


All of this was inflammable matter.

The Captain Bailey, spoken of in the succeeding report, was the same
Bailey that I captured in March previous. I had found him to be an
excellent sailing master, and a man whom I could trust. The sloop "R. B.
Tennis" was one of my fleet.


     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, May 28, 1864.

     Major H. Z. Hayner,
     Provost Marshal.

     Major.--I have the honor to submit the following brief report
     of the seizure made by sloop "R. B. Tennis," Capt. Bailey,
     with three detective officers on board.

     Enclosed I hand you report of Detective Lewis, who was placed
     in charge, which report is not quite so full as it should be,
     covering all remarks and acknowledgments made by the
     prisoners.

     I will state that they said several times that they were
     blockade runners by occupation.

     Enclosed is the statement made to me by Fred. E. Smith, who, I
     think, is rather faint hearted in his profession.

     Harrison acknowledged to have run the blockade several times,
     but don't seem willing to talk much, as he thinks "he might
     implicate some near and dear friends," he has talked a deal to
     some of the officers, whose statements I shall get when they
     return to the city.

     Alexander refuses to talk, but I shall be able to get it all
     out of them soon.

     I received from Detective Lewis the following which he states
     was all that was taken from the parties:

     Gold and silver, $188.75.
     U. S. Currency, $159.00.
     Southern States money, $190.00.
     Northern States money, $1.00.
     1 gold watch.
     1 silver watch.
     23 large and 2 small boxes tobacco.
     1 large yawl boat.

     I have stored the tobacco in the store of W. W. Janney, a
     receipt for which is annexed. The boat is in charge of guard
     on board the schooner "Travers."

     I will get fuller statements from all the detectives as soon
     as possible, and give to you. The prisoners are Fred. E.
     Smith, Powell Harrison and Robert Alexander.

     I am, Major,
     Very respy. your obdt. servant,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lieut. and Chief.


Attached to this report is a memorandum of statements made to me:


     Fredk. Smith:

     "I am from Northumberland County, Va. I left Northumberland
     County on Wednesday last. I was with Mr. Harrison and Mr.
     Alexander, no one else with us. I am a citizen. I have been
     about eight months in Va., all of that time in Northumberland
     County. I was formerly from Caroline Co., Md. I started to
     come North for clothes and things. I had some orders for goods
     for families in Northumberland County, which I threw overboard
     after we were hailed, also had twenty odd boxes tobacco.

     Mr. Harrison has lived in Northumberland County since I have
     been there, but has been north of the Potomac three or four
     times.

     I don't know much, of Mr. Alexander, except that he came from
     Maryland with Mr. Harrison on one of his (Harrison's) trips.

     I came over as a passenger with Harrison and Alexander. Some
     of the tobacco belongs to me. I had about $250 in gold, and
     about $100 or more in greenbacks, and $50 or $60 in Virginia
     money. Had no particular point of destination. I was to pay
     Harrison and Alexander $200 for my fare. I think they intended
     to land on the Eastern shore, Md., or perhaps on Western
     shore. I think Harrison and Alexander are blockade runners by
     profession. They intended to return to Virginia. I think we
     were about going into Choptank river. I think at about James
     Point.

     I started for Little River, Virginia. I think another party of
     two or three started at about the same time; they had some
     tobacco. I did not know their names; they were in a little
     sloop, dark color. I saw them again about Point Lookout. I
     think perhaps they had about two or three thousand pounds. The
     sloop and sail looked rather old. It was Wednesday night that
     I last saw the sloop. I think Mr. Harrison was over about
     three or four weeks since."



     Powell Harrison:

     "Northumberland County, Virginia. I am a farmer, I have lived
     there about three or four years. I have been north of the
     Potomac three times since the War."



     Robert Alexander:
     (Made no statement.)


You will notice the brevity of Harrison's statement, and that Alexander
made no statement. Alexander and one other man, named Bollman (if I
remember right) were the only ones who defeated me in my efforts to
learn something about them from their own lips.

The tobacco was best Virginia plug, worth about one dollar per pound
(about three thousand dollars' worth). This little yawl (with a dirty
sail), worth about twenty or thirty dollars, was earning two hundred
dollars in one night in carrying Smith and his tobacco over.

As I said before, the Potomac was patrolled by gunboats, and the north
shore was garrisoned at many points with troops, yet these little
fellows would creep right in between them. My plan was to go equipped as
they were, and meet them on their level.

We did not consider the neck between the Potomac and the Rappahannock as
the enemy's country, yet the Confederates had a signal station on the
Potomac all through the war; it was in charge of Harry Brogden, whom I
knew. When I get along in my stories to June 30th, I will show you how
well it was understood in the Confederacy.




FILE XV.

General pass for the schooner "W. H. Travers"--Trip down the bay after
blockade runners and mail carriers--Gillock and Lewis, two of my officers,
captured by Union pickets--Commodore Foxhall A. Parker--Potomac flotilla--
Arrest of J. B. McWilliams--My watch gone to the mermaids--The ignorance
of "poor white trash."


To save delay in getting out of the harbor the following request was
made:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps,
     Baltimore, June 9, 1864.

     Capt. Cornell,
     Commanding Revenue Cutter,
     Baltimore Harbor.

     Captain.--I have the honor to request that you permit the
     schooner "W. H. Travers" under command of Lieut. Smith, to
     pass your vessel without Custom Clearance. She is employed in
     the Secret Service Bureau, 8th A.C.

     Respy, your most obdt. servt.,
     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. and Provost Marshal.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, June 9, 1864.

     Special Order No. 76.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith with detachment of Secret Service Corps,
     will proceed on schooner "W. H. Travers" to such points on
     Eastern and Western shore of Maryland, Eastern and Western
     shore of Virginia, and Southern and Northern shore of the
     Potomac river, as he deems proper and necessary to further the
     instructions of the Government.

     By command of Major General Wallace,
     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. and Provost Marshal.


The chain of war vessels extending along the Potomac under the command
of Commodore Foxhall A. Parker, he having jurisdiction of the waters,
was known as the Potomac flotilla.

When I attempted to approach the Commodore on his flag ship I was, in my
raiment, a sight. The marines viewed me with curiosity. Upon introducing
myself to the Commodore, he laughed. His wife being present, also
enjoyed a laugh at my appearance. No "Johnny" ever looked more
dilapidated. I presented my orders for the Commodore's endorsement.


     Headquarters, Cavalry Detachment,
     District of St. Mary's.
     Leonardtown, Md., June 16, 1864.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith,
     Chief Detective on board
       schooner "W. H. Travers."

     Some of my scouts last night arrested two men in a boat at the
     head of Britton's Bay, who claim to be Government detectives,
     and under your charge. If such is the case I desire that you
     will in some manner identify them, as they have nothing with
     them which would lead me to suppose them to be such.

     These men give their names as John Gillock, and J. W. Lewis.

     I shall hold these men in confinement until I am fully
     satisfied of the truth of their statements.

     I am, Sir, very respy, yours, &c.,
     F. W. DICKERSON,
     Lt. Comdg.


These were our boys and they were set at liberty of course. The
Lieutenant was doing perfectly right, as our appearance and conduct was
suspicious. Our plans always were to appear to be blockade-runners, so
we never carried on our persons any evidence of our true character. We
carried forged Confederate documents when we were going where it was
desirable. We could imitate General Winder's signature to passes,
defying detection, and we had the same kind of paper, a light brown.
The Confederate Government had poor stationery.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, June 23, 1864.

     Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report the following on the trip
     on the schooner "W. H. Travers" down the Bay, and on the
     Potomac river. I seized about three boxes tobacco (three
     hundred dollars) on the farm of Mr. Evans, Smith's Creek, St.
     Mary's County, Md, which he said was placed in his hay stack
     by some blockade runners.

     I got from the Provost Marshal at Leonardtown, St. Mary's
     County, the canoe which was seized by Detective White sometime
     since.

     In the Wicomico river, near its mouth, we seized a small yawl
     containing five men and one woman, who were on their way to
     Virginia. Wm. H. Hayden owned the boat and was to receive
     fifty dollars each for conveying the passengers over; he is
     engaged in this business constantly. About one week since he
     carried over two persons, one a Doctor; they were in the woods
     a day or so before they started.

     Hayden has been carrying a mail to and fro. A small package
     of letters with a stone attached was found in the boat and I
     presume they were in Mr. Hayden's charge, as in the letters
     Mr. Hayden is mentioned as "carrying letters."

     Wm. R. Horton, a passenger, was formerly in the Confederate
     army; said he was going to return; says he applied in this
     office for a position a short time since.

     Wm. Gellatly and wife, passengers, were making their way to
     Columbia, S. C., Mr. Gellatly says he came within our lines
     early in April last, but did not report to any Provost
     Marshal, as he did not wish to bind himself not to return. He
     claims to be a British subject. They had a small trunk and
     some other baggage. Both Gellatly and Horton say that they
     made arrangements with Hayden in Chaptico, St. Mary's County.

     I found in the trunk a small revolver. This arrest was made by
     Detectives Horner and Stern, who were posted as a picket near
     the mouth of the Wicomico.

     There were two more men in the boat who succeeded in making
     their escape in the dark, and whom all the other passengers
     state were Confederate officers who had escaped from Point
     Lookout, named Bruce and Howell. I am informed that one of
     these parties left his horse with a Mr. Dent in Chaptico.

     The yawl boat in which they were was very poor, worth about
     five or six dollars, and I did not bring it to Baltimore as it
     was not worth towing.

     I took from Mr. Hayden a small gold watch. I also arrested Mr.
     J. B. McWilliams on the charge of aiding Rebels, contraband
     traders, &c., and of defrauding the Government. All of which I
     will state in a separate report.

     On the trip we have labored under many disadvantages. The
     vessel is in no way fit for the business, being too large and
     a miserable sailer. We could not get about as we ought, we had
     but one day's fair wind during the whole trip. We started from
     Wicomico river on Sunday at 3 P. M., and arrived in Baltimore
     this P. M.

     Mrs. Gellatly states that she tried to persuade her husband to
     remain North but he would not and she was compelled to
     accompany him. She came to this country about six months
     since.

     I could not get permission from Commodore Parker to enter
     Virginia on account of the raid then being carried on, but he
     said under any other circumstances he would give permission
     and let a gunboat accompany me.

     Hoping that my action in these matters will meet with your
     approval,

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. and Chief.




     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, June 24, 1864.

     Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to make the following report in the
     case of J. B. McWilliams of Charles County, Md., whom I
     arrested and brought to this prison.

     While anchored in the Wicomico river on the trip down on the
     schooner "W. H. Travers," W. H. Seward and myself took a small
     yawl which we had captured from Wm. H. Hayden in attempting to
     go South, and rowed up the Potomac river as far as Cobb creek.
     We were hailed by McWilliams as we neared the shore at this
     point, he saying, "I used to own that boat," asked us where we
     were from. I refused to answer, but he said, "I am all right,
     you need not fear me." We landed and went up into the bushes.
     He advised us to remove the mufflers from the oars as they
     could be seen from the gunboats and they would know
     immediately that we were from Virginia. He informed us where
     the soldiers were posted and how to avoid them, and advised us
     to leave our boat on his shore as it was known and would not
     be suspected, informed us of Grant's move on Fort Darling,
     &c.; called our attention to an article in the Baltimore
     Gazette which he said "done him good," and would do any
     Southerner good.

     He said he wanted to send some copies to Virginia as he knew
     they would be so highly appreciated; wanted to write by us to
     his son who was in the Confederate army; said he traded yawl
     boat with Hayden about one week previous, when Hayden was on
     his way to Virginia with two men, one of them a Doctor; said
     he talked with these two men nearly all one day, and sent a
     letter to his son by Hayden. He had sent his son a large
     revolver and wanted to sell me a double barrelled gun to take
     back with me to Virginia; said he had a full set of cavalry
     accoutrements that he had been keeping, awaiting a chance to
     saddle up and fight the Yankees.

     He said he saddled his horse and started for Frederick to
     assist when Jackson made his first raid but he could not get
     through the lines. He said many times that the people of
     Maryland only wanted a chance to turn on the Yankees. He said
     Dr. Coon of Washington had a yacht in which he carried over as
     many as three hundred to join the Confederates, from near his
     place; he said he was much afraid of his negroes as they would
     go and tell the Yanks all that was going on; he advised me to
     watch the negroes especially on Sunday and advised us to
     scatter about the woods.

     He brought us three meals in the woods. He whipped one of his
     negroes because he threatened to inform the Provost Marshal
     that we were there; he suggested to me the idea to lash one of
     his negroes down and carry him to Virginia; he said there were
     but four or five loyal men in the County.

     Said he was caught once by the Yankee gunboats and they found
     seventeen thousand dollars worth of contraband goods in his
     cellar, but that he had a frolic at his house, invited all the
     ladies about there and the Officers of the gunboats and thus
     this was all hushed up; said he could bribe any Yankee.

     He said at one time he stored $25,000 worth of contraband
     goods in his buildings and aided in getting them away but was
     not caught.

     He said that about three weeks since, two Confederate
     soldiers, came across the river and secreted themselves in the
     woods; he went to see them; one of his slaves reported the
     case to the Provost Marshal, who sent a guard to make the
     arrest. He saw the guard approach. The Confederates were
     scared; he told them to keep cool and when the guards came
     near to say they wanted to know where the Provost Marshal was,
     to say they were refugees and wanted to take the oath; said he
     came near being caught but the Yanks were not smart enough;
     said he thought these men had returned to Dixie by this time.

     He said the Government had attempted to confiscate his son
     Frank's one-third interest in some property there which was
     worth about ten thousand dollars, so he got Mr. Higgs, Post
     Master at Newport, Charles County, to make out an account
     against Frank amounting to about ten thousand dollars and sue
     the estate; he went security to pay the amount in five years
     and thus got the property in his hands.

     I seized from his house the double barrelled gun and the horse
     equipments.

     I arrested Mr. McWilliams and brought him to this city as I
     thought him too dangerous a man to occupy the position he does
     on the Maryland shore. His remarks were made voluntarily
     without my making much effort, apparently, to ascertain his
     actions.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


I remember the following incident which occurred on this trip: I tried
to qualify as a deck hand. Leaning over the vessel's waist, I tried the
difficult trick of scooping up a pail of water while the boat was in
motion, and while so engaged my watch slipped out of my pocket, and into
the water. We were then just below Fort Carroll, mid-stream. The watch
is there yet, unless some mermaid has carried it off. I would not have
lost it had I not divested it of the chain, to help appearances. On
these trips one could not discover that we were not ordinary helpers
"before the mast."

Many of the crews on such vessels were of the class called by the
negroes "poor white trash," and they were ignorant beyond belief; to
test which I once pointed out land to the east as being Ireland, to
which they assented. The captains and mates, of course, were not so
ignorant.

A strange picture presented itself to me one moonlight night. We were
laying in St. Mary's river when a cunna (canoe) came along side, and
three or four black men crawled upon our deck and hid themselves down
behind the boat's waist. They wanted to go away with us, telling a
pitiful tale of oppression, but slavery was yet in vogue there, and so
we forced them to go away home.




FILE XVI.

Captain Bailey makes a capture--Sinclair introduces me (as Shaffer) to Mr.
Plyle.


The following report was of another capture, by Captain Bailey:



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, June 29, 1864.

     Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report that Capt. Wm. Bailey
     returned to this city this morning bringing three prisoners,
     and their skiff. They were first seen near James Point, and
     afterwards were taken on board the schooner "Thos. H.
     Northern," Capt. Wells; from which schooner Bailey took them
     along with Capt. Wells, and brought them to this office. I had
     a conversation with each one separately and then confined
     them.

     George Hull stated that he was in the 9th Virginia Cavalry,
     from which he deserted some three months since; that he has
     been in the Confederacy since 1862; that he ran the blockade
     into Virginia on the schooner "Sarah Elizabeth" from
     Philadelphia, loaded with an assorted cargo, and landed in the
     Rappahannock river; that he did not know he was going to run
     the blockade when he started. A man named Edwards, commanded
     the schooner.

     Nicholas McKee states that he was a member of the Home Guards
     in King and Queen County, Virginia. He went into the
     Confederacy by the same vessel and at the same time with Hull,
     but did not know she was to run the blockade when she started.
     Neither Hull or McKee know who loaded the schooner; both deny
     all knowledge of their destination when they left
     Philadelphia.

     Samuel Lewis was a member of the 9th Cavalry, Virginia. He
     states that he ran the blockade about June or July, 1863. He
     sailed from New York on a sloop with fifteen or twenty barrels
     of whiskey on board. They anchored under Ragged Point,
     Virginia, on the Potomac river, where they unloaded the
     whiskey. For some reason the men on the sloop got frightened
     and left him on the beach. He does not know the name of the
     sloop nor the name of the Captain, nor any person on board,
     and he, like the other two, did not know that the vessel
     intended to run the blockade.

     It seems strange that none of them knew their destination
     when they shipped, and it also seems strange that after
     sailing from New York to the Potomac river, Wells had not
     learned the name of the vessel which he was on, or the names
     of any of his companions. He states also that he was the man
     sent ashore in Virginia, to do the business, but says he had
     to do it as it was orders from his Captain.

     I have sent two detectives to see the schooner on which they
     were found, and to examine the cargo as it is discharged.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


The following letter to Mr. Plyle, introducing me as Mr. Shaffer, was
the commencement of negotiations for the purchase of a lot of
Confederate bonds, which purchase was consummated in the following
November. For an account of which please refer to my report of the
arrest of Brewer and Pittman, November 24th.


     Baltimore, June 30, 1864.

     Mr. Plyle.

     Sir.--I expect to go to Norfolk or Richmond to-day. I send my
     partner, Mr. Shaffer, who will hand you this, to talk with you
     about purchasing your bonds. He will answer as well as I in
     the matter.

     I will be back about July 10th.

     Yours respy.,
     SINCLAIR.

     To Col. Plyle,
     Franklin House.





FILE XVII.

A Confederate letter.


The following discloses how perfectly the Confederate government
understood the travelled route through the lines. It was by way of their
signal station on the Potomac, that was their official channel. I was
determined to break it up.

Westmorland and Northumberland counties, Virginia, are the south shore
of the Potomac river. Mosby, or at least part of his command, covered
this country.


     Confederate States of America,
     War Department, Ordnance Bureau,
     Richmond, June 30, 1864.

     Captain:

     The bearer, Mr. White, is confided in as trustworthy. He
     desires information as to the best mode of proceeding to
     Maryland.

     I will thank you to give him any assistance you can
     consistently.

     Mr. W. is engaged in procuring stores for the Government,
     through the blockade.

     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     J. GORGAS, Col.
     Chief of Ordnance.

     To Capt. Barker,
     In charge Signal Corps.
     Approved,
     By order,
     J. A. Campbell,
     A. Sec. War.
     July 1, 1864.


This has endorsed on it:


     Signal Bureau,
     Richmond, July 1, 1864.

     The officers in charge of Signal Station on Potomac, will
     furnish Mr. White any assistance in their power, in crossing
     into Maryland.

     WM. M. BARKER,
     Capt. in ch. Signal Corps.





FILE XVIII.

Confederate army invades Maryland in 1864--General Wallace's masterly
defence of Washington--Trip outside our pickets--Confederate General
Bradley Johnson and Colonel Harry Gilmor--The Ishmael Day episode--Uncle
Zoe--Arrest of Judge Richard Grason--Report on certain "disloyals."


About this time our efforts were pointed in another direction, for a
portion of Lee's Army had been detached and had begun the invasion of
Maryland (June 28, 1864).

General Wallace gathered up his scattered troops and prepared to meet
the enemy at Monocacy. He was not well matched to meet them, but
strongly resisted them long enough to enable Grant to reinforce
Washington, and, strategically speaking, Wallace's fight saved
Washington.

Appleton's Encyclopedia, page 130, under army operations 1864, says:

     "Meantime the enemy after tearing up some railroad from
     Frederick to Baltimore, sent their main body south of it and
     detached a cavalry force towards the Northern Central Railroad
     from Harrisburg, Pa., to Baltimore. This Cavalry expedition
     overran Maryland, 25 miles of the Northern Central Railroad
     was destroyed, and on Monday the 11th (July), a force appeared
     on the Baltimore, Wilmington & Phila. Road and captured and
     set on fire the trains at Magnolia station, seventeen miles
     south of Havre de Grace.

     In one train Major General Franklin was captured but
     afterwards made his escape. Some damage was done to the track
     and Gunpowder Bridge was partially burned. The Cavalry heavily
     loaded with plunder came within six miles of Baltimore, then
     turning southward they joined the force near Washington which
     had been sent in that direction to guard against surprise;
     part of it halted before Fort Stevens on 17th street."

I remained in Baltimore until July 14th, when I started out to scout the
country east and north of the city.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, July 14, 1864.

     Pass H. B. Smith and George W. Thompson on Department business
     out and in Picket Lines at all hours.

     By command Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Pro. Marshal.


General Wallace had been compelled (by Lee's invasion) to take away to
Monocacy nearly all of his troops, and so we had to appeal to the
citizens for the defence of the city. All loyal citizens were appealed
to and they responded nobly; they made, however, a motley army, but
patriotic to the core, they vigorously performed their duty.

I had a serious experience with them when I tried to get inside our
picket lines. We scoured the country quite thoroughly.

I find among my papers no copy of a written report except the one I find
endorsed on and in connection with the report on Judge Grason's arrest
on July 24th, which is the following:

     "When Bradley Johnson's Brigade, and Harry Gilmor's Cavalry
     was in Maryland, and after they destroyed the Gunpowder Bridge
     on the Philadelphia, Wilmington and Baltimore Railroad, one of
     my detectives named Thompson and myself went out past the
     Pickets on the Philadelphia Pike as far as the Rechabite
     Church and then changed onto the Belair road, where I hailed a
     man named ---- ----, who was afterwards caught with a wagon
     loaded with contraband goods intended for the Rebs. He talked
     to me for some time. I told him that I wanted to get to see
     Harry Gilmor, that I was from New York, and that if Gilmor
     remained long enough in Maryland, I could get some recruits
     from New York.

     This man offered me money to aid me in this glorious
     enterprise. He told me that if I would go over to Towsontown
     and see Richard Grason, that he (Grason) could tell me just
     where Gilmor could be seen. This man also told me about the
     man that Ishmael Day shot.

     We left him and went over to Towsontown, where we had dinner
     and then went into Baltimore, after being arrested by (our)
     pickets almost every mile.

     That evening we again started out for Towsontown; at
     Govanstown we were surrounded by about ten or twelve of the
     13th Md., who lowered their pieces at us and demanded us to
     dismount; Thompson did so immediately, but I used more time.
     They said they had been waiting for us for some time. This of
     course was an error; finally we were released and proceeded on
     our way. We could not find Grason.

     On our way back we were again arrested by some of the Citizen
     Cavalry, but got back into Baltimore at about 2 A. M."

(From the Baltimore "American," July 12, 1864.)

     "Major Harry Gilmor, who, from a misguided leniency, if not
     something worse, was released from capture by General Wool,
     during his administration of affairs in this Department, was
     the commander of the Rebels who have worked so much
     destruction of property in this immediate vicinity.

     After his successful plundering operations in Carroll and
     Frederick Counties he concluded to visit his own county and
     receive the congratulations of his friends and admirers. On
     Sunday he spent the day and evening at Glen Ellen, above
     Towsontown, at the residence of his father, Mr. Robert Gilmor,
     and no doubt a very pleasant time was had.

     A force of about three hundred of his companions are said to
     have been encamped in that vicinity. On Sunday a delegation of
     five visited Towsontown and the joy of the Rebel males and
     females of that neighborhood is said to be beyond description.
     Mr. Richard Grason who frequently performs the office of
     special Judge of the County, was unable to restrain his
     emotion and kindly feelings to his friends, and took them to
     his dwelling where they feasted and whiskeyed to their hearts
     content."

Judge Grason in trying to escape arrest for his disloyal acts in
connection with Harry Gilmor, tried to use a stolen pass issued to an
assumed name, "Jenkins." I remember well my lecture to him on the
heinousness of his offence. It was picturesque, a boy chiding a judge.
But it was due him.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, July 24, 1864.

     Lieut. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report the arrest yesterday of
     Judge Grason of Towsontown.

     I questioned him; he stated that a good friend of his whose
     name he refused to give, procured a blank pass and he filled
     in the name, residence and destination and attempted to pass
     on it.

     I asked him the reason for assuming the name "Jenkins." He
     said he understood he was to be arrested and did not want to
     be detained. He said he received a letter from his home (near
     Queenstown), stating that his father was very poorly, and
     wanted to see him.

     I asked him where the letter was. He said he threw it in the
     stove and burned it up. I asked if it was in his kitchen stove
     at home. He said no, that it was in his office stove. I asked
     him if he had a fire in his office stove (July). He said no,
     but that he set fire to the letter from his pipe that he was
     smoking.

     He said he first heard he was to be arrested about the 11th,
     or 12th inst., and acknowledged to having kept out of the way
     as he did not want to be arrested then, as it would be some
     time, probably, before he could get a hearing, on account of
     the pressure of business on the Military Authorities.

     He is everywhere known as being a bitter Rebel. He
     acknowledged to have spoken to Harry Gilmor while in
     Towsontown, but said it was only to get him to save some
     property.

     He said he would rather receive the punishment than to allow
     the friend who gave him the pass to be punished.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


The Ishmael Day incident was quite as romantic, or dramatic, as the
"Barbara Freitchie" episode, but it was never dwelt upon, however, by
the poets, nor can it be demolished as a myth. Ishmael Day, single
handed and alone, defended his little miniature flag against the
Confederate hosts. The incident rang over the country through the press.

My uncle, Zoeth Smith, a patriot indeed, wrote me to get Ishmael's
picture, which I did. Recently, in looking over my papers, I found Uncle
Zoe's letter and sent it to his sons, Truman and Addison, to show them
the manner of man their father was when loyalty was needed.

[Illustration: ISHMAEL DAY]

The following appeared in the newspapers:

     "We had the pleasure this morning of an interview with Mr.
     Ishmael Day who yesterday morning shot down one of Harry
     Gilmor's men whilst in the act of taking down the flag over
     his gate in Harford County. He gives the following correct
     statement: 'On Sunday night he had heard that a party of
     Rebels were encamped in the vicinity, but did not give
     credence to the report. Early on Monday morning one of his
     negroes reported to him that they were coming down the road.
     He immediately hoisted his flag over the gate, and shortly
     after, two armed men came riding along the road and one seeing
     the flag burst out with a loud laugh, one of them advancing
     and seizing the halliards.

     The old gentleman, who is nearly seventy-three years of age,
     ran back into the house, threatening to shoot them if they did
     not desist. They paid no attention to him, but the halliards
     being twisted they had some difficulty in getting it down. By
     this time he had reached his second story, where his guns
     were, and raising the window fired a load from his duck gun
     just as the miscreant had succeeded in getting hold of the
     flag, and he fell back on the road seriously, and he thinks,
     mortally wounded, the whole load having entered his breast.

     Seizing another gun and a loaded Colt's revolver, he came
     down stairs and endeavored to get a shot at the other, but he
     had run up the road. He then, in his anger, leveled at the
     wounded man, but he begged for mercy, and said he surrendered,
     and Mr. Day, thinking that he would never be able to haul down
     another flag, left him lying on the road.

     Hearing the approach of a large squad Mr. Day escaped with his
     weapons to the woods and eluded their pursuit. Mrs. Day was
     still in the house when the Rebels came up, and they
     immediately commenced to set fire to it after plundering it of
     such articles as they took a fancy to, and then set fire to it
     as well as his barn, which were entirely destroyed. They did
     not allow Mrs. Day to save even her clothing, and he fears
     that some two thousand, three hundred dollars of Government
     Bonds were destroyed with his deeds and papers. He has not yet
     seen Mrs. Day, who found refuge for herself and family in one
     of the neighbor's houses.

     The only regret of the gallant old patriot is that he did not
     get a shot at the other Rebel.'

     We learn this morning that the man who was shot by Mr. Day was
     named Fields, formerly of Baltimore; that he was left by the
     Rebels at Dampman's Hotel, fifteen miles from the city on the
     Belair Road."

After the Confederates retreated I made a thorough examination into the
disloyal conduct of various persons residing east and north of
Baltimore, for the purpose, more particularly, to guide us in the
future. The following is my report:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Aug. 7, 1864.

     Lt. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report the connection of the
     following named persons with the Rebel raiders.

     Herewith I hand you a transcript of the evidence in each case.

     No arrests have been made in these cases.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


     List of Names.

     Andrew Gill,
     Stephen Gill,
     Charles Alden,
     Jackson Dorney,
     J. Berryman,
     ---- Harriman,
     ---- Jones,
     Francis Shipley,
     Chas. Shipley,
     John T. Johns,
     Henry Balton,
     Mal Guyton,
     Wm. Price,
     Henry Wesley,
     John Y. Day,
     S. Berryman,
     Benj. Worthington,
     Samuel Stone,
     Jas. Reynolds,
     ---- Walker,
     Henry Walker,
     Murray Gill,
     Wm. Gore,
     Ed. Storm,
     Robert Elder,
     ---- Smith,
     Jos. Scarborough,
     Wm. Knight,
     Mat. Shorman,
     Marion Guyton,
     David Gittings,
     Henry Emmick,
     Wm. Lowrey,
     John Grovner,
     Jas. Mannon,
     Miss Lizzie Grason.





FILE XIX.

Trip to New York regarding one Thomas H. Gordon.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Aug. 13, 1864.

     Special Order No. 111.

     1st Lieut. H. B. Smith, Commanding Detective Corps, 8th Army
     Corps, will proceed to New York on business connected with
     this office. After completing his search and investigation he
     will return to these headquarters without delay.

     Quartermasters will furnish transportation.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Pro. Marshal.


The following is the report of the case I went to New York about:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Aug. 24, 1864.

     Lt. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report the following in the
     case of Thomas H. Gordon, paymaster.

     I have on your order procured the check book ordered by him.
     Mess. Hoen & Co. say they have written to Nashville and
     Washington but have had no reply.

     I also hand you two letters, one from Gordon and one from
     Galloway, both in the same handwriting, as you will see on
     close examination.

     Gordon represents himself as Captain.

     The checks are entirely different from the usual paymaster's
     checks that are furnished by the United States depository.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.





FILE XX.

Thomas Bennett, a U. S. mail carrier, disloyal--Samuel Miles, a prominent
Baltimore merchant, a blockade runner--A laughable letter about an
overdraft of whiskey--Dr. E. Powell, of Richmond.


As our work progressed, we accumulated from Confederate mail, refugees
and deserters, a mass of information as to the disloyalty of persons,
which was carefully tabulated in a pigeonhole cabinet; we were
constantly referring to it.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Aug. 17, 1864.

     Col. Woolley:

     I have information that a Thomas Bennett, U. S. mail carrier
     between Princess Ann and Newtown is in the Confederate service
     and is engaged to carry letters, &c., for them.

     Let Smith put a sharp detective after him. Mr. E. J. Smith
     will talk with you about it.

     LEW WALLACE,
     Major General Commanding.




     War Department,
     Washington, Sept. 16, 1864.

     Memo.

     Mr. J. P. Gulick, policeman at the Capitol grounds, gives
     information to the Department that Samuel Miles, a wholesale
     forwarding merchant in Baltimore, has been engaged in sending
     goods to the South.

     Mr. Gulick lived at Wicomico Creek for some time during the
     war and while there observed the transaction, the goods coming
     to that point direct from Miles, and being from there run over
     into Little River by Samuel Langford, Miles's nephew.

The following is a Confederate letter addressed to Samuel G. Miles,
referred to by Mr. Gulick. Miles was a merchant in high standing
commercially. The letter is reproduced literally:


     Monticello, Va.,
     Feby. 29, 1864.

     Mr. Miles.

     Sir.--I take this privaledge to write to you asking the favour
     of you to send me by the gentleman that may hand you this
     letter to send me a few articles, you are well aware of our
     condition as to getting grocerys or a great many other things.
     Mr. Miles you will confer a great favour upon me to let me
     have a barril of sugar, one bag of coffee, 5 lbs. of tea, 15
     gal. of Rye Whiskey.

     I would have sent money but you know that our money would not
     be of any survace to you. But if you send the above articles
     whether I get them or no you shall certainly be paid.

     I was very sorry that I could not see you when you pass
     through to Richmond, as it would have afforded me great
     pleasure to have you at my house.

     Give my respects to Mr. Langford and all enquiring friends. If
     it is not in your power to send the above name articles you
     will do me the favour to present this letter to Mr. Thomas
     Lumking and perhaps he may send them. By so doing you will
     oblige,

     Your Friend,
     HENRY D. BARRICK.

     To
     Mr. Samuel G. Miles.


The quantity of rye whiskey, compared to the other articles seemed
pretty large. It reminds me of the story of the sloop captain who sent
his man for supplies for a trip. The man brought two loaves of bread and
a gallon of whiskey, at which the captain growled out "what made you buy
so much bread?"

And here is another Confederate letter:


     Richmond, Va.,
     Oct. 24, 1864.

     Mr. Steele.

     Dear Sir.--I have been waiting very anxiously to hear if you
     had succeeded in making the arrangements with Allison to take
     us to Baltimore.

     If it is possible to get Allison or any other person with a
     schooner to make the trip to Baltimore and bring back goods,
     make the arrangement for the trip and let me know when I am to
     come down and I will come prepared to make the trip.

     Any goods you may wish to bring I will take through in my
     name. Let me hear from you as soon as you can hear from
     Allison.

     Your obdt. servant,
     Dr. E. POWELL.

     Cor. Main & 10th Sts.,
     Richmond, Va.





FILE XXI.

Terrence R. Quinn.


Terrence R. Quinn, previously spoken of, backed by his military friends,
complained of abuse which he alleged was put upon him by our officers,
and I was called upon to make the following statement in reply:


     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, Md.,
     Oct. 20, 1864.

     Lt. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to make the following statement
     regarding the arrest of Terrence R. Quinn, and the causes for
     such arrest.

     On or about March 18, 1864, I arrested Quinn by order of Major
     H. Z. Hayner, then Provost Marshal of this Department.

     This arrest was caused by statements made by one John W.
     Lewis, to the effect that during a period of six or eight
     months then last past, at different times Quinn had stated to
     him that he was engaged in running the blockade and held out
     great inducements for Lewis to join him. He (Quinn) stating
     that he was the owner of several schooners, and told how he
     got clear on a former charge of the same kind, at the same
     time admitting his guilt.

     On searching Quinn's house, No. 23 Constitution street, I
     found a great many letters addressed to parties in Richmond,
     Confederate officers and others, which were letters of
     introduction, stating that it was Mr. Terrence R. Quinn's
     intention to visit Richmond and recommending him as "always a
     friend of the South."

     These letters were written by Rebel officers in confinement at
     Fort McHenry. There were also other letters showing that Quinn
     had aided in defrauding the government out of some bonds, and
     letters corroborating Quinn's statements in regard to
     contraband trade. All of these letters were given to Major
     Hayner.

     On arresting Quinn I took him in a carriage to Vineyard Hotel,
     as it was deemed proper to keep him closely confined until I
     could have time to go to the Eastern shore of Va., and seize
     his schooners.

     He was given a fine room at this hotel and his expenses, about
     seventeen dollars per week were all paid by me. He was placed
     under a Military guard, and was afterwards transferred to the
     prison attached to this office, for examination by an officer
     sent here by the Secretary of War.

     On seizing Quinn's schooners I found Capt. J. J. Lewis in
     command of one. This Lewis was formerly arrested and confined
     in Fort McHenry on a charge of blockade running. He admitted
     his guilt to me but stated that he was released without a
     trial. He is a specimen of the characters in Quinn's employ.

     In 1862 Quinn was arrested on charge of blockade running but
     was released without trial. He stated to Lewis that he was
     guilty but the government was not smart enough to prove it.

     I again caused the arrest of Quinn on Sept. 8, 1864, on an
     order from General Stevenson, commanding at Harper's Ferry, on
     the charge of running negroes away from Va., on forged passes.
     General Stevenson also ordered search for passes. I also
     caused the arrest of a negro named Andrew Jackson, who stated
     that Quinn tried to get him in the army as a substitute, and
     also that he did not go to the Provost Marshal for a pass but
     that Quinn sent another negro.

     As to his being treated brutally: When arrested he was
     intoxicated, and two or three times called the officers names,
     whereupon the officers struck him, once only. My first
     acquaintance with Quinn was when I was Assistant Provost
     Marshal at Fort McHenry.

     He claims that he is a British subject and not amenable to our
     laws.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.





FILE XXII.

The great fraud attempted in the Presidential election of 1864, wherein
the misplacing of a single letter led to its detection, and may be said
to have saved our nation from disruption--Involving Governor Seymour and
Adjutant General Andrews--Arrest of Ferry, Donohue and Newcomb, one of the
most successful kidnappings on record.


The Presidential election of 1864 was then upon us, and indeed it was
most momentous. The issue was to determine the life of this Union. Mr.
Lincoln was renominated, and General George B. McClellan was nominated
to run against him. And quite fittingly, Horatio Seymour, who was to
have been leader of secession in the North (according to my
information), who had lent his whole influence towards obstruction, was
made chairman of the convention that nominated McClellan.

A resolution of the convention read:

     "Resolved, that this Convention does explicitly declare, as
     the sense of the American people, that after four years of
     failure to restore the Union by experiment of War * * * the
     public welfare demands that immediate efforts be made for a
     cessation of hostilities."

In the convention Mr. Wickliffe, of Kentucky, said:

     "The delegates from the West were of the opinion that
     circumstances may occur between noon of to-day and the 4th of
     March next (inauguration day) which will make it proper for
     the Democracy of the Country to meet in Convention again."

What could he have referred to? Solve the riddle if you can. Ponder on a
"Northwestern Confederacy"; the Sons of Liberty, and the seizure of
their arms; and also on Lincoln's assassination, only a few days after
March 4th, 1865.

All of this leads me to what I am about to tell about that election,
wherein the same influences that failed with bullets to disrupt the
Union were now trying to accomplish the same purpose with ballots.

I will not charge McClellan with disloyalty, yet I can not help asking
why did he lend his name to the disloyal movement? There were disloyal
Northerners, but not one of them voted for Lincoln.

I do not claim that all who voted for McClellan were disloyal, but that
all the disloyal, including all blockade-runners and bounty jumpers,
voted for him.

On the 21st of April, 1864, a law was enacted in New York State called
"an act to enable the qualified electors of this State, absent therefrom
in the military service of the United States, in the Army or navy
thereof, to vote."

This law provided for a power of attorney appointing a proxy who would
present his (the soldier's) sealed envelope, addressed to the election
inspectors in his home or residence district. The ballot was to be in a
sealed envelope, and to be opened only by the inspectors; this envelope
was to be enclosed in another, outer envelope addressed to his proxy.
The outer envelope was to contain also the power of attorney for the
proxy to so present the sealed ballot.

And now I will tell you how merely the misplacing of the letter "L"
betrayed one of the greatest crimes of the period, entirely defeated its
perpetration, and helped to save our Union.

On Thursday afternoon, October 20th, 1864, General Wallace came to my
office with Mr. Orville K. Wood, of Clinton county, New York.

Mr. Wood had a blank or partly blank document which he had found in
possession of a soldier from his county. It was a blank power of
attorney, such as were provided for voting under the law of April 21st,
1864. The jurat was signed in blank:

     C. G. Arthur
     Lieut. 11th U. S. Cavl.

--and their conclusion was that this officer may have signed a number
of such papers in blank, and passed them out, to be used by any soldier,
perhaps to facilitate voting; an illegal act in itself; but upon
examination I pronounced the officer's signature a forgery. My
conclusion was based on the fact of the letter "l" in "Cavl." I assumed
that no officer of cavalry, more especially in the regular service,
would abbreviate in any way other than Cav. or Cavy.

General Wallace saw the force of my reasoning, and a new light was
thrown on the matter.

Had the one letter "l" been absent I should have concluded as General
Wallace and Mr. Wood had, i. e., that the fact of such a document,
entirely blank except the officer's jurat, being in public hands, was a
wrong merely laying the officer liable for having attached his name to a
blank paper.

The point then was to find out where the work was done. Mr. Wood had
visited the New York State agency office in Fayette Street and I
arranged for him to go there again the next morning (Friday), he to tell
the representative, Mr. Ferry, that some friends would call to be
assisted in preparing their votes. We agreed that my name would be
"Phillip Brady," from West Chazy, Clinton County, New York.

Friday morning I equipped myself as became a private soldier, in a
uniform much worn and shabby. One of my men, Mr. Babcock, accompanied
me, he was similarly attired. We provided ourselves with "2 hour"
passes from the Camden Street Hospital, and sicker looking convalescents
never were seen outside of a hospital. When we arrived at Ferry's office
we appeared much exhausted. Mr. Wood introduced me, and then I insisted
on Mr. Ferry's reading my pass so that he would know exactly who I was;
I told him I wanted to vote for Mr. Lincoln, because he was the
soldier's friend.

[Illustration: LUCIUS F. BABCOCK]

He went in an adjoining room and brought out one of the same powers of
attorney that Mr. Wood had shown me the day before, for me to sign; the
jurat was executed and the ink was not yet dry on it. To give myself
more time to examine, I hesitated in signing my name, I was so sickly
(?) and weak, I had Mr. Ferry help guide my hand. I had by this time
located Mr. "Arthur" in the next room.

Mr. Ferry then discovered he had no Lincoln ballots, but said he
expected them from the printer. He volunteered, if I would leave it to
him, to put in a proper ticket, and mail it for me, to which I
consented. I told him I did not know when I might get another pass.

Ferry gave me a plug of tobacco and a pair of socks, to illustrate, I
suppose, the Empire State's interest in her volunteers.

Babcock then went through the same process, which gave me all the time
needed to survey the surroundings, whereupon we left.

Mr. Wood remained, but came out afterwards and met me by appointment, on
Charles Street. He was startled at the condition of affairs in the State
Agent's office, where a corps of men were engaged in forgery, and did
not want to return there, but was persuaded to go back and put in the
day. The character and magnitude of the crime prompted us to great
secrecy.

The next day (Saturday) General Wallace went to Washington. A Cabinet
meeting was held to consider the election frauds.

Next morning (Sunday), the following order was issued by General
Wallace, personally, and is in his handwriting:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Md., Oct. 23, 1864.

     Lt. Col. John Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     You will immediately arrest the following persons: M. J.
     Ferry, Ed. Donohue, Jr., and such clerks, assistants, &c., as
     they may have in the office of the New York State Agency in
     Baltimore. You will also seize and take into your possession
     all books, papers, letters, &c., which you may find on the
     persons or in the rooms and baggage of the persons above
     named.

     The prisoners you will take to the City jail and confine them
     separately, allowing no visitor to have communication with or
     the prisoners to have communication in any manner with each
     other.

     LEW WALLACE,
     Major General Commanding.

     (You will also station a guard at the door of the office of
     said Agency. L. W.)

Upon my request to be allowed to conduct the arrests and seizures in my
own way, the General ran a pen through the words that are bracketed.

It was my desire to kidnap the parties, so that warning might be given
to other places, such as Washington, Harper's Ferry and City Point, to
look out for similar crimes, to accomplish which it was desirable to
leave behind each person, at his home or office, a reasonable excuse for
his absence for a few days, and to keep the State Agency office open to
callers.

I employed a hack and a confidential driver, one used to me, and who
would carry out instructions to the letter.

With one of my men I drove to near the State Agency Office. We entered
and were met by Donohue, who was alone (it was early Sunday A.M.) and
was pugnacious when he was made aware of his dilemma. I arranged with
him, that for friendly appearances, we would walk out arm in arm to our
carriage. Then we were whisked away to my office. I left Mr. Kraft, one
of my men, in the office to run it and tell callers that Donohue had
"gone out."

I learned from Donohue that Ed. Newcomb was stopping at Barnum's hotel.
At the hotel I found Newcomb's room number, went to it and rapped on the
door. I informed him there was a party from New York at the office, and
that Donohue wanted him at once; he accompanied me out the private
entrance and into my carriage. After a while he remarked that the driver
was not going right. I told him I was a stranger but I guessed the
driver knew the way; finally I told him of his position, that he would
meet Donohue, but not at the State Agency office.

When we came near our office I changed hats with him to prevent
recognition. An Albany regiment, the 91st, was guarding our
office--Newcomb was an Albany lawyer. I placed him in my office with
Donohue, but with officers both inside and outside the door. I took his
pocketbook, room-door key, and papers, and I returned to Barnum's to
"put them to sleep."

Shawls were commonly used then, especially by Northerners. I searched
his room, muffled myself up in his shawl, presented his key at the desk,
asked for and paid his bill, putting the receipt in his pocketbook, and
told them that Mr. Newcomb would stop over Sunday and a few days with
friends, in case of inquiry. I handed Newcomb his pocketbook and
baggage.

Meantime Mr. Kraft was running the State Agency office, answering
callers all right.

The next move was to get Mr. Ferry, who resided in the far west end of
the city. I drove out there accompanied by Mr. Babcock. Ferry had not
returned from church (think of the moral tone of one who had forged all
the week). On his return I told him there were important parties at his
office from New York and that Donohue wanted him at once; he excused
himself to the ladies and accompanied me in the carriage. The ride was
long, so we visited in a friendly way, but finally he, too, remarked
that the driver was going out of his way, and after protesting
considerably, I informed him of his true status. He did not quite
collapse. I assured him his years would earn him a gentleman's
treatment. He was soon landed in my office.

I had a good dinner served all of them from my hotel. So that the ladies
at Mr. Ferry's house would not worry, and waiting until it would have
been impossible for them to reach the boat, I wrote them on his own
letter head asking for clean clothes enough to last about a week, as he
was going to City Point--so I wrote--on the Bay Line boat, on important
business. The clean clothes I gave Mr. Ferry.

I then went back to the office to see how much business Mr. Kraft had
accomplished. He was much warmed up over his discoveries in that room
adjoining, where the forgeries were done.

While there a brusque, loud-mouthed man came in and asked for Donohue,
announcing in a loud way what he had done at Harper's Ferry. I told him
he was a fool, and that I would not have anything to do with the
business if such as he were in it. The chiding acted like a charm. He
thanked me for cautioning him. He said he would not have spoken so but
he knew that I was all right. He said he was stopping at the Fountain
House, but readily agreed to go and get his bag and go with me to my
hotel; he accompanied me and landed where the others were. His name was
Kerley, and if my memory is correct, he was running for sheriff of
Washington county.

After dark, having prepared a separate corridor in the city jail, I
placed them there, taking the following receipt:


     Baltimore, Oct. 23, 1864.

     Received of guards the following prisoners:

     Edw. Donohue.
     Edw. Newcomb.
     M. J. Ferry.
     Peter Kerley.

     (Signed) THOMAS C. JAMES, Warden.
              JOHN W. SINDALL.


On Monday (24th) we had a conference with Mr. Fred. Seward, Assistant
Secretary of State (he was accompanied by Mr. Benedict, of the State
Department), to ascertain if some one of the batch would confess. I
suggested Newcomb, and went in the carriage for him.

The city jail was in a gloomy location. The hour was well along in the
evening, and Newcomb's nerve was shaky. I took him to the Eutaw House,
before General Wallace, Colonel Woolley and Mr. Seward. At first he
(Newcomb) stoutly denied knowledge of the forgeries; my judgment as to
his probable weakness was in jeopardy. I asked Newcomb to come out in
the hall, where I told him that he could do just as he saw fit about
confessing, but that I was the convalescent soldier who voted right
there in the office when Donohue and he were doing the work. Then he
begged to be again taken before General Wallace, whereupon he confessed
all.

In the meantime I had choked up the mail and express companies for all
matter bearing the New York State Agency label, and among the mass we
got my document, but it contained a good straight McClellan ballot, as
did Mr. Babcock's.

On Tuesday (the 25th) the Doubleday Military Commission of Washington
was convened at Baltimore, and before the day was over Newcomb had
confessed and Ferry tried to, but he so falsified his statement that it
did not merit consideration. The desirability for haste to make public
the fraud was because the country had been flooded with these fraudulent
papers, which could not be intercepted, except by publicity through the
channel of the newspapers; therefore after the 27th of October the
matter was made public.

Appleton says they were arrested on the 27th, but the facts, "between
the lines," are as I have told you. The kidnapping was a success. Four
public men were taken away from their business and usual haunts, and
hidden for four days without leaving a trace.

I found in Ferry's office many rich things. Among them was a letter from
Ferry to John F. Seymour, Hudson, Columbia County, New York (the
Governor's brother), accompanying a package of these forged papers, and
telling him to use them where his judgment suggested, or words to that
effect.

I offered General Wallace to try to incriminate Seymour, if I could have
two or three days' time; but the General advised against it, having so
little time even then for publicity before election day.

The whole country was roused to action. The matter was treated by the
newspapers as of as much importance as the army movements. It was given
first column, first page, place, with flaming, startling headlines. One
paper had it: "Great Soldier Vote Fraud. Arrest of Governor Seymour's
State Agents. The Most Stupendous Fraud Ever Known in Politics." "A
systematic and widespread conspiracy has been brought to light, carried
on by agents here (Washington), at Baltimore, Harper's Ferry and in the
Army of the Potomac. Men now in custody have been actively engaged in
this business for weeks, as one of the parties involved (Newcomb)
declared. Forged ballots have been forwarded in dry goods boxes, etc."

Such startling accounts were continued for many days. It was also
treated editorially. It was not considered merely as a political move to
secure office, but as a move to secure a false verdict on the matter of
the continuance of the war. Appleton's Encyclopedia for 1864 has several
columns of matter on the election fraud case.

The following order was issued by Major General Hooker, commanding the
Northern Department.


     Cincinnati, Ohio.
     Oct. 27, 1864.

     "The Commander of this Department has received information
     that it is the intention of a large body of men on the
     Northern frontier, on each side of the line, open on one side
     and in disguise on the other, to so organize at the ensuing
     National Election, as to interfere with the integrity of the
     election, and when in their power to cast illegal votes, &c."

A number of Ohio election officers were arrested for imitating the New
York State Agents' rascalities.

Notwithstanding all efforts made to publish the facts, the conspirators
came too near success. New York polled about 730,000 votes; Mr.
Lincoln's majority was only about 6,700; and of the total vote of
2,401,000 in the great States of New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana
and Illinois, if less than three per cent. had been cast on the other
side, Lincoln would have been defeated and the Union destroyed. A twig
may change the trajectory of a cannon ball; a letter "l" misplaced, may
have saved the nation.

Will any one conclude that Ferry, the State's Agent, and Donohue and
Newcomb, were not acting under orders from their superior, Governor
Seymour?

Just now while I am writing I have before me Watson's Magazine for
March, 1911, speaking of Headley's account of his part in retaliatory
acts in the west and east: "The evidence there found of the extent of
the copperhead movement in the upper Mississippi Valley in 1863-1864 is
entirely essential to a history of both sides of the great war. It
becomes startling to contemplate to what imminence revolution in the
States of the north and west had approached, etc."

"Mr. Davis (Jefferson Davis) delivered an impassioned speech at
Palmetto Station, near Atlanta, in Sept., 1864, in which he declared the
opinion that McClellan would be elected over Lincoln at the November
elections, and in that event the west would set him up as president over
itself, leaving the east to Lincoln."

Thus it is shown that the Confederates fully expected a rupture of the
North on lines to be worked out by the "Sons of Liberty" and their
co-conspirators.

After a time President Lincoln pardoned Ferry and later Donohue. The
President's big-heartedness led him first to pardon Ferry because of his
advanced age.

Newcomb came into my life again in 1882, in the impeachment proceedings
against Judge Westbrook. Somebody hunted me up and subpoenaed me to
testify as to the character of Newcomb. He had been a receiver of a life
insurance company (if my memory is right) under an appointment by Judge
Westbrook, and it was represented that he had misapplied large sums. The
session of the committee was held in the St. James Hotel, corner of
Broadway and Twenty-sixth Street, New York. When I entered the rotunda I
was hailed by a Mr. Fox, who wanted conversation with me. He knew my
mission and told me it would be worth a thousand dollars if I would
"walk up the street with him." The proposition did not flatter me; he
did not correctly size up my moral tone. I testified concerning the
circumstances of 1864, of Newcomb's crime and his confession. Newcomb
followed me out of the committee room, and expressed great surprise at
my appearance on the scene. I was not astonished to find him in
questionable business.

Donohue I have met several times since the war. For a time he was in the
employ of the New York Central Railroad, later holding a small political
appointment in one of the New York City departments.

I found another document in the State Agent's office that finished
Adjutant General Andrews' usefulness instanter. It was written on
headquarters' letterhead and spoke disrespectfully of Mr. Lincoln, the
Commander-in-Chief. Andrews was unceremoniously dismissed from the
service.




FILE XXIII.

John Deegan, a forger, captured--A report that led to a historic raid by
Colonel Baker on the bounty jumpers and bounty brokers of New York.


Here follows a rather interesting case. One Deegan, an expert penman,
who had formerly been a clerk in one of the regular cavalry regiments,
had been forging discharges and final statements of fictitious soldiers,
employing an accomplice to present them at the various paymasters'
offices and draw the money. Being familiar with the officers'
signatures, he was very successful in forging their names. To make the
final statement cover a large amount of money--many hundreds and
sometimes thousands of dollars--the statements represented the parties
to have been prisoners of war, one or two years, which, with all the
allowances, would carry the amounts up into large figures.


     United States Army, Pay District
       of Pennsylvania.
     Baltimore, Md., Nov. 9, 1864

     Colonel:

     I have had a full explanatory conversation with your Chief of
     Detectives in reference to forgeries lately perpetrated upon
     the Government and have given him every clue in my possession,
     to the perpetrators.

     The name and recent address of the party who escaped from your
     office has also been obtained by me. I have therefore to
     request that you give him every facility he may desire in
     visiting both Philadelphia and New York, and that you will
     instruct the calling to his assistance experienced detectives.

     I have ordered my orderly to report to him as he is acquainted
     with this Deegan. The case is one of importance and no delay
     should occur in ferreting it out.

     Very respy. Colonel, your obdt. servant.,
     FRANK M. ETTING,
     Chief Paymaster.

     To
     Lt. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal,
     8th Army Corps.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Nov. 9, 1864.

     Special Order No. 164.

     Lt. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. H. Arty. and two men will proceed
     without delay to the cities of Philadelphia and New York, for
     the purpose of arresting certain persons engaged in
     manufacturing forged Discharge papers. Having accomplished
     this duty, Lieut. Smith and his guard will return and report
     at this office.

     The Quartermaster's Department will furnish the necessary
     transportation.

     By command of Major General Lew Wallace.

     WM. H. WIEGEL,
     Capt. & Asst. Provost Marshal.


We had in custody one of Deegan's pals, John Battell. To save his scalp,
I forced him to write a letter (copy below), that I might use with
Deegan.

Deegan's Philadelphia address was a saloon, kept by Dick Callery, at 126
Callowhill Street. The letter reads:


     Havre de Grace, Nov. 8th.

     Wm. Deegan.

     I am under arrest on my way to Baltimore under arrest I have
     just time through the goodness of a guard to send you this as
     we delayed here one 1/2 hour waiting for another train to pass
     it will go hard with me I suppose.

     Yours,
     JOHN BATTELL.


The above is a literal copy of Battell's letter, it is in his hand
writing and is addressed to:

     Wm. Deegan,
     11th Ward Hotel,
     Callowhill St.,
     Philadelphia, Pa.

     Private.

We were attired suitably for the occasion, velveteen caps, paper
collars, colored shirts, etc., a good "jumper's" toggery.

Jumpers, or bounty jumpers, were a very distinct class of patriots (?)
in war days. They were so patriotic they would enlist many, many times,
and draw a large bounty each time. When they enlisted they doffed their
clothes and put on the uniform. As soon as they could evade or "jump"
the guards conducting them, they would shed the uniform and buy a cheap
suit, such a one as I have described, and reappear at their old haunts,
ready to "jump" another bounty, under the skillful management of a
bounty broker. An observing person could pick out a "jumper" on sight.

We put in twenty-four lively hours with the "jumpers" and thieves at
Callery's. One may wonder how a decent man could associate with such
characters and not betray himself. It is a wonder, but somehow I managed
to fit the niche under any circumstances.

Learning that Deegan had gone to New York and would probably be at his
brother John's saloon in East 38th Street, I proceeded there.

I used the names "George Comings" or "I. K. Shaffer" usually, and they
became familiar to me. In this case I was "George Comings."

To have something to recommend me to John Deegan, I wired to myself from
Philadelphia to New York, using "R. Callery's" name (without
permission), I have the telegram, which was done by the House Printing
Telegraph (in type on long strips, or tape, much like the present ticker
tape). It reads:


     Phil Nov XIth

     Geo Comings. Wm Deegan is at John Deegans Thirty Eighth Street
     Second and Third Avenues. Please take that note to him
     (Battell's note.)

     Hund wenty six Callowhill St.

We associated with the "jumpers" who hung out at John Deegan's to
accomplish our purposes. Wm. Deegan had gone to Boston.

Bounty jumpers in New York were on every corner. The city was infested
with them. Our appearance and conduct secured us recognition by them, so
much so that my men became anxious on account of our popularity.

I made arrangements with Major Leslie, the Chief Paymaster in New York,
for the capture of Deegan, which was accomplished shortly afterwards.
When I called on Major Leslie at his residence in 9th Street, I was
somewhat shocked at first at his incivility. I had overlooked the fact
that my personal appearance (my clothes, etc.) did not merit confidence.
However, as soon as I made him know me everything went on all right. I
must certainly have looked tough.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Nov. 15, 1864.

     Lt. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to submit the following report of
     my trip to Philadelphia and New York, in search of William
     Deegan and others charged with forgeries.

     Among other steps that Major Elting took, previous to giving
     the matter into my hands, was to telegraph the Provost Marshal
     at Philadelphia to visit certain places and arrest, if found,
     William Deegan.

     I arrived in Philadelphia on Thursday morning and immediately
     called on the Provost Marshal to ascertain what steps he had
     taken, and I requested him to withdraw his men from the job.

     I ascertained to a certainty that Deegan had gone to New York,
     and also that the officers from the Provost Marshal's office
     went there (to the haunt of Deegan), dressed in uniform,
     stating they were connected with the Quartermasters' Office,
     and wanted to see Deegan. This was sufficient to scare any
     guilty man out of the country; accordingly I left for New
     York, where I visited Deegan's haunts. On Friday evening
     there, I ascertained that Deegan and his pigeons were gone,
     either to New Jersey or Boston.

     On Saturday I visited Major Leslie, Chief Paymaster at New
     York, and posted him as to the actions of Deegan and his
     associates, and recommended that if discharges purporting to
     come from the 6th United States Cavalry were presented it
     would be well to detain the parties presenting such discharges
     and final statements until he could ascertain if they were
     genuine; and would then probably be able to catch some of the
     pigeons, and perhaps Deegan. I also requested him to telegraph
     to Chief Paymaster at Boston, which he promised to do.

     Deegan's forgeries seem to be confined to the 6th U. S.
     Cavalry; he was formerly a member of that Regiment. He
     operates with "jumpers."

     I think this job was spoiled by the actions of the Officers in
     Philadelphia. I am quite positive we were not suspected, as we
     were at all times current with these "jumpers," that infested
     Deegan's haunts.

     I visited these places until yesterday, when I became
     satisfied that Deegan is too badly scared to remain about.

     In addition to my report I wish to give you a brief outline of
     the state of affairs in the Provost Department in New York and
     Philadelphia. Wherever I went in search of my man I met
     "Bounty Jumpers," who openly avowed themselves such, and
     seemed to defy the authorities. Dick Callery, who keeps a
     groggery at No. 126 Callowhill street, Philadelphia, stated he
     was aware of Deegan's transactions. Most of Callery's
     customers were "jumpers."

     In New York we could go but a short distance without meeting
     these characters. From what I could see I should think one
     thousand a low estimate of their numbers; they are very bold.
     They pay this Department quite a compliment, i. e., they say
     if they can only get clear from Baltimore they are all right.

     If about fifteen or twenty pigeons could be thrown into New
     York and Philadelphia to co-operate with a strong force of
     Detectives and Military, hundreds of these "jumpers" would be
     brought to justice.

     These jumpers without an exception are the firm support and
     backbone of the Copperhead Clique, and the same parties that
     caused the riots in New York last year. The arrest and
     punishment of these parties would cause rejoicing among
     respectable people. From my observation I can see that this
     class of men before the war were pickpockets, burglars, &c.,
     but now resort to this last and easier means of stealing, i. e.,
     "bounty jumping," at the same time they please the "Copperheads"
     by filling successively, the quotas of different districts, and
     not furnishing the Army one soldier; thus defeating the object
     of the Draft.

     I am, Colonel,

     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


My report and recommendations were so highly esteemed by General Wallace
that he had a copy sent to General N. L. Jeffries, the Provost Marshal
General of the United States, and by him were my suggestions acted upon.
Colonel Lafayette C. Baker was sent to New York with a force of men and
very ample money; a very vigorous and extended raid was made, partially
successful, but I think my plan of putting fifteen or twenty men in with
the jumpers, to actually "jump" with them, thus obtaining evidence to
convict, would have been more successful. The current newspapers treated
this matter as of great importance, using the findings of my report,
saying: "Our quotas are being fraudulently filled, and furnishing no men
for the army, etc."




FILE XXIV.

General Wallace's letter to secretary of war, Charles A. Dana (afterwards
editor of the New York "Sun") asking for an extension of territory for my
work, incidentally introducing Colonel John S. Mosby, giving a list of his
men and their home addresses--A train robbery, paymasters robbed--I
recapture part of the money--Commissions in promotion declined.



     Coleman's Eutaw House,
     Baltimore, Nov. 19, 1864.

     (Unofficial.)
     Hon. C. A. Dana,
     Asst. Sec. of War.

     Dear Sir.--Lt. Smith, my Chief of Detectives, will hand you
     this note.

     It is necessary to one of his schemes, based upon a late
     discovery, that he should have a pass from the Secretary of
     the Navy to go through the lines of the blockade on the
     Potomac. The pass should cover a vessel, a crew of six or
     seven men and two or three hundred dollars' worth of goods.

     I have every confidence that Lt. Smith will uncover a good
     thing.

     About his honesty there is no doubt.

     Very truly,
     Your friend, LEW WALLACE,
     Major General Commanding.


The above letter is in General Wallace's own handwriting. I prize it
more than any commission or brevet commission that I have.

I needed just such an extended privilege as General Wallace asked for,
and in March following I obtained it.

Colonel John S. Mosby's Guerillas were the most annoying and expensive
antagonists we had. He operated along the line of the Baltimore & Ohio
Railroad west of Washington, and also with a detachment between the
Potomac and Rappahannock. My probings extended into the territory
covered by him. I made a study of his tactics and was preparing to
counteract him. His men were at home in the district; it was, in fact,
their home. They were, or many of them were, farmers, who might be
innocently tilling the soil as our scouting parties passed, but who, at
Colonel Mosby's whistle, if the chance was propitious, would jump on
horse and surprise us before long. Small bodies of troops were taken
unawares. They never offered a front to large bodies; they would swoop
down on a defenceless train, or destroy railroad bridges.

Mosby was a valuable asset to the Confederacy, worth many times Harry
Gilmor's Raiders.

I think, without doubt, it took twenty or thirty thousand of our men to
guard against his intermittent incursions.

Mosby was an educated man. An impression was abroad then that he was a
barbarian; he was not. He was loyally doing for the South what I would
have done for the North. I captured his foraging order, on one occasion
and it opened my eyes for it was evidence of as civilized methods of war
as was ever manifested. In this order he provided for payment for
private property which he took.

I planned to organize a body of men to compete with Mosby, and I asked
for a command to operate independently of district lines, or military
commanders.

I had been locating Mosby's men (their homes), from all sorts of sources
of information, preparing to capture them in detail. I was planning to
take them at their disadvantage, when they were at the plough, and not
when they were in the saddle. Here is part of my list so tabulated:

     "Members of Mosby."

     Wm. Robinson,
     Wend Robinson,
     John Robinson--Three miles above Front Royal, on the Culpepper
       Pike. Father is a farmer.
     Geo. Reger--Black Rock below the Pike, with his brother, John
       Reger.
     Jack Downing--1/2 mile from Geo. Reger's on Black Rock, in a
       fine brick house.
     William Wright--Four miles below Front Royal, on the Linden
       Road, with his Grandmother, Luanda Wright.
     James Fold--Below Flint Hill, six or seven miles from Front
       Royal near the Pike. Father is a farmer.
     James Hawes--On Culpepper Pike, seven miles from Front Royal,
       is a laborer, lives in Mr. Gibson's house.
     Bresley Esom--Seven miles from Front Royal, one mile from
       Culpepper Pike.
     George Esom--Same place as Bresley.
     John Clark--Nine miles from Front Royal, to right of Culpepper
       Pike, on the mountain. Father is a farmer.
     John Maddox--Four miles from Front Royal on Hominy Road, is a
       farmer.
     George Leech--Three miles from Front Royal, on the Culpepper
       Pike. Shoemaker shop.
     James Bolton--Eight or nine miles from Front Royal, on
       Culpepper Pike, left hand side. Father is a blacksmith.
     James Anderson--Resides with Bolton.
     William Blackwell--Formerly on Baltimore & Ohio Railroad.

You will see later on in Paine's statement that I quizzed him on the
same subject. I presume my information was not always reliable, but was
nearly so.

The following is quoted from an interrupted Confederate letter, in
speaking of Mosby:

     "He is well off for Greenbacks since he captured those
     paymasters on the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad line. When the
     plunder secured on that occasion came to be divided up every
     officer and man who assisted got $1,922.50. A good deal of
     this money you have already got back. I will tell you how. Old
     men and women residents in the neighborhood of Upperville, who
     have gone within your lines and taken the oath of allegiance,
     have been sent by Mosby and many of his men to Berlin, to
     purchase goods: such as hats, &c., and have paid for these in
     captured Greenbacks, and got the goods out to the Battalion."

This information was correct. I captured one man's part of the plunder
entire, or nearly so. The money was yet in its original shape, as issued
to these paymasters from the Treasury Department. I took it there and
they were able to identify the packages.

The capture was made in this way: One of Mosby's men named Dr. John A.
Kline, of Loudoun County, Virginia, came to Baltimore. He was
accompanied by his mother, Mrs. Mary A. Kline, and a niece, Nannie O.
Bannon. He became intoxicated, talked too much, and the whole party was
arrested. They were searched, the women by one of my female officers,
and the money, about two thousand dollars, was found on the mother, in a
belt worn next to her skin. We confined the women in a hotel, but were
finally forced to send them to jail, as the mother got intoxicated, and
so disturbed the other guests.

Kline was sentenced to ten years hard labor. The mother was confined
until the close of the war.

Appleton, for 1864, speaks of the train robbery, on page 156, as
follows:

     "All that district of country west of Washington and
     immediately south of the Potomac River, was infested with
     guerrillas throughout the year. Colonel Mosby was their
     leader. Many of their expeditions were conducted with great
     boldness. Sometimes they came within a few miles of
     Washington.

     "On one occasion during the year they captured a passenger
     train on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, between Harper's
     Ferry and Martinsburg. A rail was removed, and the train thus
     running off the track was brought to a stop. Their proceedings
     have been thus graphically described," etc.

     "They then made a final search, and saw the work was complete;
     the train had been burned, a paymaster with sixty-three
     thousand dollars robbed, the passengers plundered of their
     hats, coats, boots, watches and money, and locking and burning
     the mail, express, and baggage, they made us a boisterous
     farewell."

The matter of my suggestion for a party to compete with Mosby, went
through all the channels, up to Major General Halleck, the President's
military adviser. I was informed that General Halleck approved of it, to
give me a commission as Captain and Assistant Adjutant General, to
report to the Adjutant General. This was suggested to overcome rank
restrictions. The matter, however, was delayed (I will refer to it again
in March, 1865). The war ended without this scheme being accomplished.
Meantime I declined to accept several tenders of commissions in
promotion, expecting to realize this greater recognition.

The following tenders of promotion were declined:


     Headquarters 8th N. Y. Arty.
       before Petersburg, Va.,
     Nov. 22, 1864.

     Friend Smith.

     How are you old boy and how have you enjoyed yourself since I
     last saw you? I am well, and full of fight as ever. We have
     done some fighting since we came into the field, and would
     like to have you with us.

     There is a Captain's commission waiting for you if you will
     accept it. If you will send answer to me immediately, I will
     get it for you.

     The officers of the Regiment would like to have you come. The
     Regiment is commanded by Major Baker, our Colonel (Willett)
     Commands the 1st Brigade, 2nd Div. 2nd Corps.

     We have some good times and some d----d hard times, but I
     think it will pay.

     I hope you will join us as Captain.

     Good Bye,
     J. W. HOLMES,
     Major 8th N. Y. H. Arty.
     2nd Brig. 2nd Div. 2nd Corps.




     Harper's Ferry, Va.
     Dec. 15, 1864.

     Dear Captain:

     I suppose I have the right to address you by the above title
     now. Your Commission as Captain came yesterday and you will
     receive it by same mail as you do this.

     Your Friend,
     J. H. GRAHAM.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Nov. 20, 1864.

     Special Order No. 171.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. Arty. Comdg. Detective Corps 8th
     Army Corps, and one man as guard will at once proceed to
     Washington, D. C., in charge of prisoner J. J. Chancellor, on
     arrival at that point he will report with Chancellor, without
     delay, to Hon. C. A. Dana, Asst. Secretary of War. Having
     completed his duties at that place he will at once return with
     the guard to these headquarters.

     Quartermasters will furnish necessary transportation.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     WM. H. WIEGEL,
     Capt. & Asst. Provost Marshal.





FILE XXV.

Capture of Confederate bonds and scrip--Arrest of Pittman, Brewer and
Fowler; Lieut. Smith, alias I. K. Shaffer, alias George Comings, led them,
victims, into a maze, to their undoing.


I will now tell you of the Confederate bond matter. Special Order No.
172 enabled me to make my arrangements at Willard's Hotel:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Nov. 20, 1864.

     Special Order No. 172.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y., and one man will proceed to
     Washington, D. C., on secret service. On completion of his
     duties he will report with his guard at these headquarters.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Pro. Marshal.




     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, Nov. 24, 1864.

     Lt. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to report the arrest of J. S.
     Pittman, Dr. D. R. Brewer and T. S. Fowler.

     I herewith hand you a carpet sack, containing Confederate
     Bonds and Scrip amounting to $82,575, which was collected in
     different ways from these parties. Also $22 from Dr. Brewer
     and $280 from Pittman, in currency, and a trunk said to
     contain 23 dozen cards (cotton and woolen cards) from Brewer's
     house.

     Herewith I hand you several statements in reference to the
     case.

     I would respectfully call your attention to Mr. Fowler's
     statement, viz.: that "that they sell this stuff to Jews, &c.,
     that run the blockade," and that "it is all done for the
     benefit of the U. S. Service," and then to Pittman's statement
     that he did not know the New York man who was to buy of him in
     Washington, and then to my statement, i. e., that I told him
     that I was from New York, and gave him my name and address in
     writing, and also told him how I intended to use the funds
     with blockade runners. Putting all these statements together I
     should conclude that if he is doing all this "for the benefit
     of the service," that he would have informed the authorities
     of my intentions.

     Pittman's and Brewer's statements were made under oath. Brewer
     stated to me that the cards were bought to send to Dixie. In
     his sworn statement, after arrest, he declined giving the
     history of them, as it might injure his friends.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


This story is quite complicated. During the progress of this case, I was
known to the parties as "Comings," "Shaffer" and Lieutenant Smith, and
to show how complex it was, although Pittman and Brewer were together in
prison, until trial came they had not been able to understand that the
three names were for one person.

When I was about to go on the stand in their trial, their counsel asked
me if Comings and Shaffer would be present? I answered yes; but when on
the stand I began and told the story, their counsel claimed the
Government had taken an advantage of them in concealing the facts.

Captain Hassing was my medium for getting into the case. It was a
Baltimore gang, but either from suspicion of Hassing, or for other
reasons, they would not meet the New York party (me) in Baltimore, so I
arranged for a meeting in Washington, at Willard's Hotel. I went over
and engaged a room there and registered; the following wire came:


     Baltimore, Md.,
     Nov. 20, 1864.

     I. K. Shaffer,
     Willards, Washington.

     Have seen the parties arrangements are made for to-morrow be
     here to-night.

     Capt. HASSING.


In reply, I wired:


     Washington, D. C.,
     Nov. 20, 1864.

     Capt. Hassing,
     German St. Green House, Baltimore.

     Telegram recd will meet you to-morrow evening at place
     appointed cannot close up my business with my friend here
     until morning.

     I. K. SHAFFER,
     Willards Hotel.


The above telegram and the one following were for Hassing to exhibit to
the gang, to show my earnestness:


     Willards Hotel
     Washington, Nov 21 1864

     I. K. Shaffer
     Telegraph Office
     Barnum's Baltimore

     Disposed of documents as you desired will see you in New York
     on 26. Your telegram recd.

     G. B. LYMAN.


I "fixed up" and went over to Washington on the same train with Pittman.
I entered a forward car and Hassing saw to it that Pittman took one in
the rear. At Washington I took a cab and landed in Willard's Hotel ahead
of Pittman. Willard's, as you know, is in the shadow of the Treasury
Department.

I was a sight to look upon; I wore a beaver, had my hair curled, had a
birth mark on one cheek, and carried a cane; I was a New York swell in
appearance surely. It almost made me sick to look in the mirror.

We introduced ourselves, each to the other, and then we went to my room.
Pittman was very cautious; he said every other person in Washington was
a detective. I assured him of my sympathy and told him that in New York
we did not suffer from such surveillance. He said he was happy to become
acquainted. He said he was so timid that he did not dare bring his bonds
and scrip along, until after meeting me, when his confidence came to
him, and said he would go over to Alexandria and return in the morning
ready to do business.

We went down stairs; my two officers (Babcock and Horner), who were
following me to make the arrest when I indicated the propitious moment,
were there. Pittman passed out the side entrance, and then Babcock and
Horner invited him into their carriage. He protested, of course, but to
no use; in the carriage they searched him and then hurried him on to
Baltimore. They could not get out of him who had been with him up stairs
in the hotel.

I then went into the barber shop, had my curls straightened, washed the
birth mark off, and went to bed. In the morning I wired myself, using
Pittman's name. The telegram I used as an introduction to Dr. Brewer, as
follows:


     Washington, D. C.,
     Nov 22 1864

     Geo. Comings
     Washington Hotel
     Baltimore

     Go to see Dr. Brewer yourself. I will come on as soon as I see
     my mother in Alexandria. Telegraph me the result of your
     visit.

     J. T. PITTMAN.


Dr. Brewer resided at the corner of Sharp and Conway Streets, not far
from our office. I rang his bell and he responded. I unceremoniously
rubbed my telegram under his nose as an introduction, giving him no
chance to survey me. After considerable talk, explaining the necessity
for my early return to New York, he said he would go and get the bonds
and scrip. Having previously engaged a room at the Maltby House, I
offered to walk with him, hoping thus to learn where the bonds were
deposited, but that did not work. He later met me at the Maltby House,
and we went up stairs to count over and settle; the two officers
following to make the arrest when signalled, remained in the rotunda.

It took until dark came on to finish our business. We packed it all into
a carpet sack. I gave Brewer $1,300 in currency, and then we went down
stairs. The arrangement had been for my men to arrest him after he got
far enough away from me, but so much time had elapsed, I presume my men
had become careless, at any rate they were not in sight. I did not dare
let Brewer get out of my reach, so I proposed to walk with him, to get
some fresh air. When near his home, and when I had about made up my mind
that I would have to make the arrest, to recover my $1,300, my men
appeared; I skipped, and they made the arrest. Brewer was obstinate, but
finally assumed a more reasonable attitude.

In their defence they tried to lighten the case by claiming the paper
was forged, but when the Government demanded to know where they got the
paper, they failed to inform.




FILE XXVI.

Arrest of T. A. Menzier and expose of a prominent railroad official--
Arrest of Barton R. Zantzinger, involving Milnor Jones--Arrest of John
Henry Skinner Quinn, alias J. Y. Plater, alias Simpson, a spy--Arrest of
E. R. Rich, a spy.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Dec. 4, 1864.

     Capt. W. H. Wiegel,
     Asst. Provost Marshal.

     Captain.--I have the honor to report that by direction of
     General Wallace, I arrested Mr. T. A. Menzier and locked him
     up in this jail, and ordered the officer of the Navy that was
     in company with him, Surgeon L. J. Draper, of the
     Receiving-Ship "Princeton," Philadelphia Harbor, to report to
     you at ten o'clock A. M. to-day. These parties were in town
     yesterday morning and intend to return to Philadelphia this
     evening; neither of them had papers. Menzier's sister, at
     whose house I arrested them is a rebel.

     The rebs were having a grand jubilee over his visit. The
     Doctor had no arms.

     I am, Captain,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.



I found in this house a number of prominent citizens, among whom was a
very high officer in a big railroad company. He begged me not to report
his presence, with which request I complied, in my written report, but
did not, of course, fail to report verbally to General Wallace. This man
was in confidential relations with the departments at Washington.

Menzier was a Rebel assistant surgeon. Both were turned over to
Commodore Dornin, for the Navy's disposition.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Dec. 5, 1864.

     Capt. W. H. Wiegel,
     Asst. Provost Marshal,
     8th Army Corps.

     Captain.--I have the honor to report that I confined Barton R.
     Zantzinger, from the Rebel Army.

     Herewith I hand you his statement, which places Mr. Milnor
     Jones in a worse fix than ever. Perhaps this corroborative
     evidence will be sufficient to convict Jones of blockade
     running.

     I think Zantzinger should be detained as a witness, if for
     nothing else.

     I am Captain,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Dec. 6, 1864.

     Capt. W. H. Wiegel,
     Asst. Provost Marshal,
     8th Army Corps.

     Captain.--I have the honor to report the arrest of John Henry
     Skinner Quinn, alias J. Y. Plater, alias Simpson, on charge of
     being a spy.

     I hand you two sworn statements that he made to me, also his
     memorandum book in which is a partial description of his first
     visit to Baltimore, also some entries, some of which he
     explains in his statement. I also hand you his furlough, which
     he said he did not have, in his first statement.

     On this trip he registered at Miller's Hotel as "Simpson." On
     23d April last, he registered at same hotel as John Y. Plater.

     You can see by his statements that he tries to conceal the
     Rebel sympathizers of this Department, and some he positively
     refuses to name, but asks me to kill him, and not ask him any
     more questions.

     He came to this office to report as a Rebel deserter, but when
     he found that I had been on his track, he owned up, but
     refused to implicate his friends.

     I am, Captain,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


As General Wallace had said, it was our duty to ascertain by every
means, the status of all persons; our archives were crowded with
information, which materially helped us to avoid the dilemma General
Schenck described.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Dec. 7, 1864.

     Capt. W. H. Wiegel,
     Asst. Provost Marshal,
     8th Army Corps.

     Captain.--I have the honor to report the arrest of E. R. Rich,
     of the 1st Md. Rebel Cavalry, on the charge of being a spy. He
     came to this office to report and take the oath of allegiance,
     but I think he did not come until he heard from his friend
     Quinn, with whom he came to this city. I hand you herewith his
     sworn statement, memoranda and pocket book, which show his
     character.

     You will also see an entry in his memoranda where Skinner
     Quinn (now in prison) started for Baltimore last spring, which
     corroborates Quinn's statement. You will also see that he
     registered under several names.

     The memorandum book shows that it was his intention to return
     for good to Virginia.

     Very respy. your obdt. servt,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


Both Quinn and Rich were sentenced to be hanged, but their sentences
were finally commuted to imprisonment during the continuance of the
war.




FILE XXVII.

Statement of Illinois Crothers, giving valuable and reliable information,
implicating Mr. William Mitchell and a Mrs. Keenan, of Winchester,
Virginia--Report on Daniel W. Jones and Joseph Bratton--Am given unlimited
access to prisoners in Baltimore city jail.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Dec. 10, 1864.

     Lt. Col. Woolley,
     Provost Marshal.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to hand you statement made by
     Illinois Crothers, of 1st Md. Rebel Cavalry, who came to this
     office to report.

     I questioned him closely and on every point of importance, he
     seemed very ignorant. He was in this city several days without
     reporting, and to all appearances is as bitter a Rebel to-day
     as ever.

     I took from him a document marked "A," which shows that it was
     generally known to the authorities in Virginia, that he was
     coming to Maryland, and unless they were sure he would return,
     he would not have been granted the liberty. You can also see
     that he came an unusual route, for a deserter, i. e., by the
     way of Richmond.

     I have reliable information that all of the Rebel Spies,
     commissioned as such, are from the Signal Corps.

     Harry Brogden, named in the document, was once in our hands,
     tried as a spy. Herewith I hand you Brogden's history.

     I think that this document shows that he, (Crothers), came
     with the consent of the Rebel authorities, and with the
     intention to return.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.

     P.S.--Mrs. Keenan, of Winchester, should be arrested.

     This is not the first transaction of the kind implicating Mr.
     Wm. Mitchell. (H. B. S.)

It required experience and skill to cull out the spies from among real
deserters and refugees. Spies would swallow the oath of allegiance as
easy as water. One of the best tests of probabilities, was to ascertain
the route travelled in coming out from the Confederacy.

Harry Brogden was the Confederate secret signal officer on the Potomac.
No real deserter or refugee came by his way. I knew him, and if my
operations had been extended to the peninsula between the Potomac and
Rappahannock, as we desired, I would have caught him; personally he was
a fine fellow. He was a prisoner at Fort McHenry under me; he and I
joked about turning our "arms into ploughshares" many times. He was
certainly as loyal to his side as I to mine.

The following is a report made from the records in my office, and it
serves to show how thorough in detail our data had come to be:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Dec. 13, 1864.

     Lt. Col. John Woolley,
     Provost Marshal,
     8th Army Corps.

     Colonel.--I have the honor to give you a history of the
     previous arrests of Daniel W. Jones, and Joseph Bratton, of
     Somerset Co., Md.

     The first arrest of Daniel W. Jones was made in 1862, and he
     was placed in Marshal McPhail's custody, under charge of
     attacking an enrolling officer. He was afterwards released on
     giving bonds to the amount of $2,000 to keep the peace, and to
     deport himself in every way becoming a loyal citizen. A copy
     of the bond is on file in this office.

     He was again arrested by General Lockwood, May 7, 1864, on
     charge of having violated his parole; on this last charge four
     sworn statements are on file in this office, one to the effect
     that he drew a revolver on a Union man because said Union man
     declared his sentiments.

     Joseph Bratton was arrested March 31, 1864, on the charge of
     disloyalty, and aiding the Rebels. A sworn statement now on
     file in this office shows that Bratton aided an escaped
     prisoner from Point Lookout to evade military and get back
     within the Rebel lines.

     I am, Colonel,
     Very respy.-your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


The following gave me unlimited access to our prisoners confined in the
city jail:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Dec. 19, 1864.

     Col. Thomas C. James,
     Warden, City Jail.

     The bearer, Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. H. Arty., who
     commands my detective Corps, is permitted to see any prisoner
     in the City Jail who belongs to this office, and at such times
     as he may deem necessary for the good of the service.

     He will be permitted to have private interviews if he desires
     them.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Pro. Marshal.





FILE XXVIII.

Statements: Jeremiah Artis, a real deserter from the Confederates--William
J. Bradley, an honest refugee--Charles E. Langley, an official Confederate
spy--Langley, personating a correspondent of the New York "Tribune," was a
most successful and dangerous spy.


I have told you that it required experience and skill to determine who
were honest deserters, sick of the Confederate service, and seeking
homes in our lines, or who were refugees, entitled to a refuge, or who
were spies. Under the head of spies were placed those who came North to
visit friends, or gain a remount intending to return to the Confederate
lines; these latter were not being especially employed as spies, but
they were persons who might carry valuable information. But it was the
real official spy that we were after.

By a "remount" I mean those who were granted leave of absence by the
Confederates for the purpose of remounting. These were mounted men who
having lost their horses, were given a "remount pass" which was
practically authority to come within our lines and gain a horse by any
means; therefore without desire to weary you I will give you the
examinations of one of each class, to wit: Jeremiah Artis, a real
deserter; Wm. J. Bradley, a refugee; Charles E. Langley, one of the most
expert and successful official spies, who is the one I referred to in
the Emmerich case as the "pal" of the conductor on the Baltimore and
Ohio railroad.

In reading these statements, you will notice jumps, or gaps, where these
occur; it indicates a question from me eliciting the statement
following.

     Statement of Jeremiah Artis (real deserter).

     "I kept store in Smithville, St. Mary's County, seven or eight
     miles from Point Lookout, about one and a half miles from the
     Bay. I joined the 1st Va. Cav., then was transferred to the
     1st Md. Cav., was then transferred to the 2nd Md. Infty.,
     Com'd by Capt. Crane. Lt. Col. Herbert is the field officer. I
     left Md. Sep. 1861, crossed the Potomac at night. I first
     heard of the President's proclamation, saw it in a Baltimore
     paper sometime early in the spring of 1864, the paper was an
     old one. I was in Maryland at the battle of Antietam or
     Sharpsburg, was also at Gettysburg, was transferred from
     Cavalry to Infantry but wouldn't stay, rejoined the Cavalry,
     was with Bradley T. Johnson at Chambersburg; had no hand in
     burning it, was kept outside of the city. I had been arrested
     while trying to cross the Potomac in July, was kept in
     Richmond awhile, then sent to my Regiment. Got as far as
     Winchester when Early came into Maryland. When I was arrested,
     I was trying to get home to stay; was on the Virginia side at
     the time I was arrested by the conscription officers. When I
     was in Maryland I would have deserted but had no chance.

     I left my Regiment this last time about Sept. 22 or 23d, in
     the Shenandoah Valley, near Port Republic, crossed Brown's
     Gap, then through Green County, Madison, Orange,
     Spottsylvania, Stafford, King George, Westmorland Counties, to
     Northumberland County to the Potomac River, crossed over to
     Britton's Bay. I had no furlough or pass. The Confederate Army
     was moving at the time and I had no trouble in going through
     the country.

     If I had been arrested I would have said I belonged to no
     regiment, as my time was out. I walked from Britton's Bay
     direct to the Patuxent River to Spencer's Wharf, and took
     steamboat to Baltimore, arrived there at 11 at night and slept
     at a hotel; next morning I reported to the Provost Marshal's
     office. I had no uniform except a jacket that I threw away in
     Virginia, near the river. I bought a coat from some young men
     I saw there.

     D. Hammell came with me all the time. I expected when I
     reported to be allowed to take the oath of allegiance and to
     be allowed to remain at home. I prefer soldiering to anything
     else in the world, and if I was as strong a Southern man as I
     was when I first went away, I would stay in the Rebel army, no
     matter how much hardship I would have to endure. I think I
     could be a truly loyal citizen.

     When I landed at Britton's Bay I did not go home because I
     wished to come to Baltimore and report. I knew there was a
     Provost Marshal to report to in Baltimore. Have seen no new
     recruits from Maryland in our regiment lately. We got a few
     recruits while in Maryland this last time. I did not know any
     of them, or where they were from; there were very few. I don't
     think our Company got any of them. Captain Brown was formerly
     our Captain; he was killed."


     Statement of William J. Bradley (a refugee), a Californian:

     (Dec. 31, 1864.) "I left Richmond, Virginia, on Dec. 11th. I
     was given the following directions and a pass by order of the
     Rebel Secretary of War, to come North; the directions were
     given by the Chief Signal Officer, viz: get off the cars at
     Milford, see Boles at Bowling Green, Gibbs at Port Royal,
     Rollins at Port Conway. I went to Oak Grove one and a half
     miles from the Signal Camp. The Signal Camp is on Bridge
     Creek, five miles from its mouth. At a point on the creek
     where there was an old bridge which was burned, is where you
     strike the road that leads to camp, which camp is about three
     hundred yards from the creek, and on the site of the birth
     place of Washington. They have a boat there in which they
     cross the Potomac; it is about twenty-six feet long, and
     capable of carrying about sixteen persons; they keep it about
     three-quarters of a mile above, on the creek.

     At the Signal Camp I saw about twelve men, commanded by
     Sergeant Harry Brogden; they were armed with revolvers. They
     collect passes that are granted in Richmond, run the mail and
     Rebel agents North, and back again. They told me they were
     expecting some twelve or fifteen parties back from Maryland
     again, very soon.

     When I came over in the boat it was manned by four oarsmen and
     one steersman, and as passengers, Norris, an Englishman and
     myself, and brought over a mail. We landed at Cobb Neck.
     Morris said he would start back from the other side of the
     Wicomico.

     The following are additional names of members of the Signal
     Corps:

     ---- Rowley.
     ---- Reed, formerly a boatman on the Potomac.
     ---- Brockenborough.

     These men said they were daily expecting members of Mosby's
     command on the Neck."

The route Bradley came was the exact route of the regular spies; but the
information he gave me was of a character to prove that although he came
by the official route, he was being honest with me. Some of the
information was new, and all of it was true and valuable. I drew out the
detailed information about the signal camp to guide me. I was determined
to capture it, and in April following my expedition was planned to
start, but was prevented by the assassination of the President.


     Baltimore City Jail,
     Dec. 23, 1864.

     Statement of Charles E. Langley (official Confederate spy).

     "I was born and raised in Winchester, Virginia. I resided in
     Baltimore some time previous to the breaking out of the war. I
     was in Washington at the Inauguration of President Lincoln;
     was keeping a butter store in Baltimore.

     In the summer of 1861, or perhaps early in the fall, I went to
     Winchester; my parents resided there. The cars ran through to
     Winchester. I went on the cars, no passes were required from
     me on the road. The Confederate troops occupied Winchester at
     the time. I went to work on the Winchester Railroad after I
     arrived; worked a short time. I remained at Winchester all
     that winter; was not in the army.

     The next spring (1862), I went to Richmond. Went to work
     driving an express wagon. Worked at that until the next fall.
     I worked for the Southern Express Co.; a man named Holbrook,
     from Baltimore, was at work for the Express Co. at the same
     time. The draft came off that fall and I left for Winchester
     to escape it. I tried to pretend I was from Maryland, and
     therefore exempt, but as I was too well known it would not
     work. I did nothing after I returned to Winchester, and staid
     there till Christmas. The town was then occupied by Union
     troops. About the last of Jan. 1863, I visited Baltimore and
     tried to get a situation; I remained in Baltimore about two
     months, doing nothing. I stopped at Mann's Hotel, that is, I
     got my meals there, as I wanted them. I stopped part of the
     time with "Bonis," a tinner, out Fayette street; I used to
     board with them before the war.

     I went back to Winchester about the first of March, but could
     get nothing to do. I staid about a couple of weeks and then
     came back to Baltimore. I tried again to get work here, tried
     to get on the Baltimore & Ohio Railroad. I worked on that road
     before the war, about three or four years. I offered my
     services to Mr. Smith, Master of Transportation, as a kind of
     scout for them, to ascertain when the road was injured, and
     where, and other information relative to the safety of the
     road. I did go up the road for him on several occasions in
     1863 and gave him satisfaction.

     I went up the road for Mr. Smith at the time Lee was crossing
     into Maryland; could not get back, and went home to
     Winchester; the Rebels occupied the town. I was arrested for
     being in Maryland, as a Yankee spy, was kept about a week and
     then discharged, as they had no proof and my friends in
     Winchester got me off.

     In the fall of 1863, when the Rebels left, I came back to
     Baltimore. I went to see Mr. Smith, but could not get any work
     from him. I remained in Baltimore until about Nov. 1st, when I
     went on to New York to make arrangements with Mr. Sydney H.
     Gay, to obtain Richmond papers for him. Mr. Gay is connected
     with the Tribune; I went to work for him, used to go down the
     valley to Winchester and obtain papers from parties down the
     valley, further south than Winchester. I was successful in
     obtaining papers but could have done better if I had had an
     assistant. I don't think I gave my employer justice, but I
     remained there to do the best I could. I continued in this
     business until April 1st, 1864. I was stopped part of the time
     on account of want of means; my pay was not sufficient to
     enable me to make proper arrangements.

     I remained in Winchester about two weeks trying to make
     arrangements. I would not tell who I obtained the papers from
     in the valley. I used to bring the papers as far as
     Kearneysville. I always reported to the Provost Marshal at
     Kearneysville when I arrived there, of any information I had
     obtained of the (Rebel) enemy.

     I went down the valley to a friend, near Strausburg, to see
     about getting the papers more regularly. I got inside the
     Rebel lines and could not get out. I remained inside their
     lines at New Market, with some friends, about six weeks. I
     staid there until the fight with Sigel. That very day
     Breckenridge had me arrested for holding communication with
     the Federal troops. I was kept in confinement two months, and
     afterwards in arrest under three thousand dollars bail for
     five months.

     About Sept. 1st, I came up to Winchester to my home, and was
     ordered back again. I went back and staid until about October,
     the last of the month. I then crossed the Ridge and made my
     way to Harper's Ferry. I got on the cars at Van Kleeve's
     Station, Baltimore & Ohio Railroad, and came on to
     Baltimore. I arrived here about the last of October. I stopped
     at Mr. Perigoy's, No. 34 George street; his wife is a distant
     relative of mine. I was not doing anything in particular,
     intended to go to New York to see Mr. Gay. I was also trying
     to find out who caused me to be arrested by Breckenridge, as I
     was confident some Rebels in Baltimore were the cause of it.

     [Illustration: CHARLES E. LANGLEY]

     I also heard that Breckenridge said a citizen of Kearneysville
     had reported me as having given information to the A. Adjutant
     General at Harper's Ferry.

     I was arrested Sunday night on the street on my way home, by
     Government detectives. I gave them a false name. I never was
     in the Rebel army. Have never taken the oath of allegiance;
     have never been asked to take it; think my arrest was not
     justified."

     (Signed) CHAS. E. LANGLEY.


I followed this man a year. After I arrested him very powerful interests
tried to frighten me; tried to make me believe the prisoner was such an
important person that his name must be whispered only. That, in fact, he
was Mr. Lincoln's personal man, and reporting only to Mr. Lincoln. They
threatened to have my commission taken from me. Finally the prisoner
himself offered to give up the "hotel burners" of New York, if I would
let up. I answered that I thought "a bird in hand worth two in the
bush," and I held him.

Upon his person I found his authority from the New York "Tribune" to
collect news at the front. This authority had been his open sesame
through our lines. I came to New York and saw Mr. Sidney B. Gay, of the
"Tribune"; he informed me that he remembered such a person, that he came
to him highly recommended; that he gave him the authority but had never
heard from him. I learned later that the powerful interests that were
working on me to compel his release were the same that had highly
recommended him to the "Tribune." He was a very successful and dangerous
spy until I interfered.

I will not tell you who the powerful interests were; suffice it to say
they were Confederates, doing good work for the Confederacy all the
while. Yet they had the entree of the departments at Washington, having
very powerful influence there. There were no other parties in the United
States so strongly allied. Through their medium many strange things were
manipulated. I will not mention their names, for they are all dead now.
I consider Langley's arrest one of the most important.

Of all the newspapers the "Tribune" was the very best to conjure with.
Any person who could show credentials from that paper would undoubtedly
be welcome anywhere on our lines.

Langley knew that I would visit the "Tribune," hence his efforts in his
statement to account for why he had not served them.




FILE XXIX.

Patrick Scally, an honest deserter from the Confederate service--A sketch
of the defences of Richmond.


The following statement is interesting as showing how a poor, ignorant,
drunken man was hurried off with Gilmor and Bradley T. Johnson, in July,
'64, when they retreated from north of Baltimore.

I feel sure the whiskey was paid for by Judge Grason, or Mr. Cockey, or
some of the other disloyals spoken of in Mr. Kremer's and my own former
reports. They undoubtedly gave him the horse, also:


     Baltimore, Md.,
     Dec. 23, 1864.

     Statement of Patrick Scally:

     "I was born in Ireland. I lived in Texas, Baltimore County,
     for five years before I went South; my father and mother live
     there. I am a laborer.

     I went South on the tenth of last July, that is, I joined
     Gilmor's command at Texas. I joined Company C, Second Maryland
     Battalion. They gave me a horse, carbine and sabre. The
     second day after I joined them I was in the fight in front of
     Washington, but did not like the fighting much.

     I was drunk when I joined them and didn't know what I was
     doing.

     I deserted from them on the 1st day of August between Hancock
     and Cumberland, and went to work for a farmer named McLean, a
     good Union man; he didn't know that I was a deserter. I worked
     for him about two weeks. I then went to Cumberland, and then
     went to Pittsburg and there worked for Wood, Matthews & Co.,
     nearly four months. I was afraid, while at work for Mr.
     McLean, that the Rebels would catch me and shoot me.

     I didn't report at Pittsburg because I didn't know there was
     any necessity for so doing; the people in Pittsburg did not
     know that I had been with the Rebels. I was only with the
     Rebels three weeks, they never gave me a uniform; they once
     paid me ten dollars in Confederate money.

     I was sworn into the Rebel service the same day that I
     enlisted, while I was drunk. I wore the same citizens clothes
     that I wore from home, while with the Rebels. I would have
     deserted the next morning after I joined them if I could, but
     could not get any chance.

     I left Pittsburg last Sunday night, got home to Texas
     yesterday evening. My father told me I would have to come
     here and take the oath and if I did not I would be arrested as
     a spy. I knew I had to give myself up before. I came in town
     this morning and gave myself up.

     I cannot read or write. I have heard the newspapers read, but
     not often. I never heard of the President's Proclamation,
     don't know what it is."

                      his
     (Signed) PATRICK  X  SCALLY.
                      mark


Below is a sketch of the fortifications bounding Richmond on the east
and north. The information came to me from Dr. A's brother, who had just
arrived from Richmond. The source of information being so reliable, a
copy was made and forwarded to General Grant. The date of its
transmission I have not.

       *       *       *       *       *

When General Grant made the assault on Richmond, on the east and north,
on Sept. 26, 1864, the colored troops under General Birney encountered
this ditch.

[Illustration]

I quote from reports:

     "On Sep. 28th a movement was made by General Grant on the
     North of the James. It was predicated on the belief that only
     a small force of the enemy occupied the works on the North
     side of the river."

     "General Birney was ordered by a rapid movement at daylight,
     to capture the enemy's work in front of Deep Bottom, and gain
     possession of the New Market road leading to Richmond."

     "Two Regiments only, of the Colored Division, reached one of
     the Rebel forts, where they found a ditch ten feet wide and
     eight feet deep between them and the parapet.

     More than a hundred of these brave fellows jumped into the
     ditch and assisted some of their comrades to mount the parapet
     by allowing them to climb up on their shoulders, about a dozen
     succeeded in mounting the parapet by this means. But this
     force which had bravely pushed on, was far too small to
     capture the fort, and was, therefore, compelled to retire,
     leaving their comrades in the ditch of the fort.

     But these were unable to make good their escape, as it would
     have been certain death to leave the ditch and return to the
     troops, and were afterwards compelled to surrender.

     About 800 men were lost in this assault in killed, wounded,
     and prisoners."

I regret not having the date upon which my information was forwarded to
General Grant, but it evidently was not in his hand by September 28th.

[Illustration: COLONEL HARRY GILMOR]




FILE XXX.

Confederate Colonel Harry Gilmor, the raider, telling how he did not
"come back" as a conquering hero; of the sword he never received; of his
capture, etc.--The arrest and conviction of the fair donor.


Colonel Harry Gilmor, who commanded a regiment of cavalry in the
Confederate service, was a Baltimorean. He was the beau ideal of its
"blue blood" ladies, or many of them; he was their hero who was to
ultimately capture the Monumental City, who was to march down Charles
Street Avenue as conquerors only return. He had earnestly tried to
produce the closing scene of his drama in July, but failed; when, to
cheer him to renew his efforts, they proposed to present him with a
magnificent sabre. They purchased the best to be found from Messrs.
Schuyler, Hartley & Graham, arms dealers, then in Maiden Lane, New York
(now on Broadway), paying for it one hundred and twenty-five dollars in
gold.

I was told the dainty creatures were so anxious for the safe custody of
their token of war, that they placed it under the British flag, pending
the opportunity to get it to the Colonel; that is, they left it with
Mrs. Frederick Bernal, wife of the British Consul at Baltimore. The
sympathies of many of the Britishers were decidedly with the South.

Gilmor was a born raider. He used to raid the hearts of these Blue
Belles "befo de wah," on Charles Street Avenue. His command was made up
largely of Marylanders, and Maryland was frequently the victim of his
incursions. Our desire to "possess" him was perhaps as great as that of
any of his lady admirers.

On November 1st, 1864, I intercepted the sword on its way to Harry. From
the person of the messenger I got a letter which was to make him "solid"
when he should arrive in the Confederate territory. Gilmor was
understood to have been wounded, and as being then laid up at the
Inglenby Mansion, three or four miles from Duffield Station, Virginia,
on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad (the Inglenby family were descendants
of one of the original colonists).

The letter was somewhat blindly framed, it did not mention the bearer,
except to say that "he is perfectly reliable" or something to that
effect.

I proposed to General Wallace that I would be the messenger, using this
letter, and would thus locate Gilmor, so that he might be captured.

With one man, Mr. Kraft, I started for Harper's Ferry, reported to
General Stevenson, engaged one of his scouts, Corporal George R. Redman
(who at one time was of my corps) to go with me and equipped with the
below described pass, I started out on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad
for Duffield Station.


     Office Provost Marshal,
     Military District of Harper's Ferry.

     Nov. 5, 1864.

     Guards and Pickets will pass bearer in and around this
     Military District. Good for three days.

     By order of

     Brigadier General STEVENSON,
     Commanding.

     A. D. PRATT,
     Capt. & Provost Marshal.


It was my custom never to have about me anything to indicate my name or
identity. And to conceal my passes, I frequently hammered them down into
a small wad in the finger of a glove. This pass shows such an
appearance. The pass did not indicate Duffield, because that destination
was a secret.

Duffield was a small way station, and any stranger alighting there,
especially in those days, would be noted. Many of the employees of the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad were Confederate sympathizers (some were
quite active). To give no chance for warning, we waited until just after
the train started up, and then we dropped off, on the far side,
covering view of us until the train was again under headway.

We separated and I went ahead, across fields, until I was so far away as
to apparently have no connection with my men, who were following; we had
about three or four miles to go thus. Finally, when I reached the
Inglenby house, my boys were near enough to be in sight, yet concealed.

At the house I introduced myself and presented my letter. For the
purpose, I represented myself as a Baltimorean, of course--a "hack
driver at Barnum's Hotel," I learned that Gilmor had been there, but
only recently had gone down the valley. I told them of the sword, that
the donors wanted to learn how to reach Colonel Gilmor, accurately;
hence my trip. They treated me very nicely, prepared a good meal for me
with true Virginia hospitality; finally I departed.

When I arrived where the boys were concealed, I found them extremely
anxious to get away from that section. While they were laying there a
man had approached them, saying that he knew they were "deserters from
the Yanks"; the boys admitted it. He asked them if they wanted to go
South. They told him "yes." He told them he knew it, and after it got
dark he would take them. He told them that some of Mosby's men were just
over on the road. My boys were not really hungry to go South, but wanted
to start across the country for Harper's Ferry without delay, which we
did, arriving there late in the evening, in the custody of our own
pickets, who had captured us at Halltown.

Had I reached Gilmor I believe I might have tried to capture him, had I
found the odds favorable. He was a giant in stature. How game he was I
do not know. I will give you a reproduction of his photograph, which I
have.

Upon my return to Baltimore I arrested the representative fair donor of
the sabre, as General Wallace has told. She resided in the ultra
fashionable neighborhood, not far from Monument Square. After I had
searched her house, she accompanied me to the sidewalk, but absolutely
refused to enter my carriage. I informed her that it would be much more
agreeable to ride than to walk, but still she refused. I then told her
that I would be gentlemanly if allowed, but I insisted that she must get
into the carriage. She finally complied.

The lady was tried before a military commission of which Lieut. Colonel
J. H. Barrett was president. She was sentenced to five years
imprisonment at Fitchburg, Massachusetts, and to pay a fine of five
thousand dollars.

A Mr. William J. Ives, who purchased the sword in New York, was also
tried. He escaped punishment on the plea that he was ignorant of the
purpose for which the sword was purchased.

One of Gilmor's officers I subsequently captured. He had come into our
lines, having one of those "remount" leaves from his command. It was not
proposed to treat him as severely as a spy, but to hold him as a
prisoner of war. I did not make him aware of this, however, but left him
under the stress of the impression that he might fear the worst, and I
proposed to him that we would permit him to return to his command
provided he would agree to make it easy for General Sheridan's scouts to
capture Harry. I knew my man and had confidence he would carry out his
part of the bargain, especially since the stake played for was, as he
supposed, his life. I let him go, and advised General Sheridan of the
arrangement. The following is the acknowledgment of my communication:


     Provost Marshal's office,
     Headquarters, Middle Military Division.
     Winchester, Va., Jany. 25, 1865.

     Lieut. Smith.

     Dear Sir.--I have submitted your communication to General
     Sheridan, and he has taken action in the case.

     With respect,
     JOHN A. GERNOS.


The expedition connected with the following pass through the pickets at
Harper's Ferry was pertaining to Gilmor's capture:


     Office Provost Marshal,
     Military District of Harper's Ferry.
     Jany. 27, 1865.

     Guards and Pickets will pass Capt. H. B. Smith to any place
     about the Ferry, Sandy Hook, or Berlin.

     Good for two days.

     By order of Brigadier General Stevenson.

     A. D. PRATT,
     Major & Provost Marshal.


On February 6th, 1865, Gilmor was captured by General Sheridan. Major
Young, Chief of his Scouts, brought him to Colonel Woolley's office, on
his way to prison in Fort Warren. Mr. W. G. Woodside, paymaster of the
Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, a mutual (?) friend of Gilmor and myself,
came to my office and invited me to be introduced, saying that Harry
said he knew me. General Woolley's office was crowded. Gilmor was asked
by Mr. Woodside to point me out, but he could not. I had never
advertised my face very much; it better suited my purposes to be
unknown.

Gilmor said to me, if he had had the sword, he would have killed many a
Yank with it. A safe enough proposition under the circumstances. Gilmor
in appearance was attractive, as a soldier, tall, fairly stout, but he
had one defective eye and was rather coarse in manners.

After the war I saw the officer of Gilmor's regiment who had been our
prisoner and who agreed to surrender Gilmor, or rather make his capture
possible. I was sorry to see that he had become dissipated. He told me
the cause was his social ostracism by the "Blue Bloods." I have never
mentioned his name, and never will. I have, I think a fair amount of
moral tone, and I cannot see that this man's act was low. He supposed
that he was obtaining the privilege to live, in exchange for the mere
incarceration of Gilmor. It was not the trading of a life for a life. I
sincerely trust the young man has not suffered a lifetime for the act.

On June 15th, 1873, I received from Gilmor the following letter:


     Baltimore, Md.,
     15th June, 1873.

     Lt. H. B. Smith,
     New York.

     My Dear Sir.--I have been trying for some time past to learn
     your address, and hope I have at last succeeded, with the
     assistance of Major Wiegel.

     My object in writing is to know whether or not you still have
     in your possession the sword which the ladies of Baltimore
     intended for me, but which fell into your hands.

     If you have the sword still, and would be willing to dispose
     of it, will you say what you will take for it, as I would like
     very much to own it, if it did not cost too much.

     I have been lately elected to the Command of a Battalion of
     Cavalry in this city, composed of men who were on both sides
     during the "late unpleasantness," and am very anxious to make
     a fine battalion of it.

     If you will do me the favor to communicate with me on this
     subject I will be very grateful.

     Address, very truly yours,
     HARRY GILMOR,
     Cor. President & Fawn Streets,
     Baltimore, Md.


At that time everything was being done to "heal the wound" and I was
disposed to do my little part. I was disposed to present the sword to
him, first getting General Wallace's approval. But on conferring with
Union people of Baltimore, I concluded not to; they thought any
ostentatious display of the sword would help keep the wound open.




FILE XXXI.

Steam tug "Grace Titus"--Statement of George Carlton, containing valuable
confirmatory information.



     Depot Quartermaster's Office,
     Baltimore, Jany. 16, 1865.

     Captain, Steam Tug
     "Grace Titus."

     You will proceed with your tug as directed by Lieut. H. B.
     Smith, who will hand you this.

     Upon completion of the service demanded by Lieut. Smith, you
     will return to this port and report to me.

     Respectfully,
     A. M. CUMMINGS,
     Capt. & Quartermaster.


I cannot recall what the expedition was for. Incidentally, I may say, I
am continually recognizing that many good stories will be omitted from
lapses of memory, but you will not lose much, as the ones I am
furnishing serve to show the general varied character of my work. My own
personal work and the work of my men, employed in every direction, kept
me busy. I had a man on every steamer plying Chesapeake Bay.

In glancing over subpoenas to attend courts, I find name after name,
none of which occur here; but the most important proposition before me
was to gather information that would assist me in my proposed work to
cripple Mosby's damaging work in the territory known as "between the
lines." It was the country outside our lines and outside the Confederate
lines, peopled by our enemies, always willing to serve the Confederacy,
never serving us; acting as a sponge to draw supplies from us by means
of blockade-running, which could in turn be absorbed by the
Confederates. The efforts of our gunboats to stop the traffic were
futile, as I have heretofore remarked.


     Office Provost Marshal,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Jany. 19, 1865.

     Statement of George Carlton, deserter, Battery Baltimore,
     Rebel Horse Artillery, says:

     "I am a native of Brooklyn, New York. Went South in the year
     1859; went to Mobile. I was engaged in a dry goods store. In
     May, 1862, I was put in the Rebel Army at Richmond, which
     place I was taken to from Mobile. I had the chance to join
     what command I pleased and I joined the Baltimore Battery in
     Richmond. I staid in the company two weeks, then was detailed
     in the Quartermaster's Department at Gordonsville, Va.

     "I remained there until the spring of 1864, when I was sent to
     my Company, then in the valley, under Early. I stayed with the
     Company until Oct. 1864, when I deserted from my Company and
     came to Westmorland County, Va., and then took a boat and
     crossed the Potomac River and landed in St. Mary's County,
     Md., and from there I walked to Baltimore.

     "I was afraid to attempt to desert before that time. (Oct.
     '64.) I deserted during Early's retreat. The Battery that I
     was a member of lost all their guns. I heard officers say that
     they lost forty-four pieces.

     "I had a hard time getting through Westmorland County. I did
     not cross the river until about two weeks ago, and during that
     time I have been on my way from St. Mary's County to this
     city.

     "Now I wish to give certain information to the Government:
     John J. Spaulding, who lived near Leonardtown, Md., and now
     lives on the Virginia side, at Westmorland Court House, six
     miles from the Potomac River, and boarding with a Mr Harvey,
     who keeps tavern at the Court House, brought me over the river
     and eight persons besides myself.

     "He brought us over in the night; he seemed very much afraid,
     and kept out of sight, and landed at Caywood's Bluff, near
     Britton's Bay.

     "Spaulding is a blockade runner, and keeps a large store of
     blockade goods at Westmorland Court House. He brought a large
     lot over the river a few days before I arrived at the Court
     House. He keeps his boat in Poor Jack Creek, and in a small
     gut. From what I heard, I think when he comes over after goods
     he goes to St. Clemmen's Bay in St. Mary's County, up to a
     certain Merryman's store, and I know that Merryman sells goods
     to Spaulding and a much larger quantity to Watkins & Pumphrey,
     two blockade runners at the Court House.

     "Pumphrey did belong to my company; Watkins to the 1st
     Maryland Infantry (Rebel) and deserted, and they are now
     running the blockade.

     "Watkins and Pumphrey were over about a month ago, and while
     on their way up St. Clemmen's Bay, while landing in a creek
     near Merryman's store, the Federal Cavalry, being informed by
     a citizen came near capturing them, but they hid in their
     hiding place, and then they went in the night to Merryman's
     store; he told them that if they were not more careful, he
     would not sell them goods.

     "Pumphrey told me about it when he came back to the Court
     House. They bought at that time about five hundred dollars'
     worth of goods; Pumphrey showed me the bill made out by
     Merryman. The kind and quantity of goods were, sugar, coffee,
     dry-goods, gray cloth, hats, boots and shoes, gun-caps, powder
     spices and other goods, shot, &c.

     "I have seen them haul the goods from the boat to the Court
     House, and have seen most of the things, including the powder
     and caps on Merryman's bill. The powder came over in cans,
     weighing about five pounds each. The party who hauls the stuff
     from Merryman's store to the boat is named Bows, or Bowers,
     who lives near Leonardtown.

     "Jarboe and Molacy, blockade runners who were captured, bought
     their goods of Merryman, sometimes. Certain vessels running
     wood from near Leonardtown to Washington or Alexandria as a
     pretext, drop in on the Virginia shore and land goods and
     recruits for the Rebel Army, so I learned at the Court House.

     "John J. Spaulding had a brother, a Doctor, in Leonardtown,
     who forwarded goods to the river shore for his brother John;
     he, Dr Spaulding, was drafted and ordered to report. He
     deserted and went over to the Virginia shore to his brother,
     and took Blair, Bailey Bowers, a son of the man who hauls
     goods, and Hayden; they were all drafted men.

     "Since Dr. Spaulding left this side, his wife, Mrs. Dr. Eck
     Spaulding, has attended to all the business in that line; she
     has the name on the Virginia side of being the smartest of the
     three in that business. The Spauldings told me that she
     forwarded stuff to them.

     "They understood that I had a furlough and that I was on my
     way to Maryland to make what I could and return to Virginia.
     John Harvey, the keeper of the tavern, runs refugees over the
     river, but I can't say whether he brings goods back or not,
     but runners say he does.

     "While I was at Westmorland Court House, some four companies
     out of seven, of Mosby's men, came down and camped at
     Heathesville, some twenty or twenty-five miles from where I
     was. They intended to winter their horses there. Mosby was not
     in command; they were commanded by a Major. I heard Mosby was
     wounded.

     "John J. Spaulding showed me a bill of exchange, fifteen
     pounds sterling, on Brown Brothers and Company, Baltimore, in
     favor of Thomas Levering. John J. Spaulding, on arrival on
     this side, passed it into the hands of Dr. Spaulding's wife,
     for collection.

     "About six weeks ago Spaulding brought over to the Md. shore,
     a Lieut. Smith, of Mosby's command, and Russel Low, and Daniel
     DeWolf Low, and at another time Wm. H. Sweeney, of Washington;
     he is engaged to get married, and came over to get wedding
     clothes. Sweeney has been over before, in company with
     Watkins.

     "Spaulding also brought over a man by the name of Richy, who
     was a detective in Richmond, and has carried two Rebel mails
     to Richmond from Maryland. Spaulding also brought over one
     Carroll, of Baltimore; also some Jew blockade runners, and a
     great many others. The Jews run a great deal of medicine for
     the Confederate Government.

     "It is my opinion that a cavalry force, landed above on the
     Neck, could cut Mosby's four companies off, and capture them
     in the position they lay.

     "There is a Signal Post on the Potomac River, near Mathias
     Point, Va., in charge of Captain Caywood, of the Confederate
     Signal Corps. He has a boat, and in good weather he comes over
     twice a week. He carries the regular mail and the foreign
     mail; it is a regular government concern.

     "I tried to find out who assisted him on this side, but could
     not do so. I found he would carry no one over without a pass
     from the Secretary of War. In crossing the river they sometime
     pass within 1200 yards of a gunboat."

     (Signed and sworn.)





FILE XXXII.

The pungy "Trifle" (one of the captures)--Colonel McPhail--Major
Blumenburg and his corrupted office--"Boney" Lee, Bob Miller, and
other thugs.



     Office of Provost Marshal General
       for Maryland.
     Baltimore, Jany. 19, 1865.

     Capt. Smith,
     Asst. Provost Marshal.

     Sir.--The pungy "Trifle" now stands in the name of Conrad
     Prince. She changed owners on the 10th of June, last.

     She had not cleared by permit since then, but may have done so
     by manifest.

     Yours, &c.,
     MCPHAIL.


Colonel McPhail was the Civil Provost Marshal of Maryland, having
exclusively to do with enrollments and drafts; the office was entirely
separated from the military service. He was a very clean, upright,
honorable man. There was, however, a district under him, having at its
head a Major Blumenburg, that was very corrupt.

Soldiers were fleeced out of bounty money. Substitutes, quite
frequently colored men, were paid large sums as bounties, more money
than they had ever seen before. By collusion between officers and clerks
in Blumenburg's office, and the substitute brokers, the substitutes were
induced to invest in valueless gewgaws, sometimes paying for a
two-dollar Oride watch as much as one hundred dollars.

One of the largest substitute brokerage concerns tried to reach me with
an offer of five hundred dollars a week, for a period as long as I would
let them alone. The offer was not "dangerously near my price." I cleaned
up the whole business very soon.

Blumenburg appointed a lot of cut throats with authority to arrest
deserters, paying them ten dollars for each deserter brought in. Their
operations were conducted this way: One of these fellows would hail a
soldier who was out on pass take it away from him, pronouncing it
fraudulent, but would allow him to proceed on his way; shortly he would
be hailed again, by a "pal," and having, of course, no pass to exhibit,
he would be arrested charged with desertion.

I was over in Anne Arundel County one night with three or four of my
men, intending to look after some blockade-runners, when four or five of
Blumenburg's thugs picked us up, supposing we were deserters or else
persons come to invade their territory. They were going to do all sorts
of things to us and pulled out their revolvers. I made no parade of
mine though my hand was on it all the time. I quietly informed them of
their error, and promised them, each and every one of them, to give them
a chance to "play checkers with their noses," and I kept my word, for
within a short time I caught them in their nefarious treatment of honest
soldiers.

The party was composed of "Boney" Lee, Bob Miller, ---- Fletcher, and
two others, each one was known to have "done time," yet Blumenburg
licensed them. I broke it all up, and they became as meek as lambs.



FILE XXXIII.

Statement of James Briers, Bollman, McGuarty and Welsh--U. S. Marine
Corps.



     Office Provost Marshal,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Jany. 26, 1865.

     Statement of James Briers, late of Richmond, Virginia, who
     says: "I am a native of England, came to this country about
     1853, remained in Baltimore, Md., about six months then went
     to Richmond, and went into the employ of the Virginia Central
     Railroad Co., and remained with them up to this time.

     "About December, 1863, I was sent into Lancaster County, by
     the Railroad Company, to buy pork for them. I remained about
     three weeks, bought a great many hogs.

     "November 20th, 1864, was again appointed agent to buy hogs
     for the Railroad Company, and was sent to Lancaster,
     Westmorland and other Counties, where I bought about one
     hundred and fifty head in Lancaster and Richmond Counties, and
     then returned to Richmond on night of 25th of December.

     "I was sent back about January 9th, 1865, into the same
     Counties, to buy pork. Then having a chance to escape I made
     my way to Westmorland Court House, and there crossed the river
     into Maryland.

     "I stopped with Harvey, who keeps the tavern at the Court
     House, and who has a boat, with which he runs the blockade.
     John J. Spaulding, a blockade runner, keeps a store at the
     Court House; he runs over a great many goods; comes over twice
     a week for goods.

     "I came over with Spaulding. He thought I was coming over on
     business for the Railroad Company, and he was to have his boat
     over for me, and some goods, in two days' time. I was to be in
     the neighborhood of Caywood's place; he, Caywood, was
     recommended to me as all right. Spaulding charged me fifty
     dollars in gold and was to bring me back. Gilson, a blockade
     runner, came over with me. He is a noted blockade runner, and
     he is in this city now. He ships his goods from here by
     vessel, marked to New York. The vessel on the way puts out the
     goods; I have seen the goods. A Confederate Captain also came
     over with me; he intended to get a boat and cross the Bay to
     the Eastern shore of Maryland, on a visit.

     "Watkins and Pumphrey, two blockade runners at the Court
     House, also run the blockade on a large scale; also a man by
     the name of Hayden.

     "Dr. Spaulding, a brother of John J. Spaulding, came over a
     few days since and took his wife over the river with him; she
     lived near Leonardtown.

     "Judge Irving, Captain Thomas, and Fred. Smith, an old
     blockade firm on the lower river, are still in that business,
     with the exception of Smith, who was captured by Colonel
     Woolley with a large lot of tobacco, and now said to be in
     Fort McHenry. Their goods are marked for New York, and landed
     down the Bay, so Gibson says, and then run to Smith's Point
     Light-house, to a man called James Sutton, who lives on the
     Virginia shore of the creek running between Smith's Point and
     the Virginia shore.

     "Bows, Wells, Hayden and Pumphrey, a party of blockade
     runners, have a plan laid to bring over to the father of a
     late Confederate soldier, living in St. Mary's County, a noted
     horse upon which the son was killed in battle; they are to
     come over the first dark night when the ice gives away in Poor
     Jack Creek.

     "The names of the blockade runners I know are J. J. Spaulding,
     Dr. Eck Spaulding, Frank Simms, Warren, Hayden, Bowers, Wells,
     Watkins, Pumphrey, Harvey.

     "The blockade runners generally sink their boats in the creek,
     when not in use."

     (Sworn and subscribed.)




     460 15th Street,
     Washington, D. C.
     Feb. 3, 1865.

     Lt. Smith,
     Chief of Detectives.

     Sir.--I desire to call your attention to the cases of Bollman,
     McGuarty, Welsh and another, privates in the U. S. Marine
     Corps, wherein I submitted affidavits to you some weeks since.

     Their commanding officer has once or twice enquired of me what
     disposition had been made of their matter. I told him that I
     had in accordance with the instructions of Colonel Woolley,
     submitted the papers to you and that you had told me they
     would be attended to in due course of business. He is,
     however, very anxious to have the matter disposed of as soon
     as possible, as the men are at any moment liable to be
     detailed on distant duty.

     If you will, kindly inform me, as soon as practicable, what
     determination you have come to in these cases.

     Very respy.,
     SELDEN HETZEL,
     Attorney at Law.


I cannot recall the cases.




FILE XXXIV.

General W. W. Morris in command in General Wallace's absence--General
Sheridan's order to arrest E. W. Andrews, formerly adjutant general to
General Morris.


General W. W. Morris, who had been in command of the First Brigade, with
headquarters at Fort McHenry (of whom I have spoken before), was placed
in command of the Department.

To make himself familiar with the work in the departments, he
interviewed the heads; finally he wanted to see me. He made the call
pleasant by saying: "I hear your work well spoken of," for which I of
course thanked him. I told him I had been Assistant Provost Marshal
under him at Fort McHenry. The old soldier brightened up and remarked:
"Oh, yes, now I remember; my Adjutant General blamed you for all his
troubles. Do you think Andrews was wrong?" I answered: "Yes, he ought to
have worn the grey."

Not many days after, I received a telegram from General Sheridan,
directing the arrest and confinement of E. W. Andrews, captain, and
formerly Assistant Adjutant General.

Believing that if Andrews was in Baltimore he would first call on
General Morris, I went there at once, and showed the General the
telegram. Very soon Andrews, with his usual pomp, came in. He espied me
at once. I showed him my authority from General Sheridan, to arrest him.
I permitted him to see General Morris--in my presence, however--and
extended him all courtesies I consistently could; finally taking him in
a carriage to Fort McHenry, I obtained the following receipt:


     Feb. 25, 1865.

     Recd. from Captain Wiegel, E. W. Andrews, a prisoner, for safe
     keeping.

     DAN. MACAULEY,
     Col. 11th Ind. Vet. Vols.,
     Commanding Brigade.


This receipt was given me in the room formerly occupied by E. W.
Andrews, as Adjutant General. What a fall was there!

This was Andrews's exeunt, for I have never seen him since. I
subsequently, however, learned of his offense in the Valley. It was more
flirting with the enemy. Some of Mosby's men had been captured, and
Andrews came to their rescue and vouched for them as being peaceful
citizens, upon which they were released, but in a few days they were
again captured while committing warlike depredations.




FILE XXXV.

Ordered to New York--Interviewed Secretary of War Stanton relative to an
independent command and extension of our territory--Major Wiegel's
weakness exposed.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Feby. 10, 1865.

     Special Order No. 27.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. H. Arty. and Commanding
     Detectives, Middle Department, 8th Army Corps, with one man,
     Lucius Babcock, of his force, will proceed to New York City,
     on special government business. After transacting same, he
     will at once return to these headquarters.

     Quartermasters will furnish transportation.

     By command of Bvt. Brigadier General Morris.

     WM. H. WIEGEL,
     Capt. & Actg. Provost Marshal.



The following refers to my seeking extended territory:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Feby. 21, 1865.

     Unofficial.
     Captain:

     General Morris desires you to write a letter about Lieut.
     Smith, asking such an appointment as will suit him. Address it
     to the Adjutant General and send it to me and I will get the
     General to put an endorsement on and forward it.

     Don't you think you could take it to the Secretary and
     accomplish something?

     Yours truly,
     SAMUEL B. LAWRENCE,
     Assistant Adjutant General.

     To
     Capt. Wiegel.


Pending the issuance of a commission which was to give me an independent
command, to operate in the Shenandoah Valley, and also south of the
lower Potomac, I had been striving to get authority to extend our
operations to the Rappahannock, to avail ourselves of the valuable data
we had accumulated.

Captain Wiegel and I went to Washington, as suggested by Colonel
Lawrence, to see Secretary Stanton. When we arrived at Mr. Stanton's
door I discovered the mental makeup and character of Wiegel. Mr.
Stanton, in manner, was not pleasant to interview. He was brusque,
rough, and appeared to think the world was made for him. Wiegel had much
avoirdupois, but not deep brain convolutions. He had been on General
Butler's staff in New Orleans. He was full of egotism, but when he
approached Mr. Stanton's door he wilted, and asked me to do the talking,
while he listened.

Mr. Stanton did not eat me, and on March 20th our request was granted. I
have always found it pleasanter to do business with the proprietor than
with the man that sweeps out.

There is no doubt but that Secretary Stanton made many critics by his
brusque manner. One did not need to waste words with him, but if a
communication was couched in terse language it pleased him. He disliked
a cringing interviewer. I did not dislike to have business with him, nor
have I ever with men similarly constituted.

Wiegel was a domineering blusterer to his subordinates, but a cringing
sycophant to those over him. Stanton's office was not a congenial
climate for him.

Secretary Dana was a most agreeable gentleman and no less an executive
than Stanton.




FILE XXXVI.

Paine, who was afterwards one of the conspirators in the assassinators'
plot, in my custody--Miss Branson appeared to plead for him--Paine
released on parole, lacking evidence to prove him a spy.


I will now introduce the material from which was builded an actor. Lewis
Paine, who brutally hacked at Secretary Seward while Booth was
assassinating the President. He was one of the characters produced for
the closing scene in that greatest tragedy.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Mch. 12, 1865.

     Major Wm. H. Wiegel,
     Actg. Provost Marshal.

     Major.--I have the honor to report the arrest of Lewis Paine,
     a refugee from Fauquier County, Va.

     He was arrested at the house of Miss Maggie Branson, No. 16
     North Eutaw Street. She is a noted Rebel.

     I was promised evidence to prove that he had been in
     Baltimore before, but the witnesses are not forthcoming, and I
     believe him innocent of that charge, but I think it would be
     well to remove him from that family. I would respectfully
     recommend his release.

     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     H. B. SMITH.
     Lt. & Chief.


When I entered my office on Friday morning March 10, 1865, Captain Webb,
my clerk, was trying to obtain from Paine some part of his pedigree, but
was baffled by the prisoner's dumbness. Then I tried with the result as
follows:


     Baltimore, Md.,
     March 10, 1865

     Lewis Paine, refugee from Fauquier County, Virginia, my
     parents reside near Orleans, in that County. I am eighteen and
     a half years old. I have not been out of Virginia since the
     war commenced, until this time.

     I was never in the Rebel army. Mosby used to stay at the house
     of Joe Blackwell, until his house was burned.

     Willie Tung, of Warrenton.

     Daniel Moffit, of Fauquier County, members of Mosby's command.

     Miss Maggie Branson, with whom I was stopping, is related to
     me by marriage.

     [Illustration: LEWIS PAINE]

     I bought the coat and vest of grey cloth in this city,
     since I came here; my pants of grey I bought in Washington.

     I don't remember of hearing any disloyal remarks from any of
     the boarders at the house No. 16 North Eutaw Street. I whipped
     a colored woman at that house on Monday last, because she
     insulted me; her name is Annie.

     (Signed) L. PAINE.

     Sworn and subscribed to, before me, this 10th day of March,
     1865.

     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Chief.


Paine was a sullen, dumb looking, overgrown young person. To get
anything out of him I alternately prodded and fondled; he was a cross
between a big booby and a sullen animal.

His statement is disjointed. Between the joints you must imagine my
questions, eliciting his words; for instance, "I am eighteen and a half
years old," was in reply to my query about his pretensions to never
having been in the army. To my remarks about his new grey clothes,
certainly pointing their use, where grey was worn, he tried to explain
his innocence, etc, etc.

While in the midst of his examination, Miss Branson, accompanied by a
Mr. Shriver, came in. Miss Branson pressed right up to my desk,
enquiring what charge was against Mr. Paine. She said he was her
cousin, and that she knew he had never been north before, etc.

I informed her that her word on such matters was not valuable, since I
had her history for disloyalty in my cabinet. I said to Mr. Shriver,
whom I knew to be reckoned as a loyal man, that he should not have lent
his presence.

I was not in good humor because persons who had promised to testify that
Paine had been in Baltimore before had failed to respond. I felt in my
bones he was a spy, but could not prove it, and therefore could not hold
him, hence my recommendation for his release. Finally, on the 12th, he
took the oath of allegiance, before me, and I paroled him, inserting in
the parole, "to go north of Philadelphia and remain during the war."

After the assassination, this paper was found on Paine, but he had
obliterated the restriction "to go north of Philadelphia," etc.

I took from him his pass and parole, issued at Alexandria, Virginia,
January 13th, 1865. In it he was described as of dark complexion, black
hair, blue eyes, height six feet one and a half inches.

I will now leave Paine until after the assassination, which was just one
month later, April 14th, 1865.

I presume my order to go to New York (following) may have hastened my
disposition of Paine.




FILE XXXVII.

Missionary E. Martin, an agent of the Confederate treasury department,
arrested, his big tobacco smuggling scheme exposed--Kidnapped him from
General Dix's department--Manahan involved.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Mch. 12, 1865.

     Special Order No. 44.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. Arty., and Commanding Detective
     Corps, 8th Army Corps, with one man of his force, will proceed
     to New York City, arrest a certain man, and return to these
     headquarters without delay, with his assistant and prisoner.

     Quartermaster's Department will furnish transportation.

     By command of Bvt. Brigadier General W. W. Morris.

     WM. H. WIEGEL,
     Major & Actg. Provost Marshal.


The cause for this trip will be explained by the following copy of a
letter, and a contract.


     New York, Mch. 10, 1865.

     Dear Manahan:

     It is said Fredericksburg and tobacco is captured. I feared
     this.

     Have written to Maddox and sent him a copy of contract. I
     enclose yours.

     Now it is for you to go to work at once and see that this
     property is taken care of. I believe you will both do it; see
     to it that no innocent parties suffer. Act promptly, for I
     assured my friends that the property was safe at that point,
     and I did it on your representations. Let me hear from you,
     care of Burnett & Funkhouser, this city.

     Yours truly, M. E. MARTIN.




     Baltimore, Md.,
     Dec. 8th, 1864.

     I hereby agree to deliver to Mess. Maddox & Manahan, during
     the month of Feby. and March, 1865, at Fredericksburg,
     Virginia, on the Rappahannock River, Four Thousand Boxes
     (4,000) of good sound merchantable tobacco, to be paid for on
     delivery, by my Agents at said point, in United States
     currency, at the rate of Forty-seven and a half (47-1/2) Cents
     per pound.

     Said tobacco to be of the quality known as good manufactured
     Virginia Leaf. I reserve to myself the privilege of increasing
     the quantity to 5,000 boxes, if I see proper.

     (Signed) M. E. MARTIN.


Manahan was of the firm of J. F. Manahan & Co., No. 17 South Charles
Street, Baltimore, Md. This letter, by mistake, fell into my hands on
March 12th. It was necessary to act quickly in order to intercept
communication twixt Martin and Manahan, and for that purpose I left
Baltimore on the 12th, and had my man wire to Martin, as follows:


     Baltimore, Md., Mch. 13, 1865.

     M. E. Martin,
     c/o Burnett & Funkhouser,
     New York.

     "Your letter here. Shaffer, my friend, will call to-day. Let
     me know the result by telegraph immediately."

     MANAHAN,
     Maltby House.


I assumed that if Martin wanted to reach Manahan, he would address him
at the Maltby House, the telegraph office there was in my possession.

I at the same time had myself wired to as follows:


     Baltimore, Md., Mch. 13, 1865.

     I. K. Shaffer,
     Merchants Hotel,
     New York.

     "Call on Martin immediately, I have his letter of 10th."

     Manahan,
     Maltby House.


This wire was to be my introduction to Martin. I located Martin and
Burnett & Funkhouser in Broad Street near Beaver. I did not call on him
immediately, as I wanted him to get anxious to see me first.

To keep him quiet on Maddox, I had him wired as follows:


     Washington, D. C.,
     Mch. 14, 1865.

     M. E. Martin,
     c/o Burnett & Funkhouser,
     New York.

     "M. leaves here to-night, you can rest fully satisfied all is
     right."

     J. F. MANAHAN,
     Willards Hotel.


Poor Manahan was asleep to all this use of his name, of course. Martin
did get anxious. He wrote me the following note and sent it to
Merchant's Hotel:


     Mr. Shaffer:

     Dear Sir.--Have despatch from Manahan that you will call and
     see me here. Will be in at half past eleven to twelve, half
     past twelve to one, and at half past one.

     Either wait for me or leave your address.

     Yours, &c.,
     M. E. MARTIN.


I called but failed to find Martin, and later I received the following
from him:


     Mr. Shaffer:

     I waited for you all the early part of the day, at B & F's,
     and then left a note for you, requesting you to leave your
     address.

     Am unwell; if it is important you should see me before
     morning, please come up to my hotel, Gramercy Park House, if
     not, please meet me at B & F's, nine to nine thirty, t-morrow
     morning.

     Yours truly,
     MARTIN.


I met him in the morning, as appointed. He was hungry to meet me, just
as I wanted it.

I found Mr. Martin to be a man evidently well fitted for the job, in
appearance tall, rather lank, energetic and gentlemanly. We visited off
and on, nearly all day. He believed, from what I told him, that I and my
friends were financially interested through Manahan. He explained his
position as representing Mr. Trenholm, Secretary of the Confederate
Treasury. He told how he had formerly run cotton through the lines on
the Mississippi river.

Now that the tobacco had been seized, his plan was to press a claim upon
our government, representing the tobacco to belong to Union people. He
told me he had papers at his hotel which would corroborate him.

In the afternoon, nearly dark, we parted in the Howard House (then at
the corner of Maiden Lane and Broadway) with the understanding that I
was returning to Baltimore and Manahan, satisfied with his assurances.

My man (Mr. Kraft), who had been following me, to be handy if help was
needed, and who had been watching for the signal to make the arrest,
came to me hastily, thinking he might have missed the signal, but I
assured him it was all right to let Martin go. I had a further purpose,
I wanted to get the documents Martin had spoken of as being at his
hotel.

Kraft and I dined at the old Lovejoy Hotel (then at the corner of
Beekman Street and Park Row) and afterwards went up to the Gramercy Park
Hotel, then quite a fashionable hostelry. We waited until Martin came
out of the dining-room. He was in his dinner suit, and was quite a dude
for such a raw-boned Southerner; he was surprised to see me again. I
told him I wanted some further talk. I asked if we could not go to his
room. After starting for up stairs I introduced my friend.

When in his room I informed him that my sole object was to obtain the
information needed by the Government. Any man's face would be a study
under such circumstances. Martin was game; his first question was:
"Well, what is your name?" "Smith," I replied. "Oh, I mean your right
name," he said. (There are some advantages in the name Smith, I really
needed no alias.)

Martin thought a treat was "on him," and he paid it. I then invited him
to show me the documents he had described when down town. I took
possession of all. They gave a very good history of his doings on the
Mississippi river, and his connection with the Confederate Treasury
Department.

In answer to his question, I told him that I did not know what the
government would do with him, but I was sure his proposed claim against
the government would not be collectible, and perhaps he would be
detained until the end of the war, to prevent a recurrence.

Pending my first call on Martin, I visited General Dix, commanding the
Department of the East. He declined to endorse my order to make the
arrest of Martin, unless I explained fully the case. Rather than do so,
just at that time, I concluded to disregard courtesy and take my man
away without his endorsement, which I did.

The "Gold Room" which was then more important than the Stock Exchange,
was in Twenty-fourth Street, back of the Fifth Avenue Hotel; it was open
evenings. I permitted Martin to send there for money, and to advise his
friends that he would be away for a few days.

During the evening Mr. Martin said to me, "Last evening, when I was
expecting you, waiting for you, I lay here reading Colonel Baker's book
on the Secret Service. He had no case as slick as this. Smith, you were
so frank and open, I would have told you anything you wanted to know."

I presume he was reading Baker's book to see how such cases as his were
treated, not dreaming of an ocular demonstration so near at hand. At
midnight we started for Baltimore.

The following from the Richmond "Whig" explains better, perhaps, than I
can, just what Martin and the case meant, from the Confederate
viewpoint:


     (From the Richmond "Whig")

     The Tobacco Transaction--A Prominent New York House Concerned.

     "We have obtained the main facts of the great tobacco
     speculation, in reference to which there were so many rumors
     last week. It appears that an agent of a New York mercantile
     house, whose name it is deemed inexpedient to publish at this
     time, proposed to certain parties in this city to contract
     with them for the delivery of a specific quantity of
     manufactured tobacco at Fredericksburg, he undertaking for his
     principals to remove the tobacco from that point, with the
     implied consent of the United States authorities, provided
     the Confederate authorities would indicate their consent, in
     writing, to the proposed transaction. The tobacco was to be
     paid for on its delivery at Fredericksburg. The New York house
     was vouched for by an influential member of Congress, who had
     intimate business relations with the concern.

     One of the Confederate bureaus became identified with the
     scheme, by reason of the representations which had been made
     to its officers, and by the prospect of advantageous results
     from the fulfillment of the proposed agreement by the parties
     on the other side.

     The contract was accordingly entered into, "sealed, signed and
     delivered," with a satisfactory endorsement from the
     predecessor of the present Secretary of War, who was no doubt
     induced to believe that it was "all right." Nothing was said
     in the contract about bacon. The quid pro quo was money.

     In execution of the contract on this side, about four thousand
     boxes of fine to extra manufactured tobacco were purchased
     here, at rates ranging from four dollars to seven dollars per
     pound, Confederate currency. Of this amount one thousand two
     hundred and seventy-three boxes, weighing one hundred and
     thirty-two thousand five hundred and seventy-eight pounds, and
     valued at seven hundred thousand dollars, were forwarded to
     Fredericksburg in charge of Dr. Rose, who was induced by
     assurances from Richmond, which he could not discredit, to act
     as consignee and custodian of the tobacco until delivered
     according to agreement. He was not in any sense, as we
     understand, a party to the contract. What became of the
     tobacco is known to our readers. Dr. Rose was carried off by
     the Yankees for engaging in contraband traffic.

     The name of General Singleton has been connected with this
     transaction. We state on the authority of an officer of the
     bureau referred to that he has no lot nor part in it, directly
     or indirectly. The loss of the tobacco will fall upon the
     contractors here unless the New York parties to the contract
     will fulfill their obligations by indemnifying the bureau with
     which they contracted."

After action by Congress, President Lincoln endeavored to extend some
relief to persons within the Confederacy who were Unionists at heart;
they were to be encouraged by allowing them to work their products up to
and through the lines. What was intended as a great beneficent
proposition was seized upon by the Confederate government to help itself
financially.

The following order will explain the experiences with cotton on the
Mississippi river. I presume these orders drove Martin to turn his
attention to tobacco in the east:


     Headquarters, Major General Washburn,
     District West Tennessee.
     Memphis, May 10, 1864.

     "The practical operation of commercial intercourse from this
     city with the States in rebellion, has been to help largely to
     feed, clothe, arm and equip our enemies."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "To take cotton, belonging to the Rebel Government to Memphis,
     and convert it into supplies and greenbacks, and return to the
     lines of the enemy, or place the proceeds to the credit of the
     Rebel Government, in Europe, is safe and easy.

     "I have undoubted evidence that large amounts of cotton have
     been and are being brought here to be sold, belonging to the
     Rebel Government."

       *       *       *       *       *

     "It is therefore ordered, that on and after the 15th of May,
     1864, the lines of the Army at Memphis be closed and no person
     be permitted to leave the city, except by river, without a
     special pass."

     "By order of
     Major General C. C. WASHBURN."


A similar order was issued by Colonel Farrar, at Natchez, Miss., and by
General Sherman at Vicksburg, in which they said:

     "The amount of trade through the lines at all these points,
     with the isolated localities, where trade stores were
     situated, was estimated at not less than a half million
     dollars, daily."

On the 6th of March, 1864, General Roberts, with one thousand five
hundred men, and with naval help, left Fortress Monroe for
Fredericksburg. He captured and destroyed three hundred and eighty
thousand dollars worth of tobacco.

Martin was the representative of the Confederate Treasury Department. I
recovered his correspondence with Secretary Trenholm. It was understood
that the proceeds of the sale of this tobacco was to go to Paris to help
pay Confederate debts incurred there.




FILE XXXVIII.

Secretary of War consulted about the extension of our territory to include
the district between the Rappahannock and the Potomac rivers--Robert
Loudan, alias Charles Veal, a boat burner and spy--A kidnapped colored
boy.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Mch. 18, 1865.

     Lieut. Smith:

     I want to see you at the office this evening at 7.30.

     The Secretary of War wants to see you in Washington, and you
     will have to go to-morrow morning.

     Yours, &c.,
     S. B. LAWRENCE,
     A. Adjutant General.


I do not remember what the Secretary wanted, but as the following order
issued the next day, I assume it was to learn more of my purpose in the
extended territory asked for:


     War Department,
     Washington, D. C.,
     Mch. 20, 1865.

     Major W. H. Wiegel:

     Provost Marshal at Baltimore is authorized to extend his
     operations into the region between the Potomac and
     Rappahannock Rivers known as the northern neck of Virginia.

     (Signed) C. A. DANA,
     Asst. Secretary of War.




     Headquarters, Department of Missouri,
     Office of Provost Marshal General,
     St. Louis, Mo., Mch. 21, 1865.

     Provost Marshal General,
     Middle Department,
     Baltimore, Md.

     Sir.--In October last, the Military Prisons of this city being
     in danger from the Rebel forces under Major General Sterling
     Price, it was deemed prudent by General Rosecrans, then in
     command of this Department, to transfer the occupants to the
     Alton Prison. While this transfer was in progress, one of the
     prisoners, Robert Loudan, alias Charles Veal, made his escape
     from the guards by cutting his irons and jumping from the boat
     into the river. He was then under sentence of death for being
     a spy and a boat burner.

     Loudan was lately heard from at New Orleans, where it was
     reported he was in the custody of the Military authorities,
     by whom he was subsequently released for the want of
     sufficient evidence to hold him.

     It is possible he has gone beyond our lines, but, if not, he
     would be likely to make for some of the large cities of the
     loyal States.

     Loudan is a native of Philadelphia, where his wife now
     resides; height, about five feet eight inches; complexion,
     fair; large blue eyes constantly rolling and displaying a
     great deal of white; hair and whiskers, fair; square
     shoulders; usually wears a false moustache; wears his hat on
     the back of his head.

     This office is charged with his execution, and will incur any
     amount of trouble to recapture him. If he is found within the
     limits of your jurisdiction, please secure and forward him to
     me or notify me of his arrest and I will send for him.

     Very respectfully,
     Your obdt. servt.,
     J. H. BAKER,
     Col. & Provost Marshal.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Mch. 31, 1865.

     Special Order No. 55.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. H. Arty., Commanding Detective
     Corps, Middle Department, 8th Army Corps, will proceed to
     Washington, D. C., for the recovery of a colored boy,
     kidnapped from Norfolk, Virginia, and will report to the
     Provost Marshal of Washington, for any assistance he may
     require.

     By command of Bvt. Brigadier General W. W. Morris.

     WM. H. WIEGEL,
     Major & Actg. Provost Marshal.





FILE XXXIX.

The chase after the steamer "Harriet Deford," which was captured by
pirates, supposedly to supply a means of escape to Jefferson Davis from
the crumbling Confederacy--Captain Fitzhugh.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Apl. 5, 1865.

     Major:

     I have written to Commodore Dornin requesting him to send a
     small steamer in pursuit of the "Harriet Deford," if he has
     one ready, and to permit Lieut. Smith and his guard to
     accompany her.

     If Commodore Dornin can not send a steamer I have written to
     Colonel Newport, to request him to place a tug at your
     disposal.

     You will please see that Smith goes in Command with sufficient
     guard and ammunition. If you want a Howitzer, send to C. O.
     Fort McHenry, or let the steamer stop there and get it.

     Very respy. your obdt. servt.,
     SAMUEL B. LAWRENCE,
     A. Adjutant General.

     To
     Major Wiegel.




     Commandant's Office.
     Naval Station,
     Baltimore, Apl. 5, 1865.

     Colonel:

     I regret that I have no steamer in the proper condition to
     start off; if we had it would be furnished promptly.

     Very respy. your obdt. servt,
     THOS A. DORNIN,
     Commodore.

     To
     Col. Sam'l B. Lawrence,
     A. Adjutant General,
     Middle Department.


A report had reached us that the steamer "Harriet Deford," plying
between the Patuxent river and Baltimore, had been captured by a gang of
pirates, in Fair Haven bay, which is midway between the Patuxent river
and the Severn river; the passengers were robbed and put ashore.

Richmond had fallen; Jefferson Davis was seeking to escape, and the
theory, quickly arrived at, was that this steamer had been seized to
furnish the means, perhaps, to run him to the Bahamas, or Bermuda.

The bay and its tributaries were alive with anxiety. In a very short
time I was away in a tug. I put the guards below decks, in the
coal-hole, where they were nearly smothered, until night came on.

Early in the evening we arrived at the mouth of Fair Haven bay. Our
pilot did not know the harbor, but soon discovered he could not run his
boat on the mere appearance of water. He ran us onto a bar, where we
thumped and thumped, backed and poled off, and then ran onto another. We
finally concluded to back off, go back to the Severn river and
Annapolis, and wait for daylight.

When we arrived in the Severn, we found the shore and water full of
alertness. We were hailed and threatened until our character was
understood. To my delight I found there a large steamer, with two
hundred men on, that Colonel Lawrence had sent down to support me. A
landlubber feels better on a larger vessel, so I took my men on the
steamer, and we started again for Fair Haven. We arrived there early in
the morning.

My theory was that I could pick up some clue there to follow up, and
events sustained me. I sauntered up from the dock towards a store. I met
two men, and to my question, one of the men admitted he was pressed into
service by the gang in the mouth of the Patuxent. He said the party had
crossed the Potomac in a small sail boat, and compelled him to pilot
them, to overhaul the "Harriet Deford." He said they steamed down the
bay, after leaving Fair Haven. We held him, and at once ran on down the
Chesapeake, to the mouth of the Potomac. We were then in Commodore
Parker's territory, which he was covering clear across the bay with
gunboats. Our duty was done, and we returned to Baltimore.

I learned afterwards that they ran the "Deford" into Mobjack bay, where
she was burned, after first stripping her joiner work. I visited, and
afterwards married, Aunt Mag, in the region of Mobjack bay, but never
referred to the incident. I thought it might not bring up pleasant
recollections. I have often wondered if some of the "Deford's" saloon
trimmings might be in use in some of the houses there. Let us forget it.

The following account of the affair appeared in the New York papers
under date April 6th, 1865, with big headline: "Another Pirate!"

     "Baltimore, April 5th, 1865. A daring act of piracy was
     perpetrated at Fair Haven, Herring Bay, about fifty miles from
     this city, the Steamer Harriet Deford being seized by a
     company of Rebel soldiers in disguise. The Deford had scarcely
     left Fair Haven Wharf before a dozen or more of newly received
     passengers threw off their overcoats and drawing revolvers
     revealed to the astonished gaze of the passengers the uniforms
     of Rebel soldiers.

     The passengers, about seventy in number, thirty being ladies,
     were ordered to the saloon and guards placed over them while
     the balance of the pirates proceeded to take command of the
     Steamer. Captain and officers were forced into obedience at
     the muzzle of the pirates' revolvers. One of the pirates
     assumed control of the wheel, the Pilot and Engineer being
     compelled to proceed to sea. Mr. A. Donnell, clerk of the
     Deford, believing that he had met the leader of the outlaws on
     a former occasion, accosted him as Captain Fitzhugh, when the
     latter acknowledged the recognition and said he was Captain of
     the Fifth Virginia Cavalry and acting under orders of superior
     officers. Under the persuasive eloquence of a revolver the
     clerk handed over to the pirates nearly twelve hundred dollars
     belonging to the owners of the Steamer and different firms in
     this City; which Fitzhugh carefully robbed.

     When about a mile from Fair Haven, Fitzhugh compelled the
     Engineer to sound the steam whistle three times, in answer to
     which signal three boats containing thirty-two men put off
     from each side of the river and stood for the Steamer. The
     crews of these boats having been taken aboard, the Steamer was
     headed down Chesapeake Bay. On the way down Captain Leage,
     Captain Dayton, officer in charge of the Steamer and several
     old gentlemen with ladies and children, were placed on board
     of the Schooner Hiawatha, bound for this city. The balance of
     male passengers, Engineer, Fireman, and twenty colored
     freedmen were retained as prisoners.

     The Deford was valued at fifty thousand dollars and had a
     cargo of tobacco, potatoes, grain, furs, &c., valued at eighty
     thousand dollars. Fitzhugh would not permit his men to rob
     passengers.

     The captured Steamer is a fast sailer, having repeatedly made
     fourteen knots per hour. The intention of the pirates could
     not be learned, but it is supposed they will endeavor to run
     outside the Capes, transfer the cargo to a larger vessel, burn
     the Deford, and proceed to Nassau.

     The paroled passengers arrived here this morning. One of them
     positively asserts that Jeff. Davis was among the party who
     came out in small boats, but no reliance whatever can be
     placed in the possibility of Jeff. having thus escaped from
     Richmond. The receipt of this news caused great excitement
     here, and measures looking to the defence of the Bay boats are
     being made.

     A steamer has also been despatched to intercept the pirates
     before they reach the Capes."




FILE XL.

Ordered to Northern Neck of Virginia the day before President Lincoln's
assassination--Martin Van Buren Morgan's statement, and order for his
disposal.


At this time in 1865 General Lee was about surrendering. All the people,
North and South, were rejoicing at the prospect of peace, excepting
those bitter, poisoned-with-their-own-venom conspirators hid away in
dark corners, who were rehearsing for the closing scene.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Apl. 13, 1865.

     Special Order No. 61.

     1st Lieut. H. B. Smith, in accordance with instructions
     received from the Hon. Secretary of War, will proceed to that
     part of Virginia known as the Northern Neck, with two of his
     men, and prisoner, M. V. B. Morgan, for the purpose of
     arresting certain outlaws in that part of Virginia.

     Military and Naval commanders will please give all assistance
     required.

     By command of Bvt. Brigadier General W. W. Morris.

     WM. H. WIEGEL,
     Major & Actg. Provost Marshal.


This was to be my first opportunity to set foot in the district I had
been seeking to. I had intended to capture in detail every known
blockade-runner, and lock them up until the end of the war, but now that
the war was practically over, my purpose was to capture the contraband
goods to be found hidden in hay stacks, barns, etc.

Martin Van Buren Morgan had been with these blockade-runners, and had
himself been somewhat in their ways, so I had become satisfied he would
serve me, for pay. An order was placed in my hands, to be used under
certain conditions. If he proved loyal and valuable, it was not to be
used. If he was not valuable, I could use it and send him north. If he
proved disloyal, I had verbal instructions to use my own judgment as to
his disposal. This was the order:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Apl. 13, 1865.

     Special Order No. 61.

     2--M. V. B. Morgan, citizen prisoner, is hereby ordered to
     proceed north of Philadelphia, Pa., and remain during the
     war, provided he takes the oath of allegiance to the United
     States Government.

     By command of Bvt. Brigadier General W. W. Morris.

     WM. H. WIEGEL,
     Major & Actg. Provost Marshal.




                       Morgan's Statement.

     "My name is Martin Van Buren Morgan. I was born in Palmyra,
     New York State. My father was named Irvin Morgan, my brother
     is named Francis Morgan. My father one year ago was in
     Nashville, Tenn. I was so young I can not remember when I
     lived in Palmyra; as far back as I can recollect I was in
     Oswego. When three years old we moved to Cleveland, Ohio. When
     about sixteen I moved to Wheeling with my mother. From
     Wheeling I ran on the river from Cincinnati to Pittsburg.

     "In November, 1860, I was in Cleveland, Ohio. I voted for
     Abraham Lincoln. From Cleveland I went to Cincinnati, to
     Pittsburg, and then to Queen's County, Virginia, in January,
     1861.

     "On March 4th, 1861, I was still in Queen's County, Virginia.
     I did not vote in Virginia. Mr. Thompson took me to Virginia.
     I never belonged to any regiment in the South. I lived in
     Queen's County until last spring, lived there all the time. I
     worked there at farming and oystering. I own a little place of
     about ten acres. I worked for Mr. Richardson and Captain
     Baggs.

     "Since last spring I have been living in Westmorland and
     Northumberland Counties. They ran me away from Queen's County.
     I lived near Union, in Northumberland. I used to oyster on the
     Wicomico River, &c.

     "When the raid was made last June, on the Necks, I was there.
     They did not find my boat that I oyster with, as it was hauled
     up and covered with pine boughs. I remained hid. I saw a few
     colored soldiers. Have seen conscripting officers and I always
     ran away from them. Have never been to Richmond since 1861.

     "I sent a letter by George Booth across the river and heard
     from my father the same way. The carrier who works from
     Rap---- to Potomac, is named James Wilds; I don't know the
     points he stops at. Charles or George Booth carries the mail
     across the Potomac.

     "I addressed the letter I sent to my father to Nashville,
     Tenn. I have a brother in the Southern army; he belongs to the
     fourth Georgia regiment; he is a Captain. I received an answer
     to the letter I sent my father. I never wrote to him again,
     and have had no letter from him since.

     "I left Northumberland County last August, and crossed over
     to the Maryland side. I came across in an oyster punt, at
     night. The boat belonged to me. I came over alone, brought
     nothing with me; landed on the Maryland side, at the barns,
     near Marshal's store, on the St. George's Island. Bennett and
     King live there.

     "When I landed on the Maryland side, I saw Ben. King, Bennett,
     and Mr. Snyder, who all came to the barn. I went over to
     Maryland to get shoes and to dredge, but could get no work and
     had to come back. I also got some sugar; I got Ben. King to
     get it for me. I got one pair of shoes, one pound of coffee
     and one pound of sugar. This is all I could get. I paid five
     dollars for the shoes, seventy-five cents for the coffee and
     thirty cents for the sugar. I bought these things for Mrs.
     Kent: I was living with her. King has been driven off the
     Island. I stayed in Maryland a week and then paddled back to
     old Virginia, to old Virginia shore.

     "About the 1st September I came to Maryland shore again,
     paddled over on a dark night, brought nothing over with me,
     again landed at the same place. I came over for stuff. Pickets
     were on the shore and I could not land, and had to put back. I
     carried over forty dollars in greenbacks.

     "After about a week I went over again, taking over the same
     thing; nothing. I landed this time at Chicken Cock, above
     Smith's Creek, a _leetle_. I got my goods at Mr. Bean's. Mr.
     Bean keeps a store. I got a pair of boots for eight dollars,
     one pair pants for five dollars, one fine-tooth comb for
     fifteen cents, and also a bottle of hair oil at thirty or
     forty cents, and had three or four glasses of whiskey.

     "I treated a Lieutenant and a Captain who were there from
     Piney Point. I had to lay in the bushes about two days, the
     weather being so rough I could not cross. I spent about thirty
     dollars.

     "On last Monday night I came over again; came over alone, and
     in a canoe worth one hundred and fifty dollars; left the canoe
     on the beach. I bought this canoe about a week before I came
     over. I bought this canoe to run the blockade with. I was
     going to run Jews across for Mr. Dawson. Mr. Dawson lives at
     the head of Large Creek, Yocomico River. Colonel Claybrook, of
     Home Guard, lives on the road from Large Creek to Union
     Village.

     "I saw in Northumberland County about three months since,
     Albert Klockgether, who gave me his address in Baltimore, and
     desired me, when I came over, to call and see him. Bill Hayden
     carried over Klockgether, in one of Dawson's boats.

     "I left my boat near Britton's Bay, on the beach. Bill Hayden
     has been captured twice, and is now back in Virginia. I came
     to this city on the West River boat, and landed this
     afternoon. I bought this shirt I have on from Mr. Wm. Hudson,
     a blockade runner; paid him six dollars for it about three or
     four weeks since. I have heard that Hudson is now captured.
     Bought my hat for five dollars from the same one. I bought my
     satchel from Richard King, a blockade runner. I bought the
     revolver from a Jew in Virginia; paid twenty dollars for it.

     "A man named Brown is a blockade runner. I heard that he
     brought over a load of Enfield rifles, in a sloop; the Home
     Guard are armed with them.

     "A Jew named Rosenfield is connected between Wilmington and
     Canada and England, in running the blockade. A woman named
     Mrs. Hays, of Baltimore, was with Rosenfield; she had a trunk
     and satchel; she came over to Dawson's. She was coming from
     Richmond.

     "Rosenfield said he was going back. I knew three Jews by
     sight, who have brought medicine across--I think from Eastern
     shore. I don't know their names.

     "A Rebel officer, Captain Berry, came over to the Maryland
     side in full uniform, and came back again. I have seen him
     lots of times; he is stationed above Boler's, who lives at
     the ferry over the Rappahannock, about twenty miles from mouth
     of the river.

     "They have large flat boats to carry over men, oxen, wagons,
     &c.--have two there now. This ferry is about fifty miles from
     Richmond. There is a large camp of Cavalry about eight miles
     from the ferry on the south side of the river. Gunboats can
     come up as far as Boler's. Captain Moon lives opposite the
     guard ship, on the Virginia side, at the windmill.

     "Foster Maynard took the oath at Point Lookout, and is now
     conscript officer; he is a Captain. Maynard lives about one
     mile from King's Sail. King's Sail is on the Yocomico River.

     "About two weeks since, Bill Hayden and Joe Cooper came over
     to Britton's Bay, to a little creek this side of the Bay, just
     above Piney Point; a white house is on the shore. The house
     right by the saw mill is the house they go to. They go to this
     house to buy goods to run the blockade with. I bought a little
     cutter from this place; bought over three sacks of salt, hats,
     caps, boots, shoes, and a jug of whiskey.

     "Richard King, of Northumberland County, a blockade runner,
     comes to this side of the river and buys canoes and yawl
     boats. King has been over here for the last three weeks. About
     four weeks ago King got a canoe from Alexandria, and took it
     over to Dawson's and sold it to him. He came to Baltimore
     once, on a pungy.

     "John Olison owns a pungy; dredges around St. George's. He
     lives on the Virginia side. Elias Steele, blockade runner,
     lives in Westmorland County. Captain Wm. Dawson lives at Large
     Creek.

     "Union Village is where the mail comes. It comes every week
     (not certain). Mrs. Frank Lewis gave me the letter addressed
     to Mr. Steele, to give to Mr. Steele. (I never gave it to
     him.) Union Village is about eight miles from the beach. I
     found out that Mr. Steele had crossed the Potomac.

     "I have seen large quantities of tobacco hid under corn
     shucks, and I know he has a large sum of money and a number of
     watches in his house (Dawson's house).

     "At Dawson's house are the following persons: Mr. Dawson, Sr.,
     Mrs. Dawson, Miss Dawson, Mrs. Nancy Clarke and her daughter,
     and Dawson, Jr. (a boy).

     "There are two canoes at Dawson's."




FILE XLI.

I am introduced to General Grant--The assassination--Capture of Samuel B.
Arnold, one of the conspirators, sent to Dry Tortugas--Arrested the
Bransons and their household, uncovering Paine's pedigree, thereafter he
was Lewis Paine Powell--Paine had my parole on his person when arrested--
Paine hung.


The saddest day in our nation's history was Friday, April 14th, 1865.
Early in the evening I was introduced to General Grant, in his private
car; he was on his way from Washington to Philadelphia. The private car
was standing on Howard just north of Camden Street. At that time the
cars of through trains were hauled through Baltimore by horses up
Howard, down Pratt to President Street, and to the depot.

Mr. Wm. G. Woodside, the paymaster of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad,
had asked me if I would like to be introduced to the General. We entered
the car from the rear door. I do not remember there being any person in
the car except the General and Mrs. Grant. It was understood in
Washington that General Grant was to have accompanied the President to
the theatre that evening.

We retired at about 10 o'clock, prepared to start the next morning,
Saturday, the 15th, for the northern neck of Virginia, with Morgan, as
outlined in the file preceding. Soon after retiring we were informed of
the assassination. There is no word in the language to describe the
shock I felt. I put on my clothes and did not take them off again until
Wednesday, the 19th. Adjutant General Lawrence sent for me, and
instructed me to abandon my trip to the Northern Neck.

The following telegram came early Saturday morning; in it Paine is
described quite perfectly, but at that time I had no idea that he was
the person described:


     United States Military Telegram,
     Apl. 15, 1865.

     The following is a description of the assassin of the Hon. W.
     H. Seward, Secretary of State, and Hon. Frederick W. Seward,
     Assistant Secretary. You will use every exertion in your power
     and call to your aid the entire force under your control to
     secure the arrest of the assassin.

     Height 6-1/2 feet, black hair, thick, full, and straight. No
     beard, nor appearance of beard. Cheeks red on the jaws, and
     face moderately full. 22 or 23 years of age. Eyes, color not
     known, large eyes, not prominent. Brows not heavy, but dark.
     Face not large, but rather round. Complexion healthy. Nose
     straight and well formed. Medium sized mouth, small lip, thin
     upper lip, protrudes when he talks. Chin pointed and
     prominent. Head of medium size. Neck short and of medium
     length. Hands small and fingers tapering, showed no signs of
     hard labor. Broad shoulders, taper waist, straight figure,
     strong looking man; manner not gentlemanly, but vulgar.

     Overcoat double breasted, color mixed of pink and grey spots,
     small; was a sack overcoat, pockets inside and on breast, with
     lapels or flaps. Pants, black, common stuff. New heavy boots.
     Voice small, inclined to tenor.

     (Signed) N. S. JEFFRIES,
     A. P. M. G.




     Headquarters, Middle Department
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Apl. 16, 1865.

     Colonel:

     I have some important intelligence, send Lieut. Smith to me at
     once.

     SAMUEL B. LAWRENCE,
     A. A. G.

     To
     Colonel Woolley.


The information was about a letter that had been found in Booth's trunk,
written from Hookstown, Md., from Samuel Arnold, showing his
(Arnold's) complicity in the assassination.

[Illustration: SAMUEL B. ARNOLD]

I at once, with one of my men, Mr. Babcock, went to Hookstown. We
avoided our pickets, traveled across country, and reached Arnold's home
about noon. We sat down, as if to rest, on Arnold's porch, asking no
questions, but waited to be questioned. A colored woman opened the door,
and I asked her if she would give us something to eat, for money. She
agreed and invited us into the sitting room, while she prepared
something for us.

There was no white person about. We ate and visited, she questioning us
about the murder, and we cautioning her. Finally, when we were about to
leave, we told her we knew Mr. Arnold. She said he had gone away some
days since to Old Point Comfort. Our purpose was accomplished. It is not
necessary to say we hurried.

Everybody bound for Old Point had to get a pass at our office. A record
was kept of each, together with the name of a person as reference. An
examination of the register disclosed at once Samuel B. Arnold's name,
vouched for by Mr. Wharton ("Wickey" Wharton), whom we knew; he was
sutler at Old Point. We wired to him to know where Arnold was. He
replied: "A clerk in my employ." We then wired for his arrest.

He was arrested and sent to Baltimore on the Bay Line boat, reaching
Baltimore on the 18th.

The following was my order to go to Washington with him:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, Apl. 18, 1865.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith (in citizen's clothes) and officer Babcock,
     will accompany the officer in charge of S. B. Arnold, to
     Washington, to aid in securing Arnold's safe delivery. The
     duty performed they will return to these headquarters without
     delay.

     By command of Bvt. Brigadier General Morris.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. Chf. Staff Prov. Mar.


Arnold was sentenced to Dry Tortugas for life. Following is a copy of
Arnold's letter, found in Booth's trunk:


     Hookstown, Baltimore County, Md.,
     March 27, 1865.

     Dear John:

     Was business so important that you could not remain in
     Baltimore till I saw you? I came in as soon as I could, but
     found you had gone to W----n. I called also to see Mike, but
     learned from his mother he had gone out with you, and had not
     returned. I concluded, therefore, he had gone with you.

     How inconsiderate you have been. When I left you, you stated
     we would meet in a month or so. Therefore I made application
     for employment, an answer to which I shall receive during the
     week. I told my parents I had ceased with you.

     Can I then, under existing circumstances, come as you
     requested? You know full well that the G----t suspicions
     something is going on there; therefore the undertaking is
     becoming more complicated. Why not, for the present desist,
     for various reasons? which, if you look into, you can readily
     see without my making any mention thereof to you. Nor anyone
     can censure me for my present course. You have been its cause,
     for how can I now come after telling them I had left you?
     Suspicion rests on me now, from my whole family, and even
     parties in the country. I will be compelled to leave home,
     anyhow, and how soon I care not.

     None, no, not one, were more in favor of the enterprise than
     myself, and to-day would be there, had you not done as you
     have--by this, I mean, manner of proceeding.

     I am, as you well know, in need. I am, you may say, in rags,
     whereas to-day I ought to be well clothed.

     I do not feel right stalking about without means, and more
     from appearance a beggar. I feel my independence; but even all
     this would be, and was forgotten, for I was one with you.
     Time more propitious will arrive yet. Do not act rashly or in
     haste. I would prefer your first query, "Go and see how it
     will be taken at R----d," and ere long I shall be better
     prepared to again be with you. I dislike writing; would sooner
     verbally make known my views, yet you know writing causes me
     thus to proceed.

     Do not in anger peruse this, weigh all I have said, and as a
     rational man and a friend, you cannot censure or upbraid my
     conduct. I sincerely trust this, nor naught else that shall or
     may occur, will ever be an obstacle to obliterate our former
     friendship and attachment.

     Write me to Baltimore, as I expect to be in about Wednesday or
     Thursday, or, if you can possibly come on, I will Tuesday meet
     you in Baltimore at B----. Ever I subscribe myself,

     Your friend,
     SAM.


Notwithstanding the opprobrium attaching to the name, Arnold, in
American history, I have always looked upon this Arnold with some
feelings of pity.

The following account of Paine's arrest is borrowed from Mr. Osborn H.
Oldroyd's "Assassination of Abraham Lincoln":

     The doorbell of Mrs. Surratt's house, No. 541 (now No. 604) H
     Street, N. W., was rung by Major H. W. Smith, in company with
     other officers, about eleven o'clock Monday night, the 17th.
     When the bell rang, Mrs. Surratt appeared at the window and
     said: "Is that you, Mr. Kirby"? The reply was that it was not
     Mr. Kirby, and to open the door. She opened the door, and was
     asked: "Are you Mrs. Surratt?" She said: "I am the widow of
     John H. Surratt." The officer added, "And the mother of John
     H. Surratt, Jr.?" She replied: "I am." Major Smith said: "I
     come to arrest you and all in your house, and take you for
     examination to General Augur's headquarters." No inquiry
     whatever was made as to the cause of arrest. Mr. R. C. Morgan,
     in the service of the War Department, made his appearance at
     the Surratt house a few minutes later, sent under orders to
     superintend the seizure of papers and the arrest of the
     inmates. While the officers were in the house a knock and ring
     were heard at the door, and Mr. Morgan and Captain
     Wermerskirch stepped forward and opened the door, and Lewis
     Payne stepped in with a pickax over his shoulder, dressed in a
     gray coat and vest and black trousers. As he had left his hat
     in the house of Secretary Seward, he had made one out of the
     sleeve of a shirt or the leg of a drawers, pulling it over his
     head like a turban. He said he wished to see Mrs. Surratt, and
     when asked what he came that time of night for, he replied he
     came to dig a gutter, as Mrs. Surratt had sent for him in the
     morning. When asked where he boarded, he said he had no
     boarding house, that he was a poor man, who got his living
     with the pick. Mr. Morgan asked him why he came at that hour
     of the night to go to work? He said he simply called to find
     out what time he should go to work in the morning. When asked
     if he had any previous acquaintance with Mrs Surratt, he
     answered, "No," but said that she knew he was working around
     the neighborhood and was a poor man, and came to him. He gave
     his age as twenty, and was from Fauquier County, Virginia, and
     pulled out an oath of allegiance, and on it was "Lewis Payne,
     Fauquier County, Virginia." Mrs. Surratt was asked whether she
     knew him, and she declared in the presence of Payne, holding
     up her hands: "Before God, I have never seen that man before;
     I have not hired him; I do not know anything about him." Mrs.
     Surratt said to Mr. Morgan: "I am so glad you officers came
     here to-night, for this man came here with a pickax to kill
     us."

     From Mrs. Surratt's house Payne was taken to the provost
     marshal's office. Mrs. Surratt was informed that the carriage
     was ready to take her to the provost marshal's office, and
     she, with her daughter Annie, Miss Honora Fitzpatrick, and
     Miss Olivia Jenkins (the latter two boarded at the house),
     were driven away.

The telegram received on Saturday morning the 15th, giving a description
of the person who tried to kill Secretary Seward, was quite accurate,
considering it was made by persons under great excitement. The oath of
allegiance which Paine pulled out of his pocket when arrested, was the
document issued from our office. He had erased, however, the restriction
which ordered that he was to "go north of Philadelphia and remain during
the war."

Before telling of what I did after discovering Paine to be the person I
had released on March 14th, I want you to read the account Mr. Oldroyd
gives of his clumsily brutal attack on Secretary Seward:

     "Lewis Payne (his real name was Lewis Thornton Powell),
     boarded at the Horndon House, corner Ninth and F Streets,
     where the Loan and Trust Building now stands, for two weeks,
     leaving there on the afternoon of April 14th. He paid his bill
     at four o'clock, and requested dinner before the regular time,
     and it was served to him.

     Very little is known of his whereabouts from that time until
     10 P. M., when he rang the bell of the Seward mansion, which
     stood on the ground now occupied by the Lafayette Opera
     House.

     When the door was opened by the colored doorkeeper, Payne
     stepped in, holding a little package in his hand, saying that
     he had some medicine for Secretary Seward, sent by Dr. Verdi,
     which he was directed to deliver in person and give
     instructions how it was to be taken.

     The doorkeeper informed him that he could not see Mr. Seward,
     but he repeated the words, saying he must see him. He talked
     very roughly for several minutes against the protest of the
     doorkeeper, who said he had positive orders to admit no one to
     the sick-chamber.

     The doorkeeper finally weakened, thinking perhaps he was sent
     by Dr. Verdi, and let him ascend the stairs. When at the top,
     he met Mr. Frederick Seward, a son of the Secretary's to whom
     he told the object of his visit, but Mr. Seward told him that
     he could not see his father; that he was asleep, but to give
     him the medicine and he would take it to him. That would not
     do; he must see Mr. Seward; and then Mr. Seward said: "I am
     the proprietor here, and his son; if you cannot leave your
     message with me, you cannot leave it at all."

     Payne started downstairs, and after taking a few steps,
     suddenly turned around and struck Mr. Frederick Seward,
     felling him to the floor. Sergeant George F. Robinson, acting
     as attendant nurse to Mr. Seward, was in an adjoining room,
     and on hearing the noise in the hall opened the door, where he
     found Payne close up to it. As soon as the door was opened, he
     struck Robinson in the forehead with a knife, knocking him
     partially down, and pressed past him to the bed of Mr. Seward,
     where he leaned over it and struck him three times in the neck
     with his dagger.

     Mr. Seward had been out riding shortly before the fatal day,
     and had been thrown from his carriage with great violence,
     breaking an arm and fracturing his jaw. The physician had
     fixed up a steel mask or frame to hold the broken bones in
     place while setting. The assassin's dagger cut his face from
     the right cheek down to the neck, and but for this steel
     bandage, which deflected two of the stabs, the assassin might
     have accomplished his purpose.

     The carriage disaster was after this night almost considered a
     blessing in disguise. Frederick Seward suffered intensely from
     a fracture of the cranium. The nurse attempted to haul Payne
     off the bed, when he turned and attacked him the second time.
     During this scuffle Major Augustus H. Seward, son of Secretary
     Seward, entered the room and clinched Payne, and between the
     two they succeeded in getting him to the door, when he broke
     away and ran downstairs and outdoors.

     The colored doorkeeper ran after the police or guards when
     Frederick Seward was knocked down, and returned and reported
     that he saw the man riding a horse and followed him to I
     Street, where he was lost sight of.

     In some way Payne's horse got away from him, for a little
     after one o'clock on the morning of the 15th Lieutenant John
     F. Toffey, on going to the Lincoln Hospital, East Capitol and
     Fifteenth Streets, where he was on duty, found a dark bay
     horse, with saddle and bridle on, standing at Lincoln Branch
     Barracks. The horse no doubt came in on a sort of byroad that
     led to Camp Barry, which turned north from the Branch Barracks
     towards the Bladensburg road. The sweat pouring from the
     animal had made a regular puddle on the ground. A sentinel at
     the hospital had stopped the horse. Lieutenant Toffey and
     Captain Lansing, of the 13th New York Cavalry, took the horse
     to the headquarters of the picket at the Old Capitol Prison,
     and from there to General E. O. C. Ord's headquarters. After
     reaching there, they discovered that the horse was blind of
     one eye, which identified it as the one Booth purchased in
     November, 1864, from Squire George Gardiner."

Immediately upon the identification of Paine I arrested the Bransons and
all the occupants of their fashionable boarding house, No. 16 North
Eutaw Street. Following is a list of the persons arrested:

     Mrs. M. A. Branson,
     Miss M. A. Branson,
     Miss Maggie Branson,
     Mrs. Early,
     Mrs. Croyean,
     Miss Croyean,
     Mrs. Thomas Hall,
     Miss Josephine Hall,
     Mr. Joseph Branson, Jr.,
     Mr. C. H. Morgan,
     Mr. C. S. Shriver,
     Mr. Chas. Ewart,
     Mr. C. E. Barnett,
     Mr. J. C. Hall,
     Mr. W. H. Ward,
     Mr. E. A. Willer,
     Mr. C. H. Croyean,
     Mr. Aug. Thomas,
     Mr. Winchester,
     Mr. Thos. Hall,
     Mr. S. T. Morgan,
     Mr. H. D. Shriver.

I began my examination of the individuals in the house, seeking to find
who, if any, were intimate with Paine, and might, therefore, have had
some knowledge of the crime "before the fact."

Not all of these people were known to be disloyal. Messrs. C. H. Morgan,
S. T. Morgan, C. S. Shriver and H. D. Shriver are marked on my list as
"loyal," and there may have been others.

I have a lead pencil memorandum of the examination in the house (No. 16
North Eutaw Street) but it is so disjointed as to be unintelligible, and
I will not put it in here. Finding that the most valuable source of
information was the Bransons, I released all others, resuming the
examination of Miss Maggie Branson in my office where I could be more
deliberate.

Her statement is mixed and disjointed and there are repetitions. It took
me much time to elicit the facts. She broke down and wanted me to
destroy a great part of her statement and let her replace it with a
truthful one, which I refused, requiring that all she had said should be
put down.


               Examination of Miss Maggie Branson.

     "I was at the General Hospital at Gettysburg about six weeks
     in 1863. I was there in the capacity of nurse. I don't know
     any of the surgeons except Dr. Simley, of Philadelphia, who
     would remember me. I went there to assist all the wounded
     soldiers. While there I saw a man known as Lewis Payne; he
     went by the name of "Doctor" and "Powell," he wore a pair of
     blue pants, I think, and a slouch hat; I did not have much
     talk with him while there.

     "I did not learn during the time I was there what he was. I
     don't remember of giving him my address. Sometime in the same
     year, after the above named occurrence, I saw him at our
     house; he called to see me. I can scarcely remember how he was
     dressed; but I think in a Federal uniform. I think he was
     stopping at Miller's Hotel.

     "He said he wanted to cross the lines but did not say where
     to, nor in what direction; he did not tell me where his home
     was; I don't remember what I replied.

     I did not ask him anything about his intentions as to crossing
     the lines. I don't know that he told me what his intentions
     were; it was in the afternoon when he called. He again called
     at our house about the middle of January, 1865; he was dressed
     in black clothes; he said he was from Fauquier County,
     Virginia; he said he had just come in on the cars, and he
     wanted to board, but we could not at that time accommodate
     him; there was no one else present; he said he was a refugee
     and had his papers; he wanted to show them to me.

     He said at Gettysburg that his name was Powell; on his second
     visit at the house he said his name was Payne."

At this point in the examination Miss Branson broke down. She realized
that I was drawing her into a net of contradictions, and she thereafter
proposed to be more frank and truthful with me.

     "He said his father was a Baptist clergyman; said he had two
     brothers that were killed in the army; it is my impression
     that they were in the Confederate Army.

     "He said a great deal of Mosby, and I should judge by his talk
     that he belonged to Mosby's Command. I have some slight
     recollection of his saying that he assisted in capturing a
     wagon train and some amount of newspapers on one occasion.

     "I have occasionally walked out with him. I called once or
     twice at Mrs. Heim, No. ---- Race Street, with him, we saw
     Charles and William Heim there; he did not see Mr. Heim, he
     (Heim) was in Richmond; I never saw any one else there when I
     went with Mr. Payne. He told me that his proper name was
     Powell; he said this when he came here this year.

     "We also called on Mrs. Mantz, on Baltimore Street, near Green
     Street. I introduced him there as Mr. Payne. I might have
     called twice at this place. I often went to church with him.
     He was arrested at our house on March 12th, 1865, by Colonel
     Woolley's officers. I saw him after his release, on the day he
     was released; I have not seen him since. I heard from him only
     once, that was by a letter to my sister from New York.

     "I have sent provisions, &c., to prisoners of war at Fort
     McHenry and Johnson's Island. I consider myself loyal. I have
     a great many friends in the South, and many relatives. I have
     never taken the oath of allegiance.

     "Mr. E. W. Blair used to meet Mr. Payne at the house very
     often. On one occasion he went with him to the theatre. Mr.
     Chas. G. Heim used to call on us and would see Mr. Payne.

     "If he had on a blue uniform when he came from Gettysburg, it
     was worn to aid him in getting South; it was not worn to act
     as a spy. I am confident that he never was North before. My
     sister said she thought at Gettysburg that he was a Federal
     doctor. Some called him Powell; I think he was introduced to
     me as Powell when he first came to our house. I think his
     correct name is Powell; he said his father was a Baptist
     minister, that he had lost two brothers in the war and that he
     did not know but that a third. His name may be Lewis Payne
     Powell. When he came to our house to board this year it was
     about the last days of January. Before coming there he boarded
     at Miller's Hotel about ten days. He called on us several
     times while he was boarding at Miller's Hotel. Sister or I
     entertained him when he came; his talk was principally of the
     ladies; he complained of his education.

     "After he came to our house to board I introduced him to the
     boarders as Mr. Payne. I said to Miss Hall, one of the
     boarders, that he (Payne) was from Frederick County, Md.

     "He was not particularly intimate with any one of the
     boarders. He was acquainted with all of them. My sister played
     chess with him; Mr. Barnett played with him. I have seen him
     speak to Mr. Joseph Thomas. I do not think they were intimate.
     I have spent considerable time with him. I think I spent more
     time with him than my sister or any of the other parties in
     the house. I walked with him very often. I was accompanied by
     Mr. Payne over in old town, on a matter of business, to employ
     some servants. I proposed to call on my cousin, Mrs. Dukehart,
     corner of Fayette and East Streets, and he agreed. I left him
     in the parlor alone, and went up stairs to see the family, and
     staid a short time and left. I am sure not a member of the
     family saw him; in the evening we called again. I called with
     him on Mrs. Heim on Paca Street, I might have called several
     times, we took tea there once; at other times only made short
     calls, at no time when we called was there any visitors there.
     Mr. Heim's business was in Richmond. Mr. Payne went to New
     York before Mr. Heim came home from Richmond. Mrs. Heim knew
     Mr. Payne was from Virginia. I don't know that she knew he was
     in the Rebel Army. I do not think Charles G. Heim was at any
     time home, when we called.

     "We (Mr. Payne and I) called on Mrs. Mentz, on Baltimore
     Street; she is my aunt. I think we called on her twice. She
     knew he was from Virginia. I don't know that my sister ever
     went out with Mr. Payne. I don't remember going to any other
     place except to church. I went several times; do not know
     exactly how many.

     "I remember his arrest on or about March 12, 1865, by Colonel
     Woolley. I came to this office and saw Lieut. Smith, about
     Mr. Paine. I thought he was arrested through malice on account
     of his whipping a colored servant in our house; that was very
     saucy. I told Lieut. Smith that he (Paine) had not been North
     before since the war commenced. I at the same time knew he
     had; I did this to shield him from harm. After his release he
     came to our house and left almost immediately. My impression
     is that he went directly to New York.

     "After he arrived there he wrote me from the Revere House,
     directing me to address him at Revere House. I wrote him one
     letter; I addressed him as Lewis Payne. I never heard from him
     again, never saw him again after he left for New York; no one
     that I know saw him. I have always been a Rebel sympathizer. I
     have sent provisions, &c., to Confederate Prisoners at Forts
     McHenry and Delaware, Johnson's Island, Camp Chase, and
     Elmira, but only on permission of the military authorities."

When she had finished she was anxious to learn what I thought the
Government would do to her. I informed her that she was responsible for
Paine's acts; that if she had told me the truth when I had him in
arrest, he would have been kept in arrest, and could not have attempted
to assassinate Secretary Seward.

Miss Branson was detained a long time. Whenever you hear Paine spoken of
in history as "Powell, the son of a Baptist minister" you will now
recognize where the information came from.

The following from the New York "Tribune," April 29th, 1865, describes
one of those who had knowledge before the act. He had been intimate with
Paine, and undoubtedly we were creeping up too dangerously near him. The
suicide was buried in Greenmount Cemetery, and in the darkness of night
we dug the body up as mentioned by the "Tribune." This was the only time
I ever acted the part of a ghoul. If I remember right, the man was a
builder and committed suicide out behind a barn in the country:


                      Suicide in Baltimore.

     "A well known citizen of Baltimore committed suicide last
     Monday, a short distance from this city, by shooting himself
     with a pistol. No cause could be assigned for the rash act
     except that he had recently seemed depressed and melancholy.
     Subsequent events have induced the suspicion that he was
     someway implicated in the conspiracy, and last night the body
     was exhumed, embalmed, and sent to Washington, by orders of
     the Government. The affair causes much speculation, and there
     are many reports in connection with it as well as some facts
     which it is deemed imprudent to publish at present."

               (New York Tribune, April 29, 1865.)


Paine was hanged, along with Mrs. Surratt, Herold and Atzerodt.
Considerable silly sentiment was manufactured in Mrs. Surratt's case; it
was entirely wasted. If you will carefully examine her record you will
say that her sex should not excuse such cold-blooded villainy. General
Wallace was second in rank on the commission that tried the
conspirators.

When President Lincoln's remains were lying in state in the rotunda of
the Exchange in Baltimore, I remained at his head long hours, watching
the faces of the people passing. Truly they were mourners, not the idle,
curious, nor frivolous of mankind.

It had been intimated that the procession of people might be turned into
a mockery. That mock ceremonies elsewhere would be attempted by some
relentless furies. But even the suggestion was unhealthy. As a matter of
history one of the earliest expressions of regret came from the
Confederate prisoners of war confined at Point Lookout. Was ever man
more universally loved?




FILE XLII.

Richmond had fallen--Class of detective work entirely changed--
Counterfeiters--Secretary McCullogh--Go to steamboat of the Leary
Line and capture a youthful murderer--Arrest of Mrs. Beverly Tucker.


Richmond had fallen, Lee had surrendered and the end was near.
Disbandment and readjustment, to a civil basis, was then in order.
Whatever work I did after this was of that character. I was no longer to
chase my dream of crippling Mosby. Probably he did not know I lived. He
might have smiled at my proposition, but I enjoyed the dream
nevertheless.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, May 13, 1865.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith.

     Sir.--From what I can learn there are several gangs of
     counterfeiters of United States currency in this city, driving
     a good trade. I had the name and description of one of them
     but have lost it.

     I now find that a certain John Mitchell (whom I know) engaged
     with a huxter in Washington, D. C., by name Henry High, knows
     all the particulars.

     Mitchell will not come to this city as he is afraid of being
     arrested, upon what charge I do not know.

     Yours,
     WM. L. HOPKINS.


This was a new field for me and I delved into the matter with success.
Counterfeit money, in slang, is called "queer," and those who pass it on
the public are called "shovers." Its manufacturer never "shoves" it, but
sells it in quantities to small shop keepers, car conductors, and
others, at a certain percentage of its face value--50 per cent. quite
usually; the percentage, however, depends on whether it is well done or
not.

Ramsey, at No. 146 Sixth Street, below Race Street, Philadelphia, was a
medium. It was represented that the headquarters of the product was at
Mahanoy City, Pa. I bought twenty-five dollars, face value, in
twenty-five cent fractional currency very well done.

This was now a matter to be submitted to the Treasury Department, which
I accordingly did, which was the reason for the following:


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, June 15, 1865.

     Special Order No. 86.

     1st Lieut. H. B. Smith, Assistant Provost Marshal, will
     immediately proceed to Washington, D. C., for the purpose of
     conferring with the Hon H. McCullogh, Secretary of the
     Treasury.

     On accomplishing the object of his visit, he will immediately
     report to these headquarters.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col & Pro. Marshal.

     Lieut. H. B. Smith,
     Asst. Provost Marshal.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, May 25, 1865.
     12 P. M.

     Lt. H. B. Smith,
     Asst. Provost Marshal.

     You will proceed to the Norfolk Boat, "Lary Line," foot of
     Frederick Street, to-morrow morning, with a guard of one
     officer and twenty men, and carry out the instructions given
     you in compliance with orders of the Hon. Secretary of War.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Pro. Marshal.


The above was an interesting case. The party to be apprehended was a
young officer, described as very youthful in appearance, who had shot
and killed a private soldier under very aggravating circumstances. He
ordered the soldier to do a menial service, and killed him for refusing.

The steamboat had three hundred or four hundred passengers. We did not
want to delay innocent persons, so I allowed all to pass off who were of
age sufficient to warrant the conclusion that they were not wanted. Then
I searched the boat and found a mere boy who appeared to be not over
fourteen years old; he was the one wanted. He had been tried and
convicted, and was on his way to jail (I think the Albany penitentiary)
when he escaped. We started him on again under a guard. When in the
Thirtieth Street station of the Hudson River Railroad, in New York City,
he was permitted to go into a water closet alone. He never came out the
door. He must have crawled out through the window, though it seemed not
large enough to permit even a boy's egress. The guards became frightened
and deserted. No one ever heard of either prisoner or guards so far as
I know. This boy officer was certainly living a charmed life.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, May 25, 1865.

     Mrs. Beverly Tucker will be arrested. Seize and search her
     baggage for papers, and also cause strict examination to be
     made to discover any papers concealed on her person. Much
     depends on your diligence and skill in executing this order.

     Watch carefully what companions she has, if any, male or
     female, and cause similar search to be made of such persons.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Pro. Marshal.

     To
     Lt. H. B. Smith,
     Asst. Provost Marshal.





FILE XLIII.

Camp Carroll rioting--Troops being mustered out.


The muster out of troops and return to civil life of the men who had
been hardened soldiers was attended with difficulties. The men often
began to feel liberty while yet with arms in their hands, and rioting,
the effect of too much "fire water" was frequent. Camp Carroll was a
muster out rendezvous in the western end of Baltimore.


     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, June 6, 1865.

     Lieut. Smith:

     I have sent four companies of infantry and a detachment of
     cavalry to report at Camp Carroll at once. They will be
     provided with ammunition. Find Colonel Johannes, 11th Md.
     Infantry, if you can, and direct him to take command of all
     reinforcements and enforce order in the Camp and neighborhood;
     if Colonel Johannes is not there, see the senior colonel at
     the Camp and impart the order to him.

     Brigadier General Lockwood has been ordered to proceed to Camp
     Carroll at once and take command.

     Please report state of affairs from time to time.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     SAM'L B. LAWRENCE,
     A. Adjutant General.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     June 6, 1865.

     Lt. Smith:

     Send all the Cavalry you have to spare at once to report to
     the Commanding Officer, 11th Md. Infantry at Camp Carroll.
     Read the order I have written to him. Keep the three orders I
     wrote to General Lockwood and C. O. Federal Hill, and if you
     do not need them to-night, return them to me in the morning.
     Send the order at once to Commanding Officer, 11th Md.

     If anything serious occurs to-night send an orderly to me.

     Yours, &c.,
     SAM'L B. LAWRENCE,
     A. Adjutant General.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Provost Marshal's Office.
     Baltimore, June 6, 1865.

     Colonel:

     I have the honor to report in the case of the disturbance at
     and near Camp Carroll this evening.

     I proceeded to the spot, assisted by Capt. Jones and Lt. Smyth
     with their commands. I arrested some forty of the
     ring-leaders. I then proceeded to the Camp to quiet the men.

     I gave the Comdg. Officer of the 11th Md. a verbal order to
     place his men on guard over all of the troops not armed, and I
     promised him a written order from you, placing him properly in
     Command, in which case I herewith return you the orders given
     to Mr. Babcock.

     After placing a guard over the Camp I had the country about
     patroled and all ordered in. Everything is now quiet. It had
     become a very serious matter and I felt justified in placing
     the 11th Md. on duty. Hoping my action in this case will meet
     your approval, I am,

     Very respy. your obdt. servt,
     H. B. SMITH,
     Lt. & Asst. Provost Marshal.

     To
     Col. Lawrence,
     A. A. G.




     Lieut. Smith:

     Your action is approved. I have no material present to write
     the order for Colonel Johannes, but will do so and send it to
     him.

     Let me know where the Md. Brigade is, and if you apprehend
     danger or think the Brigade and the 11th Md. will fight if
     they are encamped together, let me know.

     I send you the orders for General Lockwood and Federal Hill.
     If all is quiet, and likely to remain so, retain them, but if
     there is any indication of further trouble send them at once.

     Please let me know where the Brigade is. I directed it to be
     encamped at Carroll, and cannot understand why it is not
     there.

     Respectfully,
     SAM'L B. LAWRENCE,
     A. Adjutant General.

     If the Brigade is at Carroll, the Commanding Officer should be
     directed to take command of all and use his troops. Let me
     know and I will give the orders.

     The whole cause of the trouble, and reason why I know so
     little about it is that they were ordered to report to Colonel
     Brown, A. A. P. M. Gen'l.

I remained at the head of my department during all of 1865, and saw the
veteran armies disbanded. It seemed strange to see the Confederates
(Marylanders) who had been so long shooting at us, come home and resume
their occupations at the desk or plow right before our eyes.

There were not many disturbances like the Camp Carroll riot. America may
well be proud of the peaceable disbandment of the two great armies.
There was no evidence of remaining venom between the fighters. Not so,
however, with the slimy secret society disturbers who brought on the
war, and nursed its continuance. Whenever a sneering, vitriolic sound is
heard, you may be sure that it emanates from the copperhead element.




FILE XLIV.

Indicted for assault with intent to kill, the only clash between the
military and civil authorities during General Wallace's administration.


June 25th, 1865, the Baltimore papers said: "Lieut. Smith, Wm. Earle,
Kraft, and Babcock, of Colonel Woolley's office, were indicted for
assault with intent to kill one Jacob Ruppert."

General Wallace had always encouraged the civil authorities, so that the
establishment of martial law might be as little burdensome as possible
on the citizens. In this instance the fact of the military being yet in
control was overlooked. This Ruppert kept a low saloon on "the
Causeway," one of the hardest spots in Baltimore. I had sent for him to
report to me. He scorned the invitation; accordingly I went to his
place. He blocked the doorway. I pulled him out, a scuffle ensued and he
bled some, but came away with me. His (Ruppert's) father had some
political influence from being able to control votes on "the Causeway";
he asked for an indictment. A warrant was issued from Judge H. L. Bond
(Judge Bond was a Union man).

Jake Dukehardt, a deputy sheriff, met me on Baltimore Street, and
informed me he held the warrant for my arrest. I assured him it would be
foolhardy to try to execute it, for one of us would certainly be
injured. I recommended him to report to Judge Bond, and I assured him I
would be responsible for the results.

Judge Bond called on General Wallace, and explained how impossible it
was to withdraw the order. General Wallace advised the judge to use his
own judgment, but telling him, at the same time: "If you take Smith, I
will place Alexander's Battery on the hill opposite the jail and blow it
down." This was the only clash between the military and civil
authorities under General Wallace's administration.




FILE XLV.

Trip to Norfolk and Richmond--Ralph Abercrombie--Miss Elizabeth L.
Van Lew.



     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Office Provost Marshal,
     Baltimore, July 5, 1865.

     Special Order No. 93.

     III. Lieut. H. B. Smith, Assistant Provost Marshal, 8th Army
     Corps, will proceed to Norfolk, Va., with prisoners Manuel
     Desota and Morris Moran. On arrival he will deliver the
     prisoners to the Provost Marshal at Norfolk, taking receipt
     for same. This duty performed, Lt. Smith will proceed to
     Richmond, Va., for the purpose of obtaining information in the
     case of Ralph Abercrombie, after which he will return to these
     headquarters without delay.

     Quartermasters will furnish necessary transportation.

     By command of Major General Wallace.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Provost Marshal.


The above starts a train of reminiscences. Ralph Abercrombie, it was
alleged, had been used as a spy upon our men confined in Libby Prison.
He was confined with them, as though he were a prisoner also, but it was
his business to worm out the confidences naturally confided to fellow
prisoners, and to report them to the Confederate authorities.

One of the purposes of my visit was to interview a lady residing in
Richmond who was a staunch friend of the Federal government, and who had
encouraged and aided our soldiers in confinement in Libby prison and on
Belle Island. Her name was Miss Elizabeth L. Van Lew. She resided in a
fine mansion on an eminence overlooking Richmond from the east.

I was greatly entertained by her stories of her experiences; she had
come close to the danger line of confiscation of her property and her
personal incarceration. She had at one time concealed in the cupola of
her house, our soldiers, who had escaped from Libby prison, while
Confederate officers were being entertained in her parlors.

I desired to learn if she recollected anything regarding Abercrombie's
actions. As a recognition of Miss Van Lew's loyalty, President Grant
made her postmistress of Richmond in 1869, which post she filled for
eight years.

A few years after the war I gave a friend a letter of introduction to
her, which she honored. I was much pleased to be remembered by such a
person. How such a kind hearted woman must have grieved, with a view
constantly present from her home, of our suffering soldiers on desolate
Belle Island!

Abercrombie was formerly a lieutenant in the 13th U. S. Infantry. He
resigned in 1862 and went into the Confederacy through the blockade from
Nassau. He was charged with having been the principal witness against
Captain Dayton, who was executed at Castle Thunder, Richmond, on the
charge of being a spy. He was arrested on the 18th of April, 1865.




FILE XLVI.

My muster out--Reemployment as a civilian--Ordered to Philadelphia--Twice
ordered to Washington with horse thieves.


The following is a copy of my release from duty to be mustered out:


     Headquarters,
     Middle Military Department.
     Baltimore, July 19th, 1865.

     Special Order No. 1.

     I. Lieut. H. B. Smith, 5th N. Y. H. Artillery, is hereby
     relieved from duty as Assistant Provost Marshal, 8th Army
     Corps, and will rejoin his regiment without delay.

     By command of Major General Hancock.

     ADAM E. KING,
     Asst. Adjutant General.

     Official.
     (Signed) GEO. H. HOOKER,
     Assistant Adjutant General.

     Lt. H. B. Smith,
     5th N. Y. H. Artillery, D. Co.




     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     8th Army Corps.
     Baltimore, Md., July 20, 1865.

     Lieutenant H. B. Smith, 5th New York Artillery, was on
     detached service as Assistant to the Provost Marshal, Middle
     Department, 8th Army Corps, at Baltimore, Maryland, during
     sixteen (16) months, 1864 and 1865, and always performed his
     duties zealously, efficiently, and promptly.

     He won the confidence and esteem of the General Commanding,
     and all the officers of the Staff. As Lieut. Smith is to be
     mustered out of service, I take pleasure in thus furnishing
     him with evidence of the meritorious service he has rendered,
     and my belief that he will be equal to any trust that may be
     reposed on him, and entirely worthy the confidence of all with
     whom he may be associated in civil life.

     SAMUEL B. LAWRENCE,
     Lieut. Col. & A. A. G.


On August 1st, 1865, I was appointed as a civilian to perform the same
duties:


     Military
     Headquarters, Middle Department,
     Office Provost Marshal.
     Baltimore, August 31, 1865.

     Special Order No. 106.

     1st. H. B. Smith, Commanding Detective Corps. Middle Military
     Division, will proceed to Philadelphia, Pa., for the purpose
     of obtaining information regarding a certain commissioned
     officer of the U. S. Vet. Res. Corps.

     On completion of his duty he will report at these headquarters
     without delay.

     Quartermaster's department will furnish transportation.

     By command of Major General Humphreys.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Pro. Mar. General.




     Headquarters,
     Middle Military Department,
     Office Provost Marshal General,
     Baltimore, Sept. 20, 1865.

     Special Order No. 116.

     IInd. H. B. Smith, Chief of Detective Corps, Middle Military
     Department, and one man as guard, will proceed to Washington,
     D. C., in charge of the following-named horse thieves:

     Michael Shea and H. J. Hoffman. On arrival he will deliver the
     prisoners with accompanying paper to Colonel T. Ingraham,
     Provost Marshal General, Defences of Potomac, receive receipt
     and report at these headquarters without delay.

     Quartermaster's Department will furnish transportation.

     By command of Major General Hancock.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Pro. Mar. Gen'l.


Horse stealing was much in fashion at this time.


     Headquarters,
     Middle Military Department,
     Office Provost Marshal General,
     Baltimore, Sept. 22, 1865.

     Special Order No. 117.

     II. H. B. Smith, Chief of Detective Corps, Middle Military
     Department, and one man as guard, will proceed to Washington,
     D. C., in charge of the following named horse thieves:

     Wm. H. Smith and R. B. Franklin, alias Robert Nelson. On
     arrival he will deliver the prisoners with accompanying papers
     to Capt. Geo. B. Russell, Acting Provost Marshal General,
     Defences North of Potomac, receive receipt for same and report
     at these headquarters without delay.

     Quartermaster's Department will furnish transportation.

     By command of Major General Hancock.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Lt. Col. & Provost Marshal General.





FILE XLVII.

Captain Beckwith convicted--Gambling--Order to take Beckwith to Albany
penitentiary.


Along about August and September, 1865, the Government ordered
surveillance of all gambling houses, to discover if disbursing officers
were gambling. This was my first experience in the art. It was a free
school, for the tuition was on Uncle Sam. The lessons have served me all
my life, and I have never wanted to go to that school since.

We appropriated from five to ten dollars an evening, to be spent in each
house visited, depending on its standing. That gave us entry and made us
welcome so that we could spend the evening. I gambled and observed,
along with Captain Beckwith. I saw him win, and also saw him lose; lose
far more than he could afford to. That was his undoing. Powerful
interests were extended in his behalf and he was pardoned. Now read the
two documents following:


     War Department,
     Adjutant General's Office.
     Washington, October 19, 1865.

     General Court Martial.
     Orders No. 584.

     The action of Major General Hancock, Commanding the Middle
     Department, designating the Penitentiary at Albany, New York,
     as the place of confinement in the case of Captain D. L.
     Beckwith, 22d Regiment Vet. Reserve Corps, Assistant
     Commissary of Musters, sentenced by a General Court Martial
     "to forfeit all pay that is now or may become due him to the
     date of promulgation of this sentence; to be cashiered and to
     be forever disqualified from holding any office of trust or
     emolument in the service of the United States, and to be
     confined for two years without pay, at hard labor at such
     penitentiary or Military Post as the Commanding General of
     this Department may direct."

     This sentence to be published as presented by the 85th Article
     of War, as promulgated in General Orders No. 23, dated
     Headquarters Middle Military Department, Baltimore, Maryland,
     Oct. 10, 1865. Is approved. By order of the Secretary of War.

     E. D. TOWNSEND,
     Assistant Adjutant General.

     Official.
     E. D. TOWNSEND,
     Assistant Adjutant General.




     Headquarters,
     Middle Military Department,
     Office Provost Marshal General,
     Baltimore, Oct. 29, 1865.

     Special Order No. 127.

     I. Special Officer, H. B. Smith, with one guard will proceed
     to Albany, New York, in charge of prisoner D. L. Beckwith. On
     arriving at Albany he will deliver the prisoner with
     accompanying papers to Amos Pillsbury, Superintendent of the
     Albany Penitentiary; receiving receipt he will report with the
     guard at these headquarters without delay.

     Quartermaster's Department will furnish transportation.

     By command of Major General Humphreys.

     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Bvt. Brigadier General & Provost Marshal.


The "one guard" detailed to accompany me was General Woolley. He wanted
a little rest and availed himself of this opportunity. Upon our arrival
in Albany I hunted up my cousin, Edgar Jerome, who spent the evening
with us at the Delevan House. We had a delightful evening listening to
the General's stories. He was a charming story teller. Ed will remember
especially his rendering of "The Arkansas Traveller."

Now, Nettie, don't find fault with your history because your Uncle is
not mentioned in its lines. In the histories of great events, such as
our Civil War, it is an honor to be, even though hidden, "between the
lines." Thousands who are mentioned in written history to-day will not
be there when it becomes more ancient. Later on, when other great events
crowd, only three names may remain. Lincoln, Grant, Lee. Perhaps still
further on, only Lincoln, the martyr for liberty's sake, may be found.

Much of my work was between the lines of the two contestants, a more
dangerous place than in the lines, for I was exposed to the bullets and
sabres of both Southern and Northern Armies.




FILE XLVIII.

Trip to Carlisle, Illinois, to unravel a fraudulent claim--John H. Ing.


We closed our headquarters in December, 1865, packing all records in
finely arranged cabinets, which were then transferred to the War
Department in Washington.

When my relation with the government was terminated, through the
instrumentality of General Woolley (Woolley had recently been
brevetted), I was engaged by Mr. Archibald Sterling, an attorney (a
prominent Union man), to go to southern Illinois to ravel out a
contested will case. The contestants were a group of neighbors, headed
by a shrewd woman.

If I remember right, under the Maryland laws, if a child died before
maturity, there was no inheritance. Mr. Sterling claimed that the young
man was not of age when he died, and that he died in 1835; but he had no
evidence to prove it. He had only a death notice clipped from some paper
with no date on it. But he had an anonymous letter signed: "Veritas,"
postmarked at Carlisle, Illinois, in which the writer, for a
consideration, offered to put Sterling in possession of evidence that
would defeat the claim; this letter was a few months old. Mr. Sterling
could not comply. He could pay for no evidence without compromising his
clients. With these facts only and equipped with the following letter of
introduction, I started West:


     Headquarters,
     Middle Military Department,
     Office Provost Marshal General,
     Baltimore, Dec. 27, 1865.

     Capt. Silas F. Miller,
     Burnet House,
     Cincinnati, Ohio.

     My Dear Sir.--I shall be greatly obliged if you will make
     Lieut. Smith, the bearer, acquainted with one or more of the
     conductors of the O. & M. R. R. Co.

     Lieut. Smith is one of my officers, and comes west on business
     which takes him on the line of that road.

     This is not for the purpose of securing a pass, but in order
     to get information. I have the honor to be,

     Very Respectfully,
     Your obedient servant,
     JOHN WOOLLEY,
     Bvt. Brigadier General U. S. Vols.
     Provost Marshal General M. M. D.


The field was entirely new to me. All the way to Cincinnati and the rest
of the way to Carlisle, Illinois, I put in much of my time in
speculating as to the best course to adopt on landing in a small town,
among a lot of villagers, who were banded together in this scheme. My
name was to be Comings, and I came from New York; that was all settled
in my mind; but what was my business there? I expected to be there a few
days, and there was the rub; finally, after failing to fix up a story I
concluded to "keep mum," entirely. Later you will see the fix which that
conclusion came near leading me into.

I arrived there at night. I asked the landlord not to put me high up in
the hotel, and he didn't; I learned the next morning that the hotel was
only two stories high. I lounged about the tavern and the village two or
three days, making myself aware of the surroundings. I tramped out to
the fork of the Kaskaskia river, where the affidavits alleged the boy
was buried in 1836. The river was a muddy little brook. No grave was to
be found, but some little distance away was a burying ground. I went
there searching for the grave. I found it not, but lying up against a
fence was a headstone having the boy's name on it, and the date of his
death.

In walking about the village I had many times passed the residence of
the woman who had framed up the claim; she had noticed me. I wrote one
of my old officers in Baltimore to wire me, in language about like
this:

     "See Mrs. ----, confer fully and write me."

I instructed him to sign John H. Ing's name to it. Mr. Ing was this
woman's attorney.

Equipped with this telegram I would be prepared to introduce myself to
the woman as apparently having come there in the interest of Mr. Ing,
her attorney, to look over the ground to see if matters alleged in the
affidavits were susceptible of demonstration.

While waiting for the telegram I obtained the confidence of the
postmaster. I impressed him that I was an agent of the Post Office
Department, seeking to learn if he remembered a letter coming to his
office addressed to "Veritas" (Sterling had replied to Veritas); he,
having the too frequent curiosity of a village postmaster, said he
remembered it well, and told me who the recipient was, and where he
lived. He promised to keep secret my mission, and he did.

Mr. Truesdale, the proprietor of the tavern, kept horses, and I hired
him to carry me to this man's house, quite a drive of three or four
miles. On our way I found it desirable to seek his confidence too, and
impress him I was an agent of the Post Office Department, etc. Mr.
Truesdale seemed much relieved. He then told me he was so glad to know
my true character. Being the only "unaccounted for" man in the village,
I had been the object of suspicion, which, unrelieved, might have
proven uncomfortable.

Carlisle was on the edge of the prairie. Live stock (marked) ran wild,
until taken in; much had been stolen. A vigilance committee had been
organized to punish the thieves. These people were about to conclude
that the only "unaccounted for" man about was the "look out" for the
thieves. Truesdale was wonderfully pleased to stand sponsor for me to
them, without divulging my mission. Keeping perfectly mum came close to
being poor judgment under these circumstances.

I saw Mr. "Veritas" and had a private talk with him. He promised to meet
me in Carlisle the next day, which he did. Before communicating the
information which he said he had, which comprised the name of the
storekeeper who sold the material used for preparing the coffin in 1836,
and who had books to sustain the statement, he demanded a promise in
writing to pay him a large sum of money. Having a smattering of "legal
lore" I drew up a bond to pay the required amount, in event of success.
I kept a copy of the bond to show Mr. Sterling. It was signed by "George
Comings." It was satisfactory to Mr. "Veritas," and he in an impressive
manner wrote on a piece of paper, in large bold letters, the storekeeper's
name: PARMENUS BOND. We agreed to drive over to Mr. Parmenus Bond's place
the next day, and we did.

I found Parmenus to be very old, over eighty. He confirmed the statement
after he learned Mr. "Veritas's" greed had been satisfied. (I guess he
was to divide with the old gentleman, in fact.)

Having disposed of this part I was ready to use the telegram I had
received, meantime, upon the woman schemer. I called upon her,
presenting my telegram from Ing. She was charmed to meet me, saying she
had observed my presence about the village. I told her I had surveyed
the ground pretty well. I asked her about the tombstone, where did she
get it? She said she got it from Harrisburg, Pa. (about one thousand
miles away), and would have it set up in the spring, I advised her that
I concluded the evidence was presentable, provided her witnesses all
stayed in line. She assured me that they would, as they all had a money
interest in it, in the event of success. We then parted, and it did not
take me long to get out of town. I went to St. Louis, thence to
Baltimore.

When I arrived in Baltimore, I at once called on Mr. Sterling, but had
to introduce myself, I was so unkempt, and my apparel so dirty. He was
anxious to know my report; I told him I had the evidence but had to
agree to pay for it. His face was a sight. He concluded I had ruined his
case. I handed him the copy of my bond, "George Comings's" bond,
assuring him that "Veritas" would have a difficult time finding the
bondsman; that he would not want to find him until after success, that
he would not speak of it in Carlisle, for his life. Mr. Sterling then
laughed heartily. I made a full report, advised Mr. Sterling to call in
Mr. Ing confidentially, and show him his fix. The claim was withdrawn,
and "George Comings" was never called upon to settle.

The use by me of Colonel John H. Ing's name was not unwarranted. I had
previously had a "run in" with him, which led me to believe that he was
a criminal party in this scheme. At one time he was deprived of the
right to practice before military tribunals in our Department, because
of unprofessional actions. He appealed to General Wallace, who referred
the matter to me to make an examination. Pending the examination a lunch
was given at which Ing and I were present. I presume the lunch was to
give Ing a chance to reach me.

He tried to, but the lunch did not answer its purpose. Upon my report he
was practically disbarred from practice in military courts, based upon
the evidence obtained. Therefore when I met his name in connection with
this case I felt warranted in assuming he was the "promoter" of it. The
use of his name was not forgery. He was deprived by it of nothing
except, perhaps, an "unearned increment."




FILE XLIX.

Brevetted major--Governor Fenton's Letter.


     State of New York,
     Executive Department,
     Albany, 8th May, 1867.

     Bvt. Major H. B. Smith.

     Dear Sir.--I have the honor to transmit herewith a Brevet
     Commission, conferred by the President in recognition of your
     faithful and disinterested services in the late war.

     In behalf of the State allow me to thank you for the gallantry
     and devotion which induced this conspicuous mention by the
     general government. I feel a lively solicitude in all that
     relates to the honor and prosperity of the Soldiers of the
     Union Army, and especially those from our own State, who
     advanced its renown while defending the cause of our common
     country.

     Very Respectfully,
     R. E. FENTON.


I believe there should be no continued ill feeling towards those who
conscientiously bore arms against us. Nor towards their official spies.
Nor towards persons who by reason of blood relationship or former close
affiliations aided them. But towards those, who for personal profit
aided them, and who sought to hamper us in our efforts to preserve the
Union, we cannot cease to have contempt.

It is held that "everything is fair in war." If so, then the deceptions
used in the secret service were fair. But the moral effect on the one
who pursues such service is not pleasant. Such persons become so used to
being impressed with possible dishonesty as to doubt mankind generally.
I had to fight to overcome that tendency. It is a much happier condition
of mind to be freer of suspicion. "No thing is stronger than it is in
its weakest point" is an axiom. Almost every person has a weak point,
which a detective seeks to find.

General Wallace's references to me were made after a period of forty
years, during which time he had met me but twice. It was gratifying,
greatly so, and I am perfectly willing to confess that I had "zeal," but
prefer to let his opinion of my "ability" be passed upon by others.

I hope I have not injured the stories in their telling, but I am very
afraid I have wearied you all.

     New York, April, 1911.

     Semi-Centennial of the Civil War.





    +-----------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                           |
    |                                               |
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:       |
    |                                               |
    | Page  12 Blumenberg changed to Blumenburg     |
    | Page  86 Leonardstown changed to Leonardtown  |
    | Page  88 Reistertown changed to Reisterstown  |
    | Page  89 Sims changed to Simms                |
    | Page  94 Blackistone changed to Blackstone    |
    | Page 114 Kelley changed to Kelly              |
    | Page 120 Brogdan changed to Brogden           |
    | Page 123 Leonardstown changed to Leonardtown  |
    | Page 124 Leonardstown changed to Leonardtown  |
    | Page 136 Westmoreland changed to Westmorland  |
    | Page 152 Wycomico changed to Wicomico         |
    | Page 212 Brittan's changed to Britton's       |
    | Page 213 Brittan's changed to Britton's       |
    | Page 238 Leonardstown changed to Leonardtown  |
    | Page 239 Cawood's changed to Caywood's        |
    | Page 243 Blumenberg changed to Blumenburg     |
    | Page 244 Blumenberg changed to Blumenburg     |
    | Page 248 Eke changed to Eck                   |
    | Page 257 Bronson changed to Branson           |
    | Page 265 visted changed to visited            |
    | Page 284 Westmoreland changed to Westmorland  |
    | Page 286 Brittan's changed to Britton's       |
    | Page 288 Brittan's changed to Britton's       |
    | Page 289 Larges changed to Large              |
    | Page 289 Westmoreland changed to Westmorland  |
    | Page 303 Barnet changed to Barnett            |
    | Page 306 Heims changed to Heim                |
    |                                               |
    +-----------------------------------------------+



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BETWEEN THE LINES***


******* This file should be named 24541.txt or 24541.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/5/4/24541



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

