The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pianolist, by Gustav Kobbé

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Pianolist
       A Guide for Pianola Players

Author: Gustav Kobbé

Release Date: February 16, 2008 [EBook #24622]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIANOLIST ***




Produced by Jeannie Howse, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)







       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Transcriber's Note:                                       |
    |                                                           |
    | Inconsistent hyphenation in the original document has     |
    | been preserved.                                           |
    |                                                           |
    | Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. For     |
    | a complete list, please see the end of this document.     |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *




THE PIANOLIST




THE PIANOLIST

A GUIDE FOR PIANOLA PLAYERS

BY

GUSTAV KOBBE

AUTHOR OF "HOW TO APPRECIATE MUSIC," ETC.

NEW YORK
MOFFAT, YARD & COMPANY
1907




COPYRIGHT 1907, BY
MOFFAT, YARD & COMPANY
NEW YORK

Published November, 1907


PRESS OF
THE NEW ERA PRINTING COMPANY
LANCASTER, PA




_TO MY FRIEND_
JOSEPH HUTCHISON STEVENSON




CONTENTS


I. THE TITLE AND PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK                           1

II. THE CHARM OF PLAYING A MUSICAL INSTRUMENT YOURSELF         10

III. FIRST STEPS OF THE MUSICAL NOVICE                         39

IV. THE THRILL OF THE GREAT MASTERS                            83

V. AN "OPEN SESAME" TO CHOPIN                                 117

VI. NOTES ON SOME OTHER MASTERS                               141

VII. EDUCATIONAL FACTORS                                      150

VIII. A FEW "DON'TS" FOR PIANOLISTS                           159




I. THE TITLE AND PURPOSE OF THIS BOOK


My book, "How to Appreciate Music," in the chapter devoted to the
pianoforte, contains a paragraph relating to the Pianola and its
influence in popularizing music and stimulating musical taste. I
confess that before I started that paragraph I was puzzled to know
what term to use in designating the instrument I had in mind.
"Mechanical piano-player" is a designation which not only does not
appeal to me, but, furthermore, fails to do justice to the instrument,
which, although mechanical in its working, is far from being
mechanical in its effects.

The result?--I took a cross cut and arrived straight at the word
Pianola as being the name of the most widely known piano-player, and
happily derived from the name of the most widely known instrument, the
pianoforte or, as it is more popularly termed, the piano. For this
reason the term Pianola was used in the paragraph referred to and now
is employed in this book; and, for the same reason, this book is
called "The Pianolist." It is believed to be the title least requiring
explanation, if, indeed, it requires any explanation at all. Right
here, however, I must add that the company which manufactures the
Pianola objects to the use of the word as a generic term.

So much for the title. Now for the purpose of this book.

Soon after the publication of "How to Appreciate Music" I discovered
that the paragraph concerning this new musical instrument had made a
hit. It was widely quoted as evidence of the "up-to-dateness" of the
book and I began to receive letters from pianola owners who were
pleased that the merits of the instrument should have been recognized
in a serious book on music. Among these was a letter from a Mr. Harry
Mason, of Detroit, suggesting that I should write a book for the use
of those who owned piano-players. Mr. Mason and myself never have met.
He knows me merely as an author of a book on music. All I know of him
is that he is one of the editors of a druggists' trade paper in
Detroit. Yet from him has come the suggestion which has led me to
write this book, although, to judge from his letter, he had not been
deeply interested in music until he began to use a "player" and,
through it, was led to ask for a book which would tell him, in
untechnical language, something about an art that was beginning to
have eloquence and meaning for him. To me this is highly significant,
for there must be thousands of others like him all over the country,
to whom, in the same way, the great awakening just is coming through
the pianola--at first a means of amusement, then an educator with the
element of amusement, but of a higher order, left in!

Shortly after I received Mr. Mason's letter an incident added greatly
to the force of his suggestion. I always have been very fond of
Schubert's "Rosamunde" impromptu. The first person I heard play it
publicly was Annette Essipoff, a Russian pianist and one of the very
few great women pianists of the world. Frequently I have heard it
since then, but never so charmingly interpreted excepting--But that is
the most interesting part of the story.

One night I was at my desk in my study, when, suddenly, I heard the
strains of this impromptu, which is an air with variations, from the
direction of the drawing room. It was sweet and tender, graceful and
expressive, according to the character of the variations; and, when
the last variation began with a crispness and delicacy that made me
wonder what great virtuoso was at my pianoforte without my knowing it,
I hurried to the drawing room and, entering it--found my fourteen year
old daughter seated at a pianola. The instrument had arrived only a
short time before from the house of a friend who had gone South for
the winter. My daughter never had had a music lesson, never had heard
Schubert's "Rosamunde" impromptu. Yet she had, without any effort,
been the first to take me back to Essipoff's playing of Schubert's
charming work! It would have been ludicrous had it not meant so much.
In fact it was ludicrous because, a few days before, when the
instrument had just been delivered and set up, I had been deceived in
much the same manner by her playing of a composition by Grieg.

But to return to the Schubert impromptu. Essipoff, my young daughter,
the associate editor of a druggist' paper in Detroit, and myself; the
first a great virtuoso, the second a schoolgirl, the third a writer on
a trade paper, the fourth a music critic--what a leveller of
distinctions, what a universal musical provider the pianola is! Ten
years ago the virtuoso and the music critic would have been the only
ones concerned. The schoolgirl and the trade paper editor wouldn't
have been "in it." Now, the schoolgirl was playing like a virtuoso and
the writer on drugs and druggists was giving hints to the music
critic. A great leveller, placing the musical elect and those who
formerly would have had to remain outside the pale, on a common
footing! This may not always appeal to the musical elect, but think
what it means to the great mass of those who are genuinely musical but
have lacked the opportunity for musical study or to those whose taste
for music never has been brought out.

To paraphrase a few sentences from my "How to Appreciate Music" that
have been much quoted:--

"'Are you musical?'

"'No,' nine persons out of ten will reply; 'I neither play nor sing.'

"'Your answer shows a complete misunderstanding of the case. Because
you neither play nor sing, it by no means follows that you are
unmusical. If you love music and appreciate it, you may be more
musical than many pianists and singers; or latent within you and only
awaiting the touchstone of music there may be a deeper love and
appreciation of the art than can be attributed to many virtuosos. For
most of a virtuoso's love and appreciation is apt to be centered upon
himself. And when you say, 'I cannot play,' you are mistaken. You are
thinking of the pianoforte. You may not be able to play that. But you
or any one else can play the pianola, and that instantly places at
your command all the technical resources of which even the greatest
virtuosos can boast."

One purpose of this book thus is to bring home to people an
appreciation of what this modern instrument is, whether it is regarded
as a toy with which the business man amuses himself with two-steps and
ragtime after business hours, or as a serious musical instrument.

Another purpose, and a large one, is to furnish pianolists with a
guide to the music which they play, or might play if their attention
were directed to it and to some of its characteristics, and to point
out the importance of the instrument in developing a love of good
music.

I also have in writing this book a purpose which I may describe as
personal. I believe I was the first American to publish an analysis of
the Wagner music dramas that seemed to be what the public wanted, and
the first to contribute to a magazine of general circulation an
article on Richard Strauss. It is a matter of pride with me always to
be found on the firing line--even if it is the privilege of those who
watch the battle from a safe distance to dictate the despatches and
take the credit for the result to themselves. And so, I wish to be the
first to write a book on the pianola, an instrument of such importance
to the progress and popular spread of music that, at the present time,
we can have but a faint glimmering of the great part it is destined to
play.




II. THE CHARM OF PLAYING A MUSICAL INSTRUMENT YOURSELF


How I wish I could play like that! What is more common than this
exclamation from people who are listening to a great virtuoso or even
only to a fairly clever amateur? They realize that, no matter how much
they may enjoy a performance, there is much greater fascination in
being the performer. Not a musical person but would play if he could.
Why, however, that "if"? It no longer exists. It has been eliminated.
The charm, the fascination of playing a musical instrument yourself
can be yours, and the only "if" to it is--if you have intelligence
enough to appreciate what that means.

What formerly was an insuperable obstacle, the lack of technical
facility--the real inability to play--absolutely has been done away
with. There is no excuse for anybody's not playing who wants to. The
pianola furnishes the technique, the dexterity, the finger facility,
or whatever you may choose to call it. So far as this is concerned the
instrument itself makes you a virtuoso--places you on a par with a
Liszt, Paderewski or Rosenthal. It does so mechanically, yet without
the sharpness and insistent preciseness of a machine. Its action is
pneumatic and the effect of the compressed air is to impart to its
"touch"--the manner in which its "fingers" strike the keys--an
elasticity which at least is comparable with the touch of human
fingers. As a friend of mine, a lawyer, who has owned three pianolas
and who actually has been made musical through them, expresses
it:--"When you've got a mechanical device as good or nearly as good as
a virtuoso, you've got something of enormous importance to the whole
world." And so you have.

I find a great feature of the so-called mechanical piano-player lies
in what it allows you to do yourself. It provides you with technique,
but, to use a colloquial phrase, "you can still call your soul your
own." The technique, the substitute for that finger facility which
only years of practice will give, is the pianola's; but the
interpretation is _yours_! The instrument provides the devices for
accelerating or retarding the time and for making the tone loud or
soft, but when to whip up the time or to slow down, when to use the
sustaining or the soft lever or when to swell through a crescendo from
pianissimo to fortissimo--all that is left to your own taste, judgment
and discretion. There is, indeed, among the improvements introduced in
the pianola a contrivance, of which more hereafter, by which complete
directions are given for the interpretation of the roll of music that
is being played. These directions, however, are not compulsory. They
are, in each instance, based on high authority and are of great value
even to persons who are thoroughly familiar with the music, but they
need not be followed if the player does not want to follow them. He is
likely in the beginning to accept the directions, the so-called
metrostyle marking, as he would the instruction of a high class
teacher, while, later on, he may incline to regard the metrostyle as
indicating the general spirit in which the piece should be
interpreted, but vary it in detail as his mood or fancy dictates. The
metrostyle may, in fact, be called the pianolist's "coach," giving him
the kind of hints and directions which even the greatest players and
singers value. Something, however, of the pianolist himself, something
of his own thought and feeling goes into every interpretation. That
this is so is proved by the fact that no two pianolists interpret the
same composition alike. There are differences, more or less marked,
just as there are when the same piece is played by two pianists. In
the broader outlines, in general spirit, the interpretations may be
the same, but they will be distinguished by subtle shadings that
indicate temperamental differences. The perspective of a landscape
varies when viewed from different windows; so does life when observed
from different points of view; so does the interpretation of a
composition when played by different people on the pianola.

Were the instrument purely a mechanical device to wind up and set
going, the artistic results of which it is capable never would have
been obtained, and, I may add, this book never would have been
written. The fact that artistic expression instead of machine-like
precision has been its aim is what has caused its possibilities as a
musical instrument to appeal to me. It cannot be sufficiently urged
that in this country, as in every other, there is an immense amount of
latent musical taste awaiting only the touchstone of hearing music or,
better still, the fascination of personally producing music, to assert
itself. Before the invention of the piano-player hearing music was the
only touchstone; through the piano-player there is added the
fascination of being yourself a participator in producing the music
you hear. When Theodore Thomas said "Nothing so awakens interest in
music as helping to make it," he hit the nail on the head. "After
playing all this music I want to go to concerts next winter. I'd like
to hear how the 'Fifth Symphony' sounds on the orchestra," said my
little girl after the pianola had been in the house only a week. "All
this music?" Yes indeed. More than she could have become familiar
with in six months' concert-going and instruction. And we always had
said that she wasn't musical!

This fascination of personally producing music is such a great factor
in the spread of musical taste that it is well worth looking into
further. There always is more pleasure in doing something than in
watching some one else do it. Take the average amateurs who get
together for music. They enjoy what they play a thousand-fold more
than if they were listening to the greatest virtuosos playing the same
program. Why? Because always there is more satisfaction in doing the
thing itself than merely in contemplating the result of what some one
else is doing. And so, with music, "to experience the full fascination
the divine art can exercise on us mortals, we must take an active part
in the making of it." Through the pianola the opportunity of taking an
active part in the making of it is open to everybody. Remember what
my friend said. It is worth repeating. "When you've got a mechanical
device as good, or nearly as good as a virtuoso, you've got something
of enormous importance to the whole world." Mechanical, remember, only
in a certain sense. Were it wholly mechanical it never could be "as
good, or nearly as good, as a virtuoso."

Now let us see how this personal affiliation of pianola and pianolist,
of instrument and player, has been worked out, so that the player is
not a mere human treadmill pumping air into a cabinet on castors,
but--whether he be a lawyer, merchant, financier, dressmaker,
milliner, or society leader; one of the Four Hundred or one of the
eighty million--a musical artist with an unlimited repertory.

The pianoforte is the most universal musical instrument of the
civilized world. I once turned the old question, "What is home without
a mother," into "What is home without a pianoforte?" Practically no
household that makes claim to refinement is without one. Only too
often, however, even in such homes, it is merely an article of drawing
room furniture, because no member of the household can play it. There
it stands waiting for the chance visitor who can strike the keys and
make the strings vibrate with music.

Imagine that you are a member or let us say the head of that
household. You can't play a note and yet you are "fond of music." This
"fondness for music" manifests itself in different degree in different
people and somewhat according to their opportunities. You may be a
hardworking business man and when you come home from business, you
want diversion, amusement. For some one to suggest a classical
concert to you would make you feel like being asked to begin the day's
work all over again without a night's rest in between. As for Wagner,
that would be worse than straightening out an intricate account after
a day spent in poring over a ledger. No. Music without any tune to it
may be all right for some people, but comic opera is "good enough" for
you. You like that coon song you heard the other night. How you would
enjoy playing it on the pianoforte if you only knew how! But you
don't, so you have to pay a speculator three dollars for a seat if you
want to hear it again.

Suppose the days of miracles weren't past and, by some miracle, you
suddenly found yourself in command of the technique of the
pianoforte--able to play whatever you wanted to. You'd buy that coon
song and some other pieces of light music, and then you'd hurry home
to your pianoforte and play them off as fast as you could, while the
family stood around and listened and marvelled.

That is precisely the miracle the pianola performs for you. It gives
you, from the moment it enters your house, control over the keyboard
of the pianoforte that so long has stood mute in your home. All you
have to do is to put in the perforated music roll, work the
pedals--and the music begins. Supposing it is that coon song from the
comic opera you liked so much. The first time you play it, you may be
so interested in the instrument's accurate reproduction of the tune
that you don't stop to think of the expression. The chances are,
however, that your delight over what you have accomplished will lead
you to play the song right over again. Now you begin to realize that
there was something more than mere accuracy in the delivery of the
melody when you heard it at the theatre. There was interpretation,
that something which the individual artist puts into everything he
does. You will recall that while the piece was taken pretty fast as a
whole, some phrases were taken faster, others more slowly. You have
been told that by moving a little lever to the right or left, you can
produce these effects. You try it. When you come to a phrase that
should be taken a little faster, you move the lever slightly to the
right--and the pianoforte responds. It is the same when you move the
lever to the left for the slower phrases--the pianoforte responds and
the phrase is retarded. Two other levers control the volume of sound
so that you can play any part of the piece louder or softer if you
want to. It is not at all unlikely that you may vary these details to
suit yourself, instead of simply being guided by your recollection of
what you heard at the theatre. In a word you yourself become on the
spot an interpreter of music, put something of yourself into what you
play. The instrument instead of being merely a machine that grinds out
music is a machine only in so far as it takes the place of technique,
of finger facility. The expression, the real interpretation, that
which gives one the fascination of playing, is your own.

That's your first experience with the instrument. Pretty soon you are
apt to have another experience that is even more valuable. You stocked
up pretty well with the music of the day, the current Broadway comic
opera and musical comedy successes. Gradually, however, that pet coon
song of yours will begin to pall on you a little. The very jingle to
the tune that made it catch your fancy so quickly causes you to tire
of it, and so it goes with the other pieces whose rhythm is so marked
and continued with such great precision and whose tunefulness was so
obvious that they made an instantaneous impression upon your musically
untrained sense of hearing. You are beginning to find out what any one
who is trained in any art is bound to discover sooner or later. The
things most easily understood are not apt to give the most lasting
pleasure. Some one suggests to you that you try one of the lighter
classical pieces. You don't like that word "classical," it suggest
heaviness, lack of tunefulness, the kind of thing that "may be all
right for some people," but never, you think, would suit you. At last,
however, you yield. You inquire for something of the kind and are
advised to try Mendelssohn's "Spring Song." Much to your surprise you
don't find it heavy at all. In fact you recall once having heard it
played between the acts in a theatre and having thought it rather
pretty. Its rhythm isn't as persistently emphatic as that of ragtime,
nor does its melody stand out in such sharp relief, but instead of
wearying you on repetition, you like it better every time you play it.

Encouraged by this experience you next purchase the same composer's
"Spinning Song." This may not appeal to you so much at first. It seems
to run along very rapidly without any very clearly defined melody.
Still, it is by the same composer as the "Spring Song," so it may be
worth trying over again. It is more familiar now, and you begin to
associate the rapid, whirring phrases with its title--with the idea of
"spinning." How clear it suddenly becomes. You even conjure up in your
mind the picture of some young woman in quaint garb seated at a
spinning wheel in an old-fashioned room--and you find yourself
experiencing all the pleasure that comes from association of ideas,
the keenest enjoyment that art affords. You are making rapid progress
now, so rapid that it is as impossible as unnecessary to follow you
step by step. The main point is that you are becoming truly musical
and at the same time enjoying it. What might be "all right for some
people" has become all right for you too. You have been repaid a
thousand-fold for the little effort it cost you to discover through
the gradual development of a taste that had lain dormant, the kind of
music that "lasts." The same thing is true of your whole family. It
has become musical, and in an incredibly short space of time. The
pianola has done it, and done the same thing in thousands of other
cases.

Now take the case of some one whose musical taste, to begin with, is
more advanced. Supposing that, instead of having had your musical
horizon bounded by coon songs and comic operas, you were an attendant
at orchestral concerts, song and pianoforte recitals and grand opera.
You are a genuine music lover, genuinely musical, but you can't play.
You long to reproduce and express at home the music you have heard
elsewhere. If only, after hearing Paderewski play your favorite Chopin
nocturne, which, as with so many other music lovers, is the exquisite
one in G major, Opus 37, No. 2, you could go to your own pianoforte
and play it! You think it is one of the most beautiful compositions in
the whole repertory, and of all pianists whom you have heard,
Paderewski, in your opinion, plays it better than any other. There are
pieces that sound more difficult and you have been told that it
doesn't call for advanced technique as much as it does for soul. That
is what your favorite virtuoso seems to you to put into it--soul, his
own soul, interpreting himself, unconsciously expressing his own
thoughts and feelings, through those of the composer. That is what you
are convinced you could do, if only you knew how to play; for you are
musical, very musical, almost, in fact, to your finger tips. But
these, alas, never have been trained to command the keyboard. You are
getting along well in business, making money and all that; and yet you
look upon your life as half a failure because, although you have the
temperament artistic, you are unable to gratify fully your passion for
music. You can listen, but you can't play. You can hear Paderewski
interpret your favorite nocturne, but you can't go home to your own
pianoforte and let your fingers conjure up memories of it on the
keyboard. You have a beautiful pianoforte in your house--for the use
of others. You'd be willing to mortgage half your income for life, if
you could learn to play it yourself. But it's too late for that now.
So you think.

But one day you drop in at a friend's house and from the drawing room
come strains of your favorite Chopin nocturne. Something about it
reminds you of the way Paderewski plays it. Who can it be? You know
that your friend doesn't play the pianoforte. But, as you stand in the
doorway, hesitating whether to go in or not, it is he who looks out at
you from behind the instrument and nods to you to come in. You drop
into a chair and listen and wonder. The nocturne comes to an end, your
friend rises, greets your wondering look with a smile, and meets your
amazed query with one word: "Pianola!"

"It sounded like Paderewski," you stammer in a dazed sort of way.

"Why shouldn't it? Practically, I have been taught how to play it by
that great artist." He takes out the roll and brings it over for you
to look at. On it you see, reproduced in facsimile this autographed
certification:

    "The line on this roll indicates the tempo according to my
    interpretation.

                                    "I.J. Paderewski."

The roll, as the expression goes, has been "metrostyled" by the
virtuoso himself.

"I didn't know you had one of these instruments. Why haven't you told
me?--How long have you had it?"

"About a week," he answers.

"And you can make it sound like that?"

"Of course I can. Nothing easier. Just stand behind me and watch."

He replaces the music roll and, as he pedals and it unrolls, he shows
you how easy it is with the metrostyle to follow the red line marked
by Paderewski to indicate how he plays the piece.

"According to my idea," continues your friend, "he plays some parts of
the second melody a little too slowly--makes it too sentimental,
instead of poetically expressive. You may observe that I don't always
follow the line. That's one of the great things about the instrument.
You can profit by the directions just as much as you want to, but you
can disregard them whenever you have a mind to. It may seem
presumptuous to differ, even in a small detail, from a great virtuoso
like Paderewski, but every virtuoso has his idiosyncrasies and we,
who, after all, have been listening to music all our lives and have
heard all the great pianists from Rubinstein to 'Paddy' himself and
all the women pianists from Essipoff to Bloomfield-Zeisler, are
entitled to some ideas of our own. As I just said, one of the great
things about the instrument is that it allows us this latitude. I call
it a cinch!

"Now here's something else. We know Richard Strauss' big tone poems,
the biggest things in music since Wagner. But did you know that he's
written some charming little pieces for pianoforte? Just listen to
this. It's a 'Traeumerei' or 'Revery,' a delicious little dreamy
improvisation. He 'metrostyled' it himself and, as I've never heard
anyone play it, I'm only too glad to have his directions. They give
you the general hang of the thing 'right off the reel,' so to speak.
But later on, when I become more familiar with it, if I want to vary
the interpretation according to my own mood of the moment, I can. It's
a great thing, though, to find out how famous living composers, like
Richard Strauss, Grieg--here are a couple of rolls from his 'Peer
Gynt' suite metrostyled by himself--Saint-Saens, Elgar, or even
composers of first rate lighter music, like Moszkowski and Chaminade,
conceive that they want to have their works interpreted; or how great
virtuosos, like Paderewski, Rosenthal and other pianists, play them;
or gifted instructors in music, like Carl Reinecke, would have them
performed. It's like taking lessons in interpretation from these
people.

"There's another matter that will interest you. Take pieces like
Rubinstein's 'Melody in F' or the best known selection from his
'Kammenoi, Ostrow,' where the melody lies, in the former in between
the accompaniment, in the latter below it--you recall, of course, how
the accompanying figure hovers above it. In pieces like these it is
important that the melodic line should be clearly distinguished,
otherwise it will be smothered. Fortunately an attachment to the
instrument, the themodist, enables you to bring out the melody and,
at the same time does not prevent your retarding or accelerating the
general movement of the piece or of varying the volume of sound as
much as you like.

"While I've had the instrument only a little while, I've been struck
with something else. I find that you can accomplish a good deal
through what I may call 'foot-technique,' varying the degree of
strength with which you use the pedals that pump in the air. By this
means you can play louder or softer at will and by a sharp pressure
emphasize individual chords and phrases. This, I find, makes the
interpretation seem more personal than when I use the sustaining and
soft levers alone. Altogether I'm beginning to look upon myself as a
virtuoso, and the best thing you can do, old man, is to take my advice
and become one too."

Fortunately you are musical enough and intelligent enough to
appreciate the philosophy and significance of the instrument--that it
supplies what you haven't got, the technique, but that you give it the
expression, the soul; that although it is not a pianoforte, but an
attachment to that instrument, nevertheless, in playing it, you
express something of yourself, something of your inner being,
something of your higher artistic nature through it.

There is a large class of people to whom the "piano-player" is or
should be a great boon. I mean those who play the pianoforte, but not
well enough to play publicly or professionally. To this class belong
the thousands of music teachers and the amateurs. The majority of them
may be more truly musical than many of the virtuoso pianists, but they
are lacking in technique. For the technical standard is growing higher
every year. Comparatively few music teachers have much opportunity of
hearing music, the result being that they find it difficult to keep up
with the times. They become old-fashioned, and in these progressive
days to become old-fashioned means to be forced to "drop out." They
lack the technique to run through the modern repertoire, and the time
to hear others in it. It hardly is necessary to point out what the
pianola, which gives them complete technical mastery of the keyboard,
should be to them.

As regards the amateur I can cite my own case as an example. I had
progressed on the pianoforte until I was able to play Liszt's
arrangement of the Spinning Song from Wagner's "Flying Dutchman." It
is a difficult piece, but there is a great deal of pianoforte music
that is more difficult and that was entirely beyond me. Moreover the
fact that I was able to play this composition after much assiduous
practice, did not mean that I could play equally difficult or even
considerably less difficult music with ease by sight. The repertoire
of even the best amateur is apt to be a small one. He gains his
general knowledge of music from what he hears.

With me, in time, as with so many amateurs, pianoforte playing had to
yield first place to my regular work. I took up writing and that
became paramount. I began to lose my pianoforte technique, and I
should not like to say how many years it is since I lost the ability
to play Liszt's arrangement of the Spinning Song from the "The Flying
Dutchman," the "Butterfly" etude of Chopin and other works that I had
had at my fingers' ends. Often, when I went to pianoforte recitals and
heard these compositions played, I grieved over what I had
lost--through sacrificing the pianoforte to the pen.

I grieve no longer. I have acquired a perfect technique, the technique
of a great virtuoso--through the pianola. It is a key that has
unlocked for me the whole repertory of music. With it I can play the
most difficult work ever written as easily as I can a five-finger
exercise. It gives me the technique, but all that is summed up in the
one word "expression," I am at liberty to put into the music myself.

In the whole world there are perhaps two, at the most three pianoforte
virtuosos who really deserve to be called great. To listen to them is
the acme of musical delight. But right next to this comes the
performance of any musical person, whether a child or grown up, on the
pianola. It is better than the playing of any virtuoso not absolutely
of the very first rank, and infinitely preferable to the playing of
the most gifted amateur, while the performance of the average amateur
almost is juvenile compared with it. Moreover there are pieces of
which the Liszt "Campanella," the Mendelssohn "Rondo Capriccioso" and
the "Rosamunde" impromptu of Schubert, are examples, that, when played
on the pianola by a musical person, sound just as well as if they came
from under the fingers of the greatest living virtuoso--possibly
better.

These are not dreams, they are facts; and discoverable in due time by
everyone who is made musical through the instrument of which I am
writing; and, in an incredibly short time by any one, already musical,
who takes it up. Moreover they are facts readily susceptible of
explanation, and here it is:--All technical difficulties being
eliminated by the pianola, the player is free to give his whole
attention to interpretation, to that subtle something which we call
"expression," and which constitutes the supreme quality of a musical
performance.




III. FIRST STEPS OF THE MUSICAL NOVICE


I confess that when I first thought of writing this book my intention
was to plan it somewhat on the same lines as the usual "How to Listen
to Music" book, but to make it somewhat simpler. As the catalogue of
pianola music includes everything from Bach to Richard Strauss it
seemed to me that it would be easy to give the reader a course in
musical development, beginning with the simpler pieces of Bach, like
the bourrees and gavottes; then taking up the sonatas of Mozart and
Beethoven; the compositions of the romantic school from Schubert to
Chopin; and ending with the modern school of Wagner, Liszt and Richard
Strauss--in other words giving a survey of the whole evolution of
music.

This would coincide with the ordinary course of musical instruction,
which naturally ranges from what are considered the easier and
simpler pieces to the more difficult ones, early music being less
complicated and making less demand upon the player's technique than
music of the present day. But I had forgotten one important point
which is, that on the pianola nothing is difficult, that with this
modern instrument the question of difficulty entirely disappears, and
that the most hair-raising, breath-catching exploits of virtuosity are
as easy for the pianolist as the most commonplace five-finger
exercises are for the pianist. In other words, the pianolist can
approach music from a wholly new standpoint. For him music exists
simply as music. Its history, its evolution, which latter after all is
a matter purely technical, need not concern him at all.

I was brought to this view by a rather startling discovery. I think it
will seem equally startling to any one who has studied music in the
usual way--the laborious technical development involved in acquiring
the mastery of a musical instrument, generally the pianoforte. In
discussing Chopin's "Etude" in A flat, Op. 10, No. 10, one of the
greatest virtuosos of his day, Hans van Buelow, said that "he who can
play this study in a really finished manner may congratulate himself
on having climbed to the highest pinnacle of the pianist's Parnassus,
as it is perhaps the most difficult piece of the entire set. The whole
repertory of piano music does not contain a study of perpetual
movement so full of genius and fancy as this particular one is
universally acknowledged to be, excepting perhaps Liszt's 'Feux
Follets' (Will-o'-the wisps)." In looking over the catalogue of music
for the mechanical piano-player I find that this immensely difficult
study by Liszt, so difficult that Von Buelow classes it with the
Chopin study, "the highest pinnacle of the pianist's Parnassus," is
listed with the "popular" pieces. Thus a composition which taxes the
resources of the greatest virtuosos to the utmost and which few if any
amateurs can play at all, presents no difficulties whatsoever to the
pianolist and actually becomes "popular." The same thing is true of
the Liszt "Bell Rondo" (La Campanella). This delicate, dainty yet
immensely difficult work, which most amateurs know only from hearing
it played in pianoforte recitals because they themselves can do no
more than stumble through it, is, like the "Feux Follets," a popular
piece in the repertory of the pianolist. Such an astounding result is
possible only upon the pianola which absolutely eliminates all
technical difficulties and leaves the player free to select his music
without regard to such difficulties.

Another matter connected with the pianolist's repertory opens up a
field for speculation into which, fortunately, it is quite possible
for the layman to follow the musician and to appreciate the point I
wish to make. As many purchasers of pianolas are people who never have
received musical instruction, it might be supposed that the most
popular selections for the instrument would be either bits of musical
slang like twosteps and ragtime, or, at the best, simple pieces in the
recognized classical forms. But the result of the spread of musical
taste through this new instrument is wholly different and wholly novel
from the standpoint of conventional musical experience. The public,
the great musical public created by an instrument which does away with
all considerations of technique and leaves the player free to select
what he wants to play, no matter how difficult it may be when played
on the pianoforte, sweeps aside all conventions which learned
commentators, critics and writers on the history and evolution of
music have sought to establish and in fact have succeeded in
establishing for those who have been obliged to study music in the
ordinary way, and boldly selects as first choice from the vast array
of compositions Liszt's "Rhapsodie Hongroise" No. 2, with the
"Tannhaeuser" overture of Wagner a close second. In other words the
musical public when left to itself and not led--or led astray--by
pedants begins at the right end of musical evolution which is the end,
the supreme efflorescence, and not the beginning. Conceding that the
evolution of the human race began with the monkey and ends with
ourselves, it may be said, metaphorically, that the musical public,
when left to itself, declines to monkey with the monkey, but at once
proceeds to pluck the full flower of evolution, the human. For if any
musical compositions are human documents that term is applicable to
the "Second Rhapsody" and to the "Tannhaeuser" overture. Each tells a
vivid story and tells it according to the canons of art, life and
truth. The unfortunate student of music, shackled by instruction that
aims mainly at teaching him how to play an instrument and ignores the
higher side of art, plods through the classical repertory until he
gets an idea that music consists of nothing but symphonies and
sonatas, which is as absurd as it would be to say that poetry consists
of nothing but sonnets, whereas a couple of dozen good sonnets are
enough for the literature of any language.

Indeed, while instruction in the other arts steadily is being
modernized and steadily aims to familiarize the student with their
higher aspects, little progress has been made in the teaching of
music. It still is in a state comparable only with that which existed
in the teaching of languages when instruction in these was given
according to the system of Ollendorf, with its series of foolish
questions and answers:--

"Is this the sword of the grandfather?"

"No, it is the false curl of the grandmother."

A five finger exercise, or an old-fashioned technical study with its
dry little theme in the treble and its foolish little answer in the
bass, always suggests to me something along the lines of the
Ollendorfian phraseology:--

"Is this musical phrase beautiful?"

"No, but it is great for limbering up the little finger."

Often since giving thought to the new instrument which wholly
eliminates the question of technique from pianoforte playing, I have
wondered if the importance attached to "limbering up the little
finger" has not given us a wrong musical perspective; whether
compositions musically of little value have not assumed enormous
importance in the curriculum and been retained there, because they
developed finger facility in certain directions. For example to a
pianist the "School of Velocity" by Czerny and the "Gradus ad
Parnassum" by Clementi, two series of famous technical studies, mean
everything. To the pianolist they mean nothing--need mean nothing. As
for the "School of Velocity" he can by simply moving the tempo lever
to the right make the pianola play so fast that, if old Czerny still
were alive, he would lose his breath listening to it. As for the
"Gradus ad Parnassum," the difficulties which Clementi piled up in the
pianist's path, the pianolist overleaps as lightly and casually as if
wholly unaware of their existence. He may never have heard of these
technical works yet, if he has natural musical instinct or has
developed it through the piano-player, he will be as correct in his
judgment of what to play and how to play it, as if he had devoted his
whole life to an arduous study of pianoforte technique. The
pianolist's experience with music is wholly musical, while the
pianist's is largely technical. For observe, that while a music
teacher often selects a piece for his pupil, not so much because it is
beautiful but because it follows up and supplements the technical
exercise which the pupil has been practicing, the pianolist's point of
view in choosing his repertory is not obscured by any consideration of
this kind. Scratch a Russian and you find a Tartar; scratch musical
instruction of the average kind and you find technique. The
pianolist's progress is determined by music's appeal to his soul; the
average music pupil's by what he can accomplish with his fingers. In
this way, as I already have suggested, certain pieces have acquired an
importance far out of proportion to their musical value, and have
retained their position not only in the curriculum but, unfortunately,
even in the concert repertory.

There is a lot of this dry wood in music and the unfortunate student
is compelled to chop it until, when he sees a real tree, he thinks it
is all wrong because it has green leaves instead of withered ones and
strong, sappy branches instead of little twigs that snap off at the
least touch. This is the reason that modern music, although it is the
most natural music ever written, has to be "explained"--because
students prejudiced by pedantic instruction have become so accustomed
to the artificial that they cannot appreciate what is natural; just
as experts in primitive art fail to appreciate the beauty of the later
schools of painting.

To me it is positively exhilarating that the great mass of those
people who have become devotees of the mechanical piano-player do not
stop to ask what is the relation of this or that composition to the
development of music or its place in musical evolution; but, taking
music simply as music, confidently place pieces like the "Second
Rhapsody" or the "Tannhaeuser" overture on the pianola and are thrilled
by the artistic realism of these compositions. Unconsciously they are
supporting the contention of those advanced thinkers in music who
place the expression of life and truth above artificial form. Suppose
a paint brush were invented which would give complete mastery of the
technique of painting to the person in whose hand it was placed.
Would that person go to work copying the old masters? No. He would
paint the sea, the low meadow land, the foot hills, the mountains, the
waving grain, the forest, the man he admired, the woman he loved. And
so it is that the player who has the technical mastery of the
pianoforte placed, so to speak, at his disposal, is led by instinct
toward the most modern expression of musical thought and genius.

In his book, "The Temple of Art," Ernest Newlandsmith has a chapter on
musical education in which he points out that after all a pianist's
fingers and muscles are simply mechanical contrivances for striking
the keys, and that to gain complete control or mastery of this
mechanical process requires incessant drudgery and labor, such mastery
being attained only by very few people. "The average pianist never
gains the power of even striking the notes in really difficult music;
yet for an artist to infuse the exact expression of his feeling into a
work, he must not only be able to do this, but must also be able to
vary this striking of notes by the most minute and subtle degrees of
intensity, and that without experiencing any difficulty whatever, so
that his entire attention may be devoted to his feeling." All this the
pianolist gains without any of that drudgery so apt to obscure correct
musical perspective, so that, to quote again from Mr. Newlandsmith,
"it is a matter of wonder that any one can be found to speak against
mechanical piano-players, when they remember that they are only
mechanical to the extent that a pianist has to be. They are not
intended to play of themselves, like a musical box, but are controlled
by the performer's feeling."

The first steps in music are apt to be "two-steps." Marches and dances
of a popular kind and the seemingly inevitable coon-song may be
regarded as the infant's food of the musical novice. For a person
whose love of music still is latent, may not "arrive" at once at the
"Second Rhapsody" or the "Tannhaeuser" overture. The friend to whom I
have dedicated this book began with the lightest kind of music, the
kind he now regards as "trash." For from knowing nothing at all about
music, he has become, through the piano-player, an ardent lover of all
that is good in the art. Nevin's "Narcissus" happened to be included
in his first set of rolls. He tried it over, but thought it dull.
After a while, however, when the other rolls began to pall on him, he
played it again and found in it something that he missed in the
others. This was the first step toward better things, and step by
step thereafter he gained in musical taste until now his judgment is
unerring.

Nevin whose death six years ago and at a comparatively early age, was
a distinct loss to music, was one of the small number of composers who
have written music of the lighter kind which yet is thoroughly good,
music that is pleasing without being trivial, melodious without a
suggestion of the commonplace, and thoroughly sound in workmanship.
This American composer was exceptionally apt at reproducing in music a
mood or fancy and at painting in tone the charms of a romantic
locality. Possibly no gentler rise from what is known as the "light
classic" to the classic can be provided than through him. Therefore I
begin with him, although he is a thoroughly modern composer, my aim
being gradually to lead the pianolist from enjoyment of lighter works,
of the kind, however, which possess genuine musical merit, to an
appreciation of the greater masterpieces. Sometimes I have selected
only one work by a composer and, except in the case of Chopin, never
more than a few examples from any composer. But the works which I cite
and describe in more or less detail, should suffice to stimulate the
pianolist to explore more fully the range of the composers I mention,
and of others. I give merely a taste; the catalogue of music rolls
supplies the full menu.

To some this arrangement may seem haphazard. Nevertheless it has
system and purpose. The usual method followed in books that aim to be
musical guides would have been much easier. Mine I believe best
adapted to the needs of the average pianolist, who, it may be assumed,
at the time he purchases his instrument, knows little or nothing about
music of the higher kind; whose taste, in fact, still is to be
developed.

I cannot imagine any one so obtuse to musical impressions as not to
find Nevin's "Valse Caprice," Op. 6, No. 1, thoroughly delightful. It
is the first of a set of several pieces comprised in his sixth work,
this fact being expressed by the designation Opus 6, No. 1. The piece
is full of pretty sentiment and I always like to imagine that it
describes an episode during a dance. It has charming melodies.
Ornamental figurations in the accompaniment, now above, now below,
give the effect of whispered questions and answers during the dance.
The questions--put by the man--are pressing and ardent, the
answers--from the girl--playful and parrying. Sometimes they even
ripple with chaff. Yet, toward the end of the dainty little
composition, they become tinged with sentiment, as if she were afraid
she might have gone a little too far and might "spoil things" and
thought it just as well to let him know in time that, after all, she
was not turning a wholly deaf ear to his pleading.

This piece I would follow with Nevin's "Intermezzo," Op. 7, No. 3.
Although it belongs to an entirely different work I enjoy playing it
immediately after the waltz and imagining that it relates to the same
young couple--that he has led her out into the conservatory or on to a
terrace overlooking a moonlight garden and under these romantic
circumstances, is urging his suit more persistently than before. She,
however, is a little too fond of flirting to let her real sentiments
be known at once. But when, as if giving up the riddle in her dancing
eyes and seemingly mocking smile, he appears about to lead her back
into the ballroom, there is, at least so I like to read the music, a
pretty little laugh, as much as to say, "Can't you read my real
feelings under my mask of banter," a tender glance indicated by a
retard on a charmingly expressive little turn of the melody--and she
is in his arms.

Now I would repeat the waltz, to indicate that, carried away by their
happiness, they have gone back into the ballroom and thrown themselves
heart and soul into the dance. And there you have a little Nevin suite
telling a pretty story.

To me one of this composer's most fanciful tone paintings is, "In my
Neighbor's Garden," Op. 21, No. 2. This is one of a series of pieces
the complete title of which is "May in Tuscany," and which he composed
during a sojourn in Florence. You can hear a bird sing all through
this piece, and that the composer so intended it, became clear to me
when I found that its original title was "Rusignuolo," Italian for
nightingale.

    Make haste to mount, thou wistful moon,
    Make haste to wake the nightingale:
    Let silence set the world in tune
    To harken to that wordless tale
    Which warbles from the nightingale.

Those lines from Christina Rosetti's "Bird Raptures," seem to me
perfectly reflected in Nevin's composition, and equally so are these
lines from the same poet's "Twilight Calm":--

        Hark! that's the nightingale,
        Telling the self-same tale
    Her song told when this ancient earth was young:
    So echoes answered when her song was sung
        In the first wooded vale.

Or this from Byron's "Parisina":--

    It is the hour when from the boughs
      The nightingale's high note is heard;
    It is the hour when lovers' vows
      Seem sweet in every whisper'd word.

Nevin's "Barcarolle" is another beautiful composition, which conveys
the listener to Venice with its picturesque canals and ancient
palaces. It is a night scene, and reminds me of Wagner's description
of the singing of the gondoliers at night in one of his letters from
Venice: "Ah, music on the canal. A gondola with gaily colored lights,
singers and players. More and more gondolas join it. The flotilla,
barely moving, gently gliding, floats the whole width of the canal. At
last, almost imperceptibly, it makes the turn of the bend and
vanishes. For a long while I hear the tones beautified by the night.
Finally the last sound, dying away, seems to dissolve itself into the
moonlight, which beams softly on, like a visible realm of music."

There is an entire Venetian suite by Nevin which he composed during a
stay in the Italian city. One day he gave his gondolier a day off,
and the boatman took his sweetheart, who lived on the mainland and
never had been in Venice, through the waterways. It was this which
suggested to Nevin the composition of the suite, which he entitled "A
Day in Venice." The best known number from it is the "Venetian Love
Song."

Moskowszki is another good composer of light music, and like Nevin,
what he writes is thoroughly original. His "Serenata" Op. 15, No. 1,
is one of the prettiest of modern pieces, and a perfect example of
what a serenade should be--a graceful melody over an accompaniment of
guitarlike chords. There is an intervening part with much
ornamentation, which has the effect of improvising, a delicious little
run leading back to the first melody which now should be played very
softly and with slight retardations, as if the serenader were
departing and the music dying away. "From Foreign Parts,"
Moskowszki's Op. 23, is one of the best known modern compositions. It
consists of several numbers each representing a country and composed
in true national style and with as much success as if, were such a
thing possible, the composer were a native of each of these countries
and were thoroughly imbued with its spirit. Of these separate numbers
I am inclined especially to recommend to the pianolist "Germany," with
its beautiful, broad, sustained melody, thoroughly German in contour
and expression, and among the most beautiful melodies composed in
modern times; and "Spain," one of the most brilliant little rolls for
the piano-player--gay, spirited and full of snap and go, the movement
never flagging from beginning to end. Moskowszki has shown himself
most happy in catching the spirit of Spanish music. He has a book of
Spanish dances and two Spanish albums full of music of most varying
mood, yet every mood characteristic of Spain and its people, now gay,
now languorous, now dashing, now subdued, now softly whispering, now
full of verve and passion, like the "Bolero," the fifth of the
"Spanish Dances," Op. 12, with its sharply accentuated rhythm and
dashing melody, which toward the end fairly swirls with excitement.

A "Moment Musical," Op. 7, No. 2, was the composition which gave
Moskowszki his first taste of international fame, but in spite of much
that is genuinely beautiful, especially in its opening melody, I think
the work suffers from undue length. By all means, however, the
pianolist should not neglect this composition. Were I asked, however,
to select the work which seems to me to bring out in the most
favorable relief Moskowszki's traits as a composer it would be his
"Waltz," Op. 34, No. 1. It has an introduction beginning with a
phrase in the bass like a man asking the honor of a dance with an
attractive girl, followed by a little upward run, the gleam of the
smile with which she gives assent. Then there are short, crisp, bright
phrases, as though she enjoyed the knowledge that every one is looking
at her as he leads her out and whispers compliments.

The introduction with all these interesting preliminaries over, the
waltz itself opens with a melody full of sentiment and almost personal
in its persistent suggestion of wooing. At the same time it has a
graceful swing that carries it along like an undercurrent, with rising
and falling inflections, and, like the Nevin waltz, with much dainty
ornamentation, as if the couple were conversing in low tones while
dancing. Then there is a brilliant episode when individuals seem lost
sight of in the general vividness of the scene with its gaily colored
costumes and flash of jewels. There are alternating sentimental
passages until, toward the end, the first melody bursts into a
fortissimo--a great rising inflection, insistent and impassioned--then
a final pitch of excitement as all seem to throw themselves into the
whirl and the waltz reaches a brilliant end. While Nevin in the waltz
which I selected from among his works, appears to tell the story of
two people, Moskowszki here places before our eyes a vivid ballroom
scene with one particularly handsome couple as the center of
attraction, without, however, letting us wholly into their secret. The
waltz, though long, is of never-flagging interest.

This composer's opus 34 is an orchestral suite ("Premiere Suite d'
Orchestre") of which the second number is an "Allegretto giojoso," a
playful, sportive, chic and graceful movement, with a tender melody in
the middle part, at first heard alone, then with a sparkling
accompaniment. This piece having originally been scored for orchestra,
it is quite possible to detect orchestral instruments like flutes and
clarionets in some of the brilliant runs. The pianola roll is a
reproduction of an arrangement for four hands, that is, for two
players at one piano, yet only one player is required to produce the
full effect of a pianoforte duet arranged from an orchestral
composition.

Moskowszki is a prolific composer, and it is well worth the
pianolist's while to thoroughly explore the catalogue of his works.
Much modern music merely echoes what has gone before and may be summed
up as watered Chopin. Therefore, even if Moskowszki's compositions are
in the lighter forms, their originality and melodiousness make them
worthy of ranking high among modern salon pieces.

One of the prettiest and deservedly popular little works in the modern
repertory is the Paderewski "Minuet," Op. 14, No. 1. Modern minuets
are echoes of the classical period. Compositions of this kind are to
be found in the sonatas and symphonies of Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven
and even further back in the suites of Bach. Accordingly the
Paderewski "Minuet," in keeping with the form, is simple and clear-cut
and gracefully melodious. At the same time, however, it is modern in
the brilliant ornamentation introduced in the middle part of the
composition which in a minuet is called the trio.

The minuet was a stately dance. The word is derived from the French
menu meaning small and referring to the short steps taken in the
dance. Originally the music to it was brief, but as a complement, a
second minuet was added which, in time, became the trio, so-called,
because it was written in three part harmony. This was followed by a
repetition of the first minuet. While the designation trio has been
retained to this day, the three part harmony no longer is considered
obligatory. The minuet is one of the very few of the older dance forms
which have not become obsolete.

It was a square dance, the steps consisting of a coupee (a salute to
one's partner, while resting on one foot and swinging the other
backward and forward) a high step and a balance. In the Paderewski
minuet the stately, ceremonious character of this dance is preserved
together with its old fashioned, naive grace and charm. It is quite
possible while playing it to see the dancers at a French court ball or
in the ballroom of some chateau, the women, beauties of their day, in
high pompadour with puffs and curls powdered white, with petites
mouches, little moon and star-shaped beauty spots, on their faces;
square cut bodices, lace stomachers, paniers over brocaded skirts with
lace panels; feet encased in high heel satin slippers with jewelled
buckles; and gracefully managing their ostrich feather fans as they
curtsy to their partners; the latter wearing wigs also powdered white,
long coats of brocade, elaborately embroidered waistcoats with lace
jabots, satin knee breeches, silk stockings and a garter with jewelled
buckle on the right leg, and helping themselves to snuff out of gold
or silver boxes during brief pauses in the dance. Such is the picture
that can be conjured up in imagination while playing the Paderewski
minuet.

Quite different yet equally effective in its way is his "Cracovienne
Fantastic," Op. 14, No. 6. The cracovienne is a Polish dance for a
large and brilliant company and just as Paderewski recalled in his
minuet the stately assemblage of days long past, so in his
cracovienne he gives us a brilliant picture of a ballroom scene in his
native Poland when that country was still in its glory and not
partitioned among three nations of Europe. The reiteration of its
characteristic rhythm gives it peculiar fascination. It is clearly and
distinctly melodious, with bright, flashing runs giving it brilliancy.

Again different in style from any of the preceding are the works of
Cecile Chaminade. Not only is this composer a woman, she is a French
woman and, like a French woman, essentially clever and chic. She may
be a trifle more superficial than the composers I have mentioned, but
her music is clean-cut, clear as a crystal, and, like everything about
a refined woman, the quintessence of neatness. It is quite as if Mme.
Chaminade's maid laid out her musical thoughts as well as her dresses,
being sure to have every frill and furbelow in its place, whether it
be the robe d' interieur which she is to wear at breakfast, her robe
de ville for calling, or her robe de soiree. True it is that serious
musicians are apt to wear a somewhat supercilious expression at
mention of her music and to pronounce it clever rather than deep, yet
it is equally true that it takes its place among the best salon pieces
of the day and gains value if only from the fact that this bright
French woman has skillfully refrained from attempting flights for
which her graceful wings are not strong enough. Most of her music is
characterized by a fascinating archness and coquetry and requires
quick and sudden changes in time for its proper interpretation. While
rarely attempting the larger musical forms, she has been an
industrious student of the best music, so that all her compositions
are what is called "well made," correct according to the rules of
musical science, yet in melodic and harmonic inspiration characterized
by originality and musical inventiveness. She writes with judgment,
refinement and taste, avoiding on the one hand the pitfall of
pretentiousness, and, on the other, the monotony of platitude found in
the works of those who compose in the larger forms but lack the
originality to fill them with new and interesting matter. It is a
great thing to know your limitations, yet to be able to do vivid and
original work within them.

Brief as is Chaminade's "Serenade," Op. 29, its melody is charming, it
is ably harmonized and it appeals to the heart. There is not a
commonplace bar in it. It is one of those delicate bits of inspiration
which survive other and seemingly grander works, the grandeur of
which, however, is in course of time, discovered to be mere hollow
pretentiousness. It is a capital example of the manner in which this
composer writes in the small genre--delicate, refined and sensitive.

She has been highly successful in compositions in dance form, managing
these without a suggestion of the trivial. Thus her "Air de Ballet,"
Op. 30, No. 1, is full of brilliancy and nervous energy without ever
degenerating into vulgar noisiness. Another "Air de Ballet" by her
from the ballet "Callirhoe," to which her widely known "Scarf Dance"
also belongs, is crisp, bright and dainty. "Callirhoe" is a
ballet-symphonique for stage performance and its production showed her
to be so well grounded in her art that it does not suffer even under
the pressure of rapid composition, or of being obliged to work "on
time." The commission for this ballet was offered to Godard, a
well-known French composer. He was, however, occupied with an opera
and declined the work, at the same time recommending that the
commission be offered to Chaminade. It was accepted by her and within
six weeks from the day when she began work upon it, it was completed
even to the scoring for orchestra.

While the pianolist hardly can go amiss in choosing from among the
list of Chaminade's compositions I may mention as especially
characteristic her "Arabesque," "Humoresque," La Lisonjera (Flatterer)
"Pierrette," "Scaramouche" (Mountebank) and "Spinning Wheel."

Chaminade's compositions are so popular in this country yet so little
is known about her personally, that I have secured a few personal data
concerning her from my friend, Mr. Percy Mitchell, who is attached to
the staff of an American paper in Paris. Mme. Carbonel-Chaminade has a
shock of dark, curly, short-cropped hair which gives her a boyish
aspect, a touch of masculinity further emphasized by a tailor-made
costume with stiff, white, turned-down collar and loosely tied scarf.
Beyond this aspect, however, there is nothing mannish about her. She
cares neither for sport nor exercise in general; her principal
occupation is musical composition, her chief relaxation practicing the
pianoforte two hours a day; and she reads an immense amount of poetry
from which she carefully selects the words for her songs. Society she
abhors, but she attends scrupulously to her large correspondence. Very
many of these letters come from America, and in a practical spirit
truly American seek information regarding the interpretation of her
works. "How should your 'Serenade' be phrased?--I am learning the
'Scarf Dance.' By this same mail I am sending you a copy of it. Would
you kindly mark the phrasing in it and return it to me?" In
connection with questions of this kind it is interesting to note that
practically all of Chaminade's compositions have been metrostyled for
the pianola by the composer herself. The pianolist at least will not
find it necessary to trouble her with questions like the above.

Probably no composer has had one set method of work. It is apt to vary
according to surroundings. So with Chaminade. She may write while
seated at her pianoforte, testing her thoughts on the keyboard and
even working them out in detail before putting them on paper. Or she
may sit at her table, a vast velvet-covered affair taking up nearly
half of her studio. Sometimes an idea that has haunted her for weeks
may take definite shape while she is speeding on a train to fulfill a
concert engagement and she will jot it down in spite of the roar and
vibration of railway travel. As the train rushes on the composition
may be completely worked out in the composer's mind before the
journey's end, and so retentive is Chaminade's memory that, when she
returns to her villa in Vesinet, near the forest of St. Germain not
far from Paris, she can seat herself at her table and copy the work
from that mental vision of it which she had on the train.

Some years ago during a semi-professional tour which she made through
Roumania, Servia and Greece, she was invited to play for the students
of the Athens conservatory. When she stepped on the stage she saw row
after row of young people armed with the printed music of what she was
about to play and prepared in a cold-blooded, business-like way to
open the music of the first number on the program and to follow the
concert note for note from the printed scores from beginning to end.
Imagine the effect upon her nerves produced by the rustling of one
hundred pages all being turned at the same instant at intervals during
the concert; and even now she laughingly confesses that she was nearly
overcome with stage fright and prays she may never have to endure
again such an ordeal as the music students of Athens unwittingly
prepared for her.

With the exception of Nevin, the composers whose works I have
mentioned are living and actively engaged in composition. The piece to
which I now desire to call the pianolist's attention belongs to the
dawn of the romantic period in music. It was composed by Weber who
died in 1826, is entitled "Invitation to the Dance," was written a few
months after his happy marriage with the opera singer Caroline Brandt,
and is dedicated to "My Caroline." Because Weber was one of the first
composers who rank as great to give distinctly descriptive titles to
compositions, and because of certain other characteristics in his
works, he is regarded as the founder of the romantic school of
music--music which is not simply sufficient unto itself but has a
secondary meaning that adds immeasurably to its interests; music which
seeks to suggest a definite mood and even to throw a realistic picture
of some scene in nature or some human experience upon a background of
harmony and instrumental coloring; and which cares less for the
artifices of form than for the expression of the true and the
beautiful from the standpoint of modern art.

The "Invitation to the Dance" derives further interest from the fact
that it was the first composition to lift the waltz, which up to that
time had been employed simply as an accompaniment for dancing, to the
level of other legitimate and recognized artistic musical forms. The
composition opens with an introduction in slow time, the first phrase
unmistakably being the voice of the man conveying to the lady an
invitation to dance. You hear her playful objection--undoubtedly she
wants to be asked a second time--the repetition of his invitation, her
assent, the short dialogue as the two step out on the floor; brief,
but resonant preluding chords; then the free, elastic rhythm of the
waltz followed by its gay, dashing melody. There is an exuberance of
runs and ornamentations until the first feeling of elation lapses into
a second dreamy, languorous waltz melody, as if the dancers were
floating on the scented atmosphere of the ballroom. In portions of
this there is a sentimental colloquy between the couple whom we met in
the introduction, the two voices being clearly differentiated. The
little duet between them adds to the beauty and interest of this
portion of the work, the melody of which simply is exquisite. Then
everything whirls and sparkles again and, when the dance has ceased,
there is a briefer recapitulation of the introduction, the lady is led
back to her seat, and the episode comes to an end.

The pianolist may now place Liszt's "Campanella" (Bell rondo) on the
instrument. Originally this was composed by the famous violinist
Paganini, Liszt transcribed it for the pianoforte and so successfully
that now it is better known in his version than in its original form.
It is a piece which can be described only by one word--delicious. Its
title is immediately understood by the unmistakable silvery tinkle of
a bell in the high treble, constantly recurring, but always with added
instead of diminishing, beauty. On the pianoforte it demands
virtuosity of the highest rank, yet for the pianolist it is as easy
to play as is the simplest pianoforte piece intended for a beginner.

And so, having begun this chapter with Nevin, one of the lighter
composers of pronounced merit, the pianolist already finds himself
playing a work by Weber and another by Liszt, two of the most famous
figures in musical history. Even if, as I trust will be the case, he
becomes so interested in the works I have cited in this chapter, as to
try much other music by the same composers, he will, in an almost
incredibly short space of time, be ready for the thrill of the great
masters--which shows that, after all, the sequence I am following in
this book is not as haphazard as some may think.




IV. THE THRILL OF THE GREAT MASTERS


In his choice of music the pianolist need not pause to consider the
slow evolution of the art from the simple to the more complex, since
for him nothing is complex. Thus he is free to disregard all
traditions, even such an absurd one, for example, as that which
insists that a sonata or symphony should be played as a whole, that,
if a work in this form consists of three or four movements, none of
these should be "lifted" out of the whole and played as a separate
composition.

The pianolist calmly looks upon these movements as so many different
pieces and chooses between them. Thus among the hundred classical
compositions most in demand by pianolists, the slow movement of
Beethoven's "Fifth Symphony" ranks seventeenth, while the first is as
far down on the list as thirty-seventh, and the roll with the last
two movements as sixty-fifth. That in future the consensus of opinion
of thousands of music lovers who are unhampered by pedantic tradition,
will have immense influence in determining the standard of composers
and of their several works, and will have immense effect in hastening
the introduction and appreciation of works by new composers, in spite
of opposition from the ultra-conservative element, goes without
saying, and will be one of the most important factors in the
revolution this new musical instrument is destined to effect.

All this readily can be appreciated when the attitude of this great
musical public toward Liszt's "Hungarian Rhapsodies" is taken into
account. For years the critical camp has been divided on Liszt, some
considering him a composer whose unequalled greatness as a player of
the pianoforte led him to write music that was superficially
brilliant but barren of genuine musical inspiration. Others, like
Henry T. Finck and that band of advanced commentators on music among
whom I am proud to number myself, unhesitatingly rank him with the
greatest composers. This phase of musical life, this warring of
factions, the pianolist happily ignores entirely, and following his
unbiased intuition, places Liszt's second "Hungarian Rhapsody" at the
head of the repertory, closely follows it with the twelfth and
fourteenth, and, all told, includes nine of these fifteen compositions
in the top list of one hundred pieces of serious music which have
proved most popular with pianola players. The pianolist is not aware
of the fact, but that most inexorable of all critics, time, most
emphatically justifies his choice.

Liszt brought out these rhapsodies fifty-three years ago. They are not
compositions which suddenly are offering themselves as candidates for
popular favor. For more than half a century has passed over these
master works, which still are as fresh and modern as if they had been
struck off but yesterday in the white heat of inspiration. Their roots
go back even further than fifty-three years. As long ago as 1838 Liszt
published them as short transcriptions of Hungarian tunes. Then he
worked them over and, in 1846, issued them in somewhat more elaborate
form as "Melodies Hongroises." Still further elaborated they became in
1854 the "Rhapsodies Hongroises" as we know them.

These rhapsodies reflect the weird romanticism of that most mysterious
and fascinating of races, the Gypsies, as successfully as Chopin's
music reflects the crushed aspirations of his unhappy country, Poland.
Although they are called Hungarian, they are neither derived from nor
founded upon national Hungarian music, but are purely of Gypsy origin.
The Hungarians, however, have adopted the Gypsies as their national
musicians, and it is by reason of this adoption, or, in order to
express through the title this mutual assimilation, that Liszt has
called these rhapsodies "Hungarian." With a Gypsy parentage so
authentic that he speaks of the melodies on which they are based, as
"the songs without words" of the Gypsies, his rhapsodies form the only
channel through which the intense inner life and mystic idealism of
this strange race has found expression. They are the long suppressed
cry of souls struggling for self utterance and they constitute nothing
less than an epic, the "Iliad," of that strange race which centuries
ago cast itself upon the continent of Europe like a wave coming, none
knew from where or whither bound.

This race, as Liszt describes it in his book on Gypsy music, brought
no memories, betrayed no hope; possessed no country, religion,
history. Divided into tribes, hordes and bands, wandering hither and
thither, following each the route dictated by chance, they still
preserve under the most distant meridian, the same infallible rallying
signs, the same physiognomy, the same language, the same traditions.
The ages pass. The world progresses. Countries make war or peace,
change masters and manners, but this people that shares the joys, the
sorrows, the prosperity and the misfortunes of none other; that laughs
at the ambitions, the tears, the combats of civilization; still
obstinately clings to its hunger and its liberty, its tents and its
tatters, and still exercises, as it has exercised for centuries, an
indescribable and indestructible fascination upon poetic minds,
passing it on as a mysterious legacy from age to age.

Such is the race of which Liszt recites the epic in the "Hungarian
Rhapsodies." They portray the life, the scenes, the mood of the Gypsy
camp, vividly, brilliantly, yet with an undercurrent of tragedy--the
tragedy of homeless wanderers. Because they represent life, because
they are true to life, because they depict life with a wonderful union
of realism and beauty, they will, in spite of critical detraction,
live as long as the Bach fugues, the Beethoven sonatas or the Wagner
music dramas.

An elaborate musical analysis of these wonderful works would be
futile. They are too racial, and in parts too pictorial to be
dissected in narrative style. What I have said of the race from which
they derive their characteristics should serve as a general
explanation of their purport. The second, twelfth and fourteenth
rhapsodies are admirable examples of the series. In general these
"Hungarian Rhapsodies" open with a few brief bars suggestive of tragic
recitative, which leads into a broad yet strongly marked and searching
rhythm, upon which is built a slow, stately yet mournful melody,
broken in upon here and there by strange weird runs and rapid
passages. These latter serve a double purpose. They imitate the
curious aeolian harp effects of the most characteristic instrument of
the Gypsy orchestra, the cembalon, a large, shallow box with strings
about as numerous as those of the pianoforte, and played with two
little mallets, with which the player produces the weird arpeggios or
rapid, broken chords and the improvised runs characteristic of
Hungarian Gypsy music; and they also prepare the player and listener
for the rapid movement into which the slow melody passes over, finally
to dash into the very frenzy of emotional and physical excitement.

These three divisions, the slow movement introduced by a recitative,
the rapid movement following, and the still more rapid one with which
the rhapsodies generally end, are based upon three distinct kinds of
melodies of the Gypsies, and their startling contrast contributes to
the effectiveness of the composition. The slow melody in the first
part of the rhapsodies (a different melody in each rhapsody of course)
is the "lassan," a sad song giving utterance to the pathos of the
race. The dance music that follows, so full of playful humor, grace,
caprice, coquetry and dashing contrast, is the "frischka"; while the
delirium, almost demoniac in its fury, with which the rhapsody rushes
to its intoxicating finale, and compared with which the Italian
tarantella and even the Dervish dance of the East are tame, is the
"czardas." In playing these rhapsodies one must try to imagine a Gypsy
camp, the flicker of firelight in the deep forest or on the wild
plains of Hungary, a sense of loneliness or of vast distance, forms of
swarthy men and women suddenly appearing from a shadowy background to
be illumined for a moment in the light of the fire, their swaying,
whirling forms vanishing the next, back into the vague darkness from
which they issued. Of the "Hungarian Rhapsodies" hostile critics may
say what they please; he who plays them understandingly, will feel in
them the thrill of a great master.

A composition of impassioned, yet mournful beauty is Liszt's
"Liebestraum" (Dream of Love) one of a set of three nocturnes, this
one being based upon a well known German poem, Freiligrath's,

    O love as long as love thou canst,
      O love as long as love will keep;
    The day will come, the day will come,
      When at a grave you stand and weep.

Liszt's "At the Spring" is a charming composition somewhat in the same
style as the "Campanella," but instead of describing silver-toned
chimes of bells, reproducing the purl of a bosky spring. One hears the
clear rippling water and sees its sparkling jets in glints of
sunlight, as it dashes against the stones, and its shimmering spray.
The work is the forerunner and model of numerous similar pieces, all
of them, however, lacking its freshness and originality and its high
order of musicianship.

The pianolist who is led by the examples of Liszt's music which I have
cited to choose liberally from the numerous compositions by him in the
catalogue of music rolls, hardly can go amiss. If, however, he prefers
to leave this for some other time, and to turn to another composer, he
will find Mendelssohn's "Rondo Capriccioso," Op. 14, a capital roll.
This rondo was composed in 1826, the same year in which he wrote the
overture to Shakespere's "Midsummer Night's Dream," with its wonderful
depiction of fairy life. The "Rondo Capriccioso" might be part of the
"Midsummer Night's Dream" music, it is so much in the same character.
Nothing could be more crisp and dainty. It seems to depict elves
romping through the forest by moonlight. Nor is it without romantic
moods, as if love-making were going on even among these light-footed,
light-hearted revelers. But when this is said, it still is all touch
and go; a breath, a sigh, the iridescence of the moonglade on a
woodland lake--then off and away:--

    Over hill, over dale,
      Through brush, through brier,
    Over park, over vale,
      Through flood, through fire,
    I do wander everywhere,
    Swifter than the moon's sphere;
    And I serve the fairy queen,
    To dew her orbs upon the green.

or

    Light as any wind that blows
      So fleetly did she stir,
    The flower she touch'd on dipt and rose,
      And turned to look at her.

This "Rondo Capriccioso" is indeed a fascinating piece, written in its
composer's most facile vein. It is one of the finest rolls from among
which the pianolist can select. There can be no doubt that Mendelssohn
has been losing ground as compared with the enormous popularity which
he enjoyed in his lifetime. But the pendulum has swung too much the
other way. Certain of his compositions have been too much neglected.
The "Rondo Capriccioso" is one of them. As it actually sounds crisper
and daintier on the pianola than on the pianoforte no matter by whom
played, it enjoys well merited popularity in the pianolist's repertory
and may contribute toward restoring the appreciation of Mendelssohn's
music to its proper balance.

I would be greatly surprised if a beautiful work like Schubert's
"Rosamunde" impromptu were not among the most popular pieces of the
pianolist's choice. The word impromptu is sufficiently
self-explanatory, but it needs to be pointed out that this work of
Schubert's differs from the usual impromptu in being an air with
variations, the variations, however, giving the impression of free
fantasies or improvisations on the original air. There are five
variations and the composition ends with a repetition of the air.

The work is written in the truest Schubertian style. I like to fancy
that the melody with its serene, lyric beauty is a picture of the
fair Rosamunde herself. The first variation, a plaintive melody over
an agitated accompaniment, I should be inclined, still referring to
Rosamunde and regarding each variation as expressing an experience in
her life, to entitle "Moods." The second variation is more playful in
character but without any loss of romantic charm, and I should say
that we might call it an expression of her "Fancies." The third an
impassioned meditation, a cry from the heart, Rosamunde's heart, may
be called "Love." The fourth variation, which again is frankly playful
like the second, is "Hope." The fifth, as brilliant as a cascade on
which the sun is shining, is "Joy." It ends suddenly without coming to
a full stop in the musical sense, and, after a pause, the original air
now couched in broad and beautiful chords, begins in the lower
register, rises successively to the middle and higher ones, then dies
away--an exquisite ending. Is this not Rosamunde, the more charming
for the romance of which she is the heroine; Rosamunde, looking at her
engagement ring, musing on the past and trustful of the future?

Schubert was one of the most famous song composers and Liszt in
addition to being an original composer, rendered a great service to
music by transcribing, in most admirable style, many of Schubert's
most famous songs for pianoforte. Widely known as they are for voice,
they have through these transcriptions become almost as familiar for
pianoforte. The delicate and dainty "Hark, Hark the Lark" is a
favorite work in Paderewski's repertory. So spontaneous was Schubert's
inspiration that he wrote the music of this song at a tavern where he
chanced to see the poem in a book which he was examining. "If only I
had some music paper!" he exclaimed. One of his friends promptly ruled
lines on the back of his bill of fare and Schubert, with the varied
noises of the tavern going on about him, jotted down the song then and
there.

Another splendid Schubert song that has been made popular on the
pianoforte through Listz's transcription is "The Erlking." As it ranks
among the greatest songs, and by many people actually is considered
the greatest, the illustration it affords of the rapidity with which
Schubert worked is most interesting. Two friends calling upon him one
afternoon, toward the close of the year 1815, found him all aglow
reading "The Erlking" aloud to himself. Having read the poem, he
walked up and down the room several times, book in hand, then suddenly
dropped into a chair, and, without a moment's pause and as fast as his
pen could travel over the paper, composed the song. Schubert had no
pianoforte, so the three men hurried over to the school where formerly
he had been trained for the Imperial choir--this was in Vienna--and
there "The Erlking" was sung the same evening and received with
enthusiasm. Afterwards the Court organist played it over himself
without the voice, and, some of those present objecting to the
dissonances which depict the child's terror of the Erlking, the
organist struck these chords again and explained how admirably they
expressed the situation described in the poem and how well they were
worked out musically. Schubert was only thirty-one when he died and
was only eighteen when he set this poem of Goethe's to music, yet the
whole song is almost Wagnerian in its descriptive and dramatic
qualities, and its climax thrilling.

The work of Beethoven's which seems most to appeal to the pianolist
is the "Moonlight" sonata. Possibly the attractive title, which,
however, Beethoven probably did not give to it, may have something to
do with its selection. But why not attribute its popularity to the
fact that the music bears out the title?

A sonata is a composition in several movements, usually four, and
follows a clearly outlined, in fact, an almost rigid form, not to say
formula. It attained its highest development during the classical
period and left its impress upon all the larger compositions of that
time, for a symphony is nothing more than a sonata composed for
orchestra, instead of for the pianoforte, and trios, quartets, and
other pieces of chamber music of the classical period are sonatas for
the corresponding combination of instruments.

The "Moonlight Sonata," however, is less rigid in form than the
average sonata. In it, in fact, Beethoven may be said to have broken
away from form, for after the word sonata he adds the qualifying
phrase "quasi una fantasia," signifying that, although he calls the
work a sonata, it has the characteristics of a free fantasy.

Instead of opening with the usual rapid movement, the work begins with
a broad and beautiful slow one, a sustained melody, a poem of profound
pathos in musical accents. This is followed by a lighter allegretto
which Liszt called "a flower 'twixt two abysses," the second "abyss"
being the last movement, which is one of Beethoven's most impassioned
creations. At the end both of the first movement and of the allegretto
the usual wait between the divisions of a sonata is omitted, Beethoven
giving the direction "attacca subito il sequente," literally meaning
"attack suddenly the following," indicating an inner relationship
between the movements so close that there must be only the briefest
possible pause between them.

This sonata is a true drama of life, a story of unrequited passion. It
is dedicated to one of the great beauties of Beethoven's time, the
Countess Giulietta Guicciardi. Although it is known that the composer
subsequently was deeply in love with her cousin, the Countess Therese
Brunswick, he is believed to have been in love with Giulietta at the
time he wrote the "Moonlight Sonata." The countess was not insensible
to his passion. She already was engaged to Count Gallenberg, but one
day, coming excitedly into the presence of her cousin Therese, she
threw herself at the latter's feet, "like a stage princess," and
exclaimed: "Counsel me, cold, wise one! I long to give Gallenberg the
mitten and marry the wonderfully ugly, wonderfully beautiful
Beethoven, if only it did not involve lowering myself socially." And
so she gave up Beethoven and led a life, none too happy, with her
Count. Connecting the "Moonlight Sonata" with this episode in
Beethoven's life, the first movement of the sonata may appropriately
be regarded as a song of love, deeply pathetic because no response is
evoked by the longing it expresses. The second movement, the graceful
allegretto, is the coquetish Giulietta who would not "lower herself
socially" by marrying a genius. The third movement is the rejected
lover crying out his passion and despair to the night.

From Beethoven to Grieg, from Vienna to Norway, from the greatest
master of the classical period to a composer who still is living and
who has been called not inaptly, "the Chopin of the North," may seem a
long step. But the pianolist can travel with seven league boots.
Grieg's most widely known compositions are four of the pieces of
incidental music which he wrote to Ibsen's drama "Peer Gynt." Peer
Gynt is the Faust of Norwegian literature. Without attempting here to
follow up this parallel, it may be said that he is a curious
combination of ne'er-do-well, dreamer and philosopher, with a
pronounced streak of impishness running through his character and
giving a touch of the extravagant and grotesque to many of his actions
and to some of them even a suggestion of the weird and supernatural.

"Peer Gynt" has its roots in Norwegian folklore and was written by
Ibsen in Italy when he was about thirty-seven years old, and it
precedes the problem plays by which he is best known, although Peer's
character is in itself a complex problem. Grieg in his incidental
music, adroitly avoids the difficult task of interpreting or even
hinting at the curiously contradictory nature of the principal role
in the play, one of the most interesting psychological studies in
modern literature. His music deals with the more superficial aspects
of the story and is pictorial rather than intellectual or profoundly
emotional. The principal selections for the piano-player from the
"Peer Gynt" music, are contained on two rolls with two selections to
each roll. One of them gives the music of "Anitra's Dance" and "In the
Hall of the Mountain King"; the other the scenes "Daybreak" and "Death
of Aase." Were these selections to be arranged in the order in which
they occur in the drama it would be necessary to begin with the "The
Hall of the Mountain King" and follow this, in the order mentioned,
with "Aase's Death," "Anitra's Dance" and "Daybreak." On the rolls,
however, the pieces are not arranged in the order of their occurrence
in the play, but in the sequence which is most effective from a
musical standpoint--just as in this book I have purposely refrained
from following any set, historical sequence, but have adopted a purely
musical method of guiding the pianolist from music of the lighter kind
to that of a more serious character.

"Anitra's Dance" is an episode of the drama laid in Morocco which Peer
has reached in the course of his wanderings. Anitra is a lithe-limbed
daughter of the East who entrances Peer with her dancing, and, when he
promises to endow her with a soul, promptly informs him that she would
rather have the opal from his turban; gradually coaxes all his jewels
from him; then swiftly throws herself upon his horse and gallops away,
showing herself a true exemplar of the "eternal feminine," so called,
I presume, because it eternally is getting the better of the eternal
masculine. Be that as it may, "Anitra's Dance" is the very essence of
witchery and grace. In the scene "In the Hall of the Mountain King"
the trolls gather for the marriage of Peer to the Troll King's
daughter. When Peer, at the last moment, refuses to go through the
ceremony, the trolls dash at him. One bites himself fast to his ear.
Others strike him. He falls. They throw themselves upon him in a heap.
At this critical moment, when he is writhing beneath them in torture,
the sound of distant church bells is heard, the trolls take to flight,
the palace of the Mountain King collapses and Peer is standing alone
on a mountain. The scene may be construed as one of his supernatural
experiences, as a nightmare, or as the allegory of a stricken
conscience. "Daybreak" which opens the second roll is in Egypt, Peer
standing before the statue of Memnon in the first hush of dawn and
waiting for the rays of the rising sun to evoke the music which
according to tradition many thousand years old, is drawn from the
statue by the sunrise. In this number Grieg paints the colors of an
Oriental daybreak rather than attempts to convey the thrill of an
ancient sculpture, on the edge of the great desert, thrilling with
song at the first kiss of the rising sun. In the "Death of Aase" Peer
watches his mother's life slowly ebb away and seeks to divert her mind
from death by grotesque tales, even throwing himself astride a chair
and persuading her through subjective suggestion, that he is the
forerider of a beautiful chariot in which she is seated, so that the
poor woman, who all her life long has felt the pinch of penury, dies
with a vision of wealth and glory before her eyes created for her by
the son, worry over whom has hastened her death. In keeping with the
lyric trend of his genius, Grieg has ignored the grotesque and ghastly
humor of the situation, and has contented himself with portraying its
sombre and tragic aspect, his music being in character somewhat like a
funeral march.

The pianolist will find a characteristic Norwegian touch in Grieg's
"Bridal Procession Passing By," Op. 19, No. 2, from his "Sketches from
Norwegian Life." It begins with a curiously droning rhythm, played
softly as though the procession were approaching from a distance. Over
this rhythm is introduced a piquant march figure, hopping and skipping
along as if the musicians were dancing at the head of the marchers. As
the procession approaches and the music becomes louder, one hears in
the bass an accentuation of the characteristic rhythm, like the tap of
a bass drum. When the march has swelled to a forte, it sinks to a
brief piano, as if the winding path had led the procession away again.
Then there is another brief outburst, this time fortissimo, as if the
marchers were quite near; and then a pianissimo, as if they had passed
behind a hill and almost out of hearing. The music grows loud again,
the procession goes by, and there is a delicious effect as the march
dies away in the distance, the rhythmic beats with which it opened
becoming softer and softer, while the little hopping and skipping
march-figure, somewhat curtailed, flutters over it.

Grieg's "Peer Gynt" suite was composed for orchestra, but was arranged
for pianoforte by the composer. Notwithstanding the fact that in its
original form the suite is intended to be played by a large body of
instruments of different tone coloring and that arrangements for
pianoforte of orchestral works usually are so complex that even great
pianists find difficulty in rendering them effectively, the "Peer
Gynt" selections are among the most attractive in the pianolist's
repertory. For, through the instrument on which he plays, he is able
to overcome the most complicated chords and the most difficult and
complex runs, as easily as if they were music of the simplest kind. If
the pianola sometimes is called mechanical, the injustice thus done it
is due to its superhuman capacity of playing with perfect ease things
that are wholly beyond the fingers even of the greatest virtuosos, yet
can be rendered fluently and also expressively by the pianolist who
has genuine feeling for music.

It is this combination of technique and expression that gives to
Liszt's enormously difficult pianoforte transcription of Saint-Saens'
symphonic poem, "Danse Maccabre," which even for orchestra is an
extremely difficult piece, its place in the pianolist's repertory.
This is one of the most interesting of modern compositions, and most
graphically descriptive of its subject, which is the "Dance of Death,"
"maccabre" being derived from the Arabic "makabir," which signifies a
place of burial. Both in the literature and in the painting of the
Middle Ages in Europe and particularly in church decoration, figures
the legend that once a year on Hallowe'en the dead arose from their
graves for a wild and hideous dance, with King Death himself as master
of ceremonies. Saint-Saens' symphonic poem realistically describes
these scenes, and, as if to attribute the inspiration for his music to
its precise origin, the composer has placed above his score a poem by
Henri Cazalis. Mr. Edward Baxter Perry has made a free transcription
of this poem, which, at the same time, serves capitally as a
description of the music:

    On a sounding stone,
    With a blanched thigh-bone,
    The bone of a saint, I fear,
    Death strikes the hour
    Of his wizard power,
    And the specters haste to appear.

    From their tombs they rise
    In sepulchral guise,
    Obeying the summons dread,
    And gathering round
    With obeisance profound,
    They salute the King of the Dead.

    Then he stands in the middle
    And tunes up his fiddle,
    And plays them a gruesome strain.
    And each gibbering wight
    In the moon's pale light
    Must dance to that wild refrain.

    Now the fiddle tells,
    As the music swells,
    Of the charnal's ghastly pleasures;
    And they clatter their bones
    As with hideous groans
    They reel to those maddening measures.

    The churchyard quakes
    And the old abbey shakes
    To the tread of that midnight host,
    And the sod turns black
    On each circling track,
    Where a skeleton whirls with a ghost.

    The night wind moans
    In shuddering tones
    Through the gloom of the cypress tree,
    While the mad rout raves
    Over yawning graves
    And the fiddle bow leaps with glee.

    So the swift hours fly
    Till the reddening sky
    Gives warning of daylight near.
    Then the first cock crow
    Sends them huddling below
    To sleep for another year.

The composition opens weirdly with the hollow strokes of the hour.
There is a light, staccato passage suggesting the spectres tiptoeing
from their graves to take their places in the fantastic circle. Then
comes one of the most strikingly realistic passages in the
composition--Death attempting to tune up his fiddle, an effect that is
repeated at intervals throughout the composition. After reading the
poem, the pianolist will not require a detailed description of the
work. He will recognize the details even to the moaning of the night
wind and the crowing of the cock, the scurry of the spectres and their
final wail, as the grave closes upon them for another year.




V. AN "OPEN SESAME" TO CHOPIN


The goal of all pianists is Chopin. As the list of one hundred
favorite compositions for the pianola includes no less than twenty-six
works by this composer, he would seem to be the goal of the pianolist
as well.

Chopin now is recognized universally as one of the great composers.
But during his lifetime he was much criticised, called morbid and
effeminate and a composer of small ideas because he wrote almost
entirely in the smaller forms. As if size had anything to do with the
beauty of a work. In every art the best work of each great man should
be ranked with the best of all other great men. Some geniuses express
themselves on a larger, but not necessarily on a greater scale, than
others. In poetry, for example, Poe's "Raven" is not to be ranked
below Milton's "Paradise Lost" because shorter; nor in music need a
Chopin ballad be placed below a Beethoven symphony because not so
extended as the latter. Every genius, however, must expect to be
condemned until Time silences criticism of his work. For ever since
men began to create rare and beautiful things, there have been other
men who, having failed therein, have found a bitter consolation in
sitting in crabbed and ill-tempered judgment upon their successful
betters.

Another point raised against Chopin was, that practically he confined
himself to composing for pianoforte. A sufficient answer to this is,
that his music made the pianoforte what it is. For he was the first
composer who appreciated the genius of the instrument, discovered its
latent tone colors and developed its resources to their full capacity
for artistic beauty and expression. Chopin was the first to make the
pianoforte both shimmer and sing. Rubinstein said that the art of
music could go no further than Chopin and called him the pianoforte
bard, rhapsodist, mind and soul. "How he wrote for it I do not know,
but only an entire passing over of one into the other could call such
music into life." George Sand (Mme. Dudevant) the famous French
authoress with whom Chopin had a love affair that was one of the
tragedies of his life, said that "he made the instrument speak the
language of the infinite. He did not need the great material methods
of the orchestra to find expression for his genius. Neither saxophone
nor ophicleide was necessary for him to fill the soul with awe.
Without church organ or human voice he inspired faith and enthusiasm."

Although Chopin figures on almost every pianoforte recital program the
average amateur has comparatively slight knowledge of the range of
his genius. Only the player able to go over his works in person can
acquire such knowledge, and the number of amateurs possessed of
sufficient technique to play Chopin's music is very small. "But
to-day," writes Mr. Ashton Johnson in his "Hand-Book to Chopin's
Works," "owing to the invention of the pianola and the fact that all
Chopin's works, including even the least important of the posthumous
compositions, are now available for that instrument, the whole domain
of his music is, for the first time, open to all. Those who wish may
pass the portal hitherto guarded by the dragon of technique and roam
at will in his entrancing music land."

Chopin was a native of Poland. He was born near Warsaw in 1810. When
the Poles lost their country it was as if their grief and the
melancholy of their exile found expression through Chopin's music. He
became the musical poet of an exiled race. The most significant years
of his life he spent in Paris surrounded by the aristocracy of his own
country, who yet had no country, and by the aristocrats of art. Liszt,
Heine, Meyerbeer, Bellini and other famous men, as well as famous
women, were his personal friends.

The affair with George Sand left on his music the imprint of sorrow,
poignant grief, and a pathos reaching down into the depths of tragedy.
Different in character was his idealization of the beautiful Countess
Delphine Potocka. The episode is fully set forth in my "Loves of the
Great Composers." One of Chopin's favorite musical amusements, when a
guest in the house of intimate friends, was to play on the pianoforte
"musical portraits" of the company. One evening in the salon of
Delphine's mother, he played the portraits of the two daughters of
the house. When it came to Delphine he gently drew her light shawl
from her shoulders, and then played through it, his fingers, with
every tone they produced, coming in touch with the gossamer like
fabric, still warmed and hallowed for him from its contact with her.
It was Delphine who soothed his last hours by singing for him as he
lay upon his death bed.

She was one of the very few people to whom he dedicated more than one
of his works. Both his second concerto (in F minor, Op. 21) and his
most familiar waltz, the Op. 64, No. 1, bear her name. Chopin as a
pianist, showed decided preference for the slow movement of the
concerto, a movement which is of almost ideal perfection, "now radiant
with light and anon full of tender pathos," to quote from Liszt. It is
indeed, an exquisite idyll, beautifully melodious and replete with
delicate ornamentation. Because of its beauty and its association
with Delphine, I would suggest that the pianolist begin with this
larghetto. There is another reason for the suggestion. In its
ornamentation it illustrates to perfection that characteristic of
Chopin's music known as the "tempo rubato." Much of Chopin's music has
in addition to inspired melody, an iridescence as if produced by
cascades of jewels. These are ornamental notes which yet are not
ornamental in the limited meaning of the word; for in spite of all
their light and shade and their play of changeable colors, they form
part of the great undercurrent of melody. There are various technical
definitions of tempo rubato, but Liszt described it poetically and yet
exactly when he said, "You see that tree? Its leaves move to and fro
in the wind and follow the gentlest motion of the air; but its trunk
stands there immovable in its form." Or the effect might be compared
with the myriad shafts from the facets of a jewel, vibrating
brilliance in all directions, while the jewel itself remains
immovable, the center of its own rays. These effects readily are
discoverable in the larghetto of the Potocka concerto.

The pianolist should then take up the valses of Chopin beginning with
Op. 64, No. 1, like the concerto, dedicated to Delphine. This is the
most familiar of all the Chopin waltzes, so familiar that it
frequently is referred to in a derogatory way as hackneyed. Yet, when
properly played, it is one of the most effective of his compositions
in this genre. Of the Chopin waltzes in general, it should first be
said that they are not dance-tunes but expressions, alternately
brilliant, charming and sad, of the intimacy of the ballroom, and that
they possess an innate grace which no other composer has been able to
impart to the form. They have been characterized as salon music of
the noblest kind and were well described by Schumann when he said that
if they were played for dances, half the ladies present should be
countesses--which exactly hits off the distinguished quality of these
valses. To play them is like looking at a dance through a fairy lens;
they seem like improvizations of a musician during a dance and to
reflect the thoughts and feelings that arise as he looks on, playing
the waltz rhythm with the left hand, while the melody and the
ornamental note groups indicate his fancy--love, a jealous plaint,
joy, ecstasy and the tender whisperings of enamored couples as they
glide past.

"Gliding" is the word that has been applied to the smooth brilliance
of the Potocka valse. There runs a story regarding this composition
that George Sand had a little dog that used to chase its own tail
around in a circle, and that one evening, she said to Chopin, "If I
had your talent, I would improvise a valse for that dog," whereupon
the composer promptly seated himself at the pianoforte and dashed off
this fascinating little improvisation. It is Parisian in its grace and
coquetry and ends with a rapid run, the last note of which is like the
rhythmic tap of the foot with which a dainty ballet dancer might
conclude a lightly executed _pas_.

In striking contrast to this is the "Valse," Op. 34, No. 2. This is in
a minor key and instead of representing the abandon of the dance, it
seems rather to depict a melancholy lover allowing his eyes to travel
slowly around the ballroom in a futile search of his heart's desire.
The prevailing tone of the composition rather is that of an elegy--the
burial of fond hopes. Stephen Heller, pianist and composer, tells of
meeting Chopin in the store of a Paris music publisher. Heller had
come in to order all the valses. Thereupon Chopin asked him which he
liked best, and when Heller mentioned this sad one in slow time,
Chopin exclaimed, "I am glad you like that one, for it also is my
favorite," and he invited Heller to have luncheon with him.

Perhaps the most brilliant and extended of the valses is Op. 42. In
this Chopin imposes upon the triple waltz time, a melody that is in
double time--that is, while you count "one, two, three" for the
accompaniment, "one, two" will suffice for the melody above it. The
effect of this device has been described as indicative in this waltz
of the loving, nestling and tender embracing of the dancing couples.
It is followed in the music by sweeping motions free and graceful like
those of birds. The prolonged trill with which the piece begins, seems
to summon the dancers to the ballroom, while the waltz itself, is an
intermingling of coquetry, hesitation and avowal, with a closing
passage that is like an echo of the evening's events.

These three waltzes, if played in the order in which I have mentioned
them, make a capital valse suite, and another could be made by taking
in the following order, the dashing "Posthumous Waltz" in E minor, the
C minor, Op. 64, No. 2, with its veiled, sad beauty; and the brilliant
Op. 34, No. 1.

In his "Nocturnes" those sombre poems of night, Chopin seems weaving
his own shroud. But if, like Robert Louis Stevenson, Chopin loved the
darkness and its melancholy murmuring, and if there was a touch of
morbidness in his nature, yet, like Stevenson, he had in him a strain
of chivalry. Mr. Huneker, therefore, in his book on Chopin, is quite
right when he says of the nocturnes that if they were played with
more vigor, a quickening of the time pulse and a less languishing
touch, they would be rescued from a surplus of lush sentiment.

Undoubtedly, the most popular of the nocturnes is the one in E flat,
Op. 9, No. 2. In fact it is so popular that when any one is asked to
play "Chopin's Nocturne," this one is meant. Because it is popular, it
is sneered at by some critics, but it possesses a lyric beauty quite
its own and "sometimes surprises even the weary teacher with a waft of
unexpected freshness, like the fleeting odor from an old and much used
school book in which violets have been pressed." A sustained love
song, it ends with a cadence that should be played with a rippling
delicacy suggestive of moonlight on a lake in the garden of an old
chateau.

There are nocturnes of Chopin's composed on a larger scale than the
Opus 37, No. 2, but to my taste there is none more beautiful. It
bears a striking resemblance to a passage in George Sand's diary
describing a voyage with Chopin to the island of Majorca. "The night
was warm and dark, illumined only by an extraordinary phosphorescence
in the wake of the ship; everybody was asleep on board except the
steersman, who, in order to keep himself awake, sang all night, but in
a voice so soft and so subdued that one might have thought he feared
to arouse the men of the watch. We did not weary of listening to him,
for his singing was of the strangest kind. He observed a rhythm and
modulation totally different from those we are accustomed to, and
seemed to allow his voice to go at random, like the smoke of the
vessel carried away and swayed by the breeze. It was a reverie rather
than a song, a kind of careless floating of the voice, with which the
mind had little to do, but which kept time with the swaying of the
ship and the faint lapping of the dark water, and resembled a vague
improvization restrained, nevertheless, by sweet and monotonous
forms."

How suggestive this is of the nocturne! The undulating accompaniment,
the scintillation of the treble, suggests the gliding, gently rocking
motion of the vessel and the phosphorescence in its wake; while the
second theme of the nocturne would, even without any suggestion from
the passage in George Sand's diary, be taken for a barcarolle, a
reverie sung at night, now rising, now dying away, but with the pulse
of a musical poet throbbing through every note--the most beautiful
melody, I think, Chopin ever wrote.

And speaking of this melody as an improvization, reminds me of those
other improvizations by Chopin, the "Impromptus," in which he has
displayed his genius as convincingly as in any of his other works.
They are fresh and untrammeled in their development, and as full of
sunlight as the nocturnes are of darkness. The one in A flat major was
dedicated to the Countess de Loban as a wedding present, and was a
farewell to her as a pupil. Brilliant, joyous and iridescent in its
opening and closing sections, that in the middle voices vague and
tender regret. The composition sometimes is spoken of as the "Trilby"
impromptu. It is the one Du Maurier made Trilby sing under the
hypnotic influence of Svengali.

Had Chopin's directions for the destruction of certain of his
manuscripts after his death been carried out, the world would be the
poorer by the loss of his "Fantaisie Impromptu," published as Op. 66.
It is difficult to understand why he should have wanted this work
destroyed, since it produces a sinuous, interwoven, flowing effect,
interrupted by a middle melody of much sentiment and beauty. It has
been very well described by Mr. Perry in a brief poem entitled "The
Fantaisie Impromptu":

    The sigh of June through the swaying trees,
    The scent of the rose, new blown, on the breeze,
    The sound of waves on a distant strand,
    The shadows falling on sea and land;
      All these are found
      In this stream of sound,
    This murmuring, mystical, minor strain.

    And stars that glimmer in misty skies,
    Like tears that shimmer in sorrowing eyes,
    And the throb of a heart that beats in tune
    With tender regrets of a happier June,
      When life was new
      And love was true,
    And the soul was a stranger to sorrow and pain.

A reading of this poem conveys to the player the correct mood in which
to interpret the impromptu.

By way of contrast I follow these careless raptures--careless only in
their effect of spontaneity--with the famous "Marche Funebre," the
funeral march which forms the third movement of Chopin's sonata in B
flat minor, Op. 35. This has been called the best funeral march ever
written for the pianoforte. At Chopin's own funeral it was played
scored for orchestra. In my opinion it is not only "the best funeral
march ever written for the pianoforte," but the most intrinsically
beautiful and sad funeral march ever composed. Its opening suggests
the solemn tolling of great bells, the heavy march rhythm gives the
effect of the slow procession of mourners; and the dirgelike music,
soft and muffled at first, grows in power like the measured,
inflexible rhythm of fate. Then it seems as if the mourners had
arrived at the open grave, for the music voices a weeping melody, pure
and tender and sweet; then the march rhythm makes itself heard again
and the procession leaves the grave, the music dying away in the
distance. This is the funeral march of a nation, of Chopin's own
beloved Poland.

Chopin wrote two sets of twelve "Etudes." They gave an entirely new
significance to the term. For the Chopin etudes not only are supreme
as studies. They are supreme as music as well. Before they were
published the usual musical study was something very dry and set. How
different these superb compositions are from studies such as are
comprised in Czerny's "School of Velocity," which make you feel like
employing the "velocity" you have acquired to run away as quickly as
possible from the "school," whereas the Chopin etudes are so full of
melody and of the rarest and the most beautiful musical effects, that
to play any one of them suffices to whet the appetite for the others.
The pianolist might well go through the entire two sets of twelve. It
would open up a new musical world to him. Here I can only point out
three. Opus 10, No. 5, is the "Black Key" etude, so called because all
the notes of the right hand are on black keys. This is a brilliant
study with a very charming ending. Opus 25, No. 9, is the so called
"Butterfly Wings" etude, a designation which expresses its general
characteristic of lightness and grace, but fails to make allowance for
the accent of passion in the rising and descending passage that occurs
about the middle and which should be brought out when it is correctly
interpreted--which usually it is not. The greatest of all the etudes
is the "Revolutionary," Op. 10, No. 12. It was written by Chopin in
1831, when he heard the news that Warsaw had been taken by the
Russians, and it expresses the tornado of emotion that swept over him
when he realized that Poland was about to sink beneath the triple
onslaught of Russia, Austria and Germany. This composition which, mind
you, goes by the simple name of "study," is one of the most tremendous
outbursts of wrath in music--a storm of the soul without even such
lyric episodes as those which form islands of calm in the torrential
last movement of Beethoven's "Moonlight Sonata." Well may Mr. Huneker
say that the end "rings out like the crack of creation. It is
elemental."

This etude, certain of the "Polonaises," the "Scherzos," the
"Ballades" and the "Fantaisie" in F minor, reveal a fire, passion and
virile power that will surprise those who have formed their estimate
of Chopin from the mournful nocturnes and brilliant waltzes. The
so-called "Military Polonaise," Op. 40, No. 1, is so replete with the
spirit of war that in the middle portion it is easy to hear the roll
of drums and the clash of battle. It was of this polonaise Chopin
said, "If I had the strength to play it as it should be played I would
break all the strings of the pianoforte."

The most effective of the polonaises, his opus 53, also breathes forth
martial ardor and defiance. It begins with a stirring call to arms,
followed by the swinging measure of the polonaise proper with a melody
that suggests soldiery on prancing steeds and with flashing sabres,
defiling in review before battle. This is followed by a "trio" in
which a rapid octave figure in the bass, beginning softly and growing
louder and louder until it reaches a crashing climax, with strains
like a bugle call ringing out above it, depicts a cavalry charge
coming from the distance, drawing nearer and nearer and sweeping past
with a mighty roar. There is a story that while Chopin was composing
this polonaise, he was so affected when playing over the nearly
completed work, that, seized by a peculiar hallucination, he saw the
walls of the room open and, approaching from the outer night, a band
of medieval Polish knights mounted and in armor, as if they had risen
from their ancient graves and ridden on the clouds to appear in
response to the summons of his music. The somewhat vague passage which
follows the climax of the cavalry charge and leads back to the main
subject possibly may be accounted for by this strange experience.

Unfortunately there is no opportunity here to take up the "Scherzos,"
so unlike the coquettish, bantering pieces of the same name by other
composers, Chopin seemingly representing tragedy mocking itself, as
any one playing the B flat minor "Scherzo," Op. 31, may hear for
himself; the "Ballades," so eloquently narrative of love and
adventure, the A flat major and the G minor being especially popular
in the pianolist's repertory; and the "Fantaisie," in F minor, one of
the greatest compositions for pianoforte. As for the "Mazurkas" and
"Preludes," pieces that are among their composer's happiest creations,
I can do no more than call the pianolist's attention to their
existence and advise him not to neglect them.




VI. NOTES ON SOME OTHER MASTERS


Besides those composers, one or more of whose works I have described
in some detail, there are others who at least should be touched on,
always bearing in mind, however, that one of the aims of this book is
to stimulate the pianolist to explore for himself. Bach, Haendel, Haydn
and Mozart can be studied most profitably in connection with the
courses that are referred to in the chapter on Educational Factors
which follows. There too will be found reference to the thorough
courses on Wagner, one a general course on that composer, the other a
special course on his "Ring of the Nibelung."

A line of composers that may well interest the pianolist has come to
the front in Russia. Rubinstein, whose "Melody" in F and "Kammenoi,
Ostrow," No. 17, are among the popular selections in the pianolist's
repertory was a Russian, who, however, from a musical standpoint,
expressed himself in German. To a certain extent the same is true of
Tschaikowsky. His music is "universal" rather than national. It has,
nevertheless, the Russian tang to a greater degree than Rubinstein's,
and Tschaikowsky is classed correctly as the head of the Russian
school and one of the greatest of modern composers. His "Pathetic
Symphony," which has been metrostyled by Edouard Colonne, a
distinguished French orchestral conductor, is a noble work. Among
smaller pieces which the pianolist readily will appreciate, are the
"Song without Words," Op. 2, No. 2; an attractive "Valse a cinq
Temps," with its oddly extended rhythm; the very characteristic
"November, in the Troika," Op. 37, No. 11; an expressive "Barcarolle"
and the selections from his "Casse Noisette" (Nutcracker) ballet
suite.

Next to Tschaikowsky's "Song without Words" the most widely known
short piece for pianoforte by a Russian composer is Rachmaninoff's
"Prelude," Op. 3, No. 2, a broad and sonorous work with a splendid
climax. A little "Waltz," Op. 10, No. 2, is captivating; and a
"Serenade," Op. 3, No. 5, has an originality and charm quite its own.
A very beautiful "Moment Musical," Op. 16, No. 5, does not seem to
have been included as yet in the catalogue of music rolls, an honor to
which it clearly is entitled. Arensky, Balakirew, Cesar Cui,
Glazounow, Karganoff, Liapounow, Rimsky-Korsakow, Sapellnikoff and
Taneiew are other interesting figures of the "New-Russian" school of
which so much is heard at present.

Dvorak who was a Bohemian wrote much music distinctly and
fascinatingly characteristic of his native land. He was, however,
broad enough in his tastes to recognize, during his sojourn of three
years in America, the beauty of the Negro plantation melodies and to
compose upon several of these as themes, his symphony "From the New
World," sometimes called more briefly the "American Symphony." This
symphony, two works of chamber music, also composed during his
residence in America, and his compositions in his native Bohemian
musical idiom usually are ranked higher than his more cosmopolitan
efforts. His "Humoreske," Op. 101, No. 5, the "Slavic Dances" and "On
the Holy Mount" are among his compositions unmistakably Bohemian in
origin.

While Saint-Saens, having worked more successfully in the larger
orchestral forms, is ranked first among contemporary French composers,
and Chaminade leads as a composer of clever salon music, the
pianolist can add some attractive pieces to his repertory from the
compositions of Delibes and Godard. Delibes is the composer of the
opera "Lakme," and the Airs de Ballet from this, as well as the
selections from his "Coppelia" and "Sylvia" ballets, will be found
spontaneous and original. In fact in all instances in which music
composed in dance forms has survived, this will be found due to a
decided strain of individuality and resulting originality in the
composer. The Valse Lente from the "Coppelia" ballet is among the
hundred most popular pieces in the pianolist's repertory; and well up
in the same list is Godard's graceful "Second Mazurka," Op. 54.

Among the most distinguished modern composers is the American, Edward
Alexander MacDowell. He is living, but his work is over; for,
unfortunately, his mind has given way. His "Scotch Poem" with its
graphic musical representation of the sea beating against a rockbound
coast and its lyric episode consisting of a trist Scotch ballad, is
highly dramatic, while his "Sea Pieces" are among the most poetic of
contemporary compositions for pianoforte. His "Witches' Dance" is
highly descriptive, and in whatever direction the pianolist may
familiarize himself with the music of MacDowell, he will be found a
highly original, eloquent and expressive composer, whose fame, already
established, is bound to grow with the lapse of time.

This chapter may fittingly be concluded with a brief reference to two
great German composers, Schumann and Brahms. Although "popular" is not
a word ordinarily associated with Schumann, two of his shorter pieces,
"Traeumerei" (Revery) and "Warum" (Why) are great favorites. Schumann
did much for the development of music that has a distinct meaning and
his works frequently bear titles that are suggestive of some mood or
scene, like "At Evening," "Soaring" (Aufschwung, sometimes translated
as Excelsior), "Carnaval," a series of twenty-one pieces descriptive
of carnival scenes; and the "Novelettes."

Brahms is far more of a melodist than his critics give him credit for,
but his clearness of expression is interfered with by the relentless
scientific accuracy with which he works out his ideas, to which method
he is apt to sacrifice only too often the innate beauty of his
thoughts. He seems, however, to be slowly gaining ground, but more
through his songs than through his instrumental works excepting those
of chamber music. Yet any one who will seriously study Brahms and
begin with the shorter pianoforte pieces, Op. 76 and Op. 116-119, will
find mines of purest musical gold, where, perhaps, he least expected
to discover them. Entirely different in style from Brahms' other works
are his "Hungarian Dances," in which he has taken dance themes of the
Hungarian Gypsies and skillfully worked them up into pieces that are
melodiously and rhythmically fascinating and unreservedly popular.
They are much played by pianolists.

Let me point out again, here, that, however unsystematic the
arrangement of this book may seem to the musical pedant, I have
followed a certain sequence--one of my own devising and which seemed
to me best adapted to give the pianolist a bowing acquaintance with
some of the great composers that would lead him to wish for a closer
intimacy with these and others. What I have kept in mind, and very
clearly, is the fact that I am dealing with a player for whom all
technical difficulties have been eliminated by the very instrument on
which he plays. The complete control it gives him of all technical
resources is what makes the old method of analyzing pieces according
to their historical sequence not only unnecessary but futile in a book
of this kind. Nevertheless, so perfectly does this instrument adapt
itself to all music, that any one who desires to trace up the
technical evolution of the art from Bach to the present day, will find
it the readiest means for accomplishing his purpose, especially if he
uses in conjunction with it the educational courses referred to in the
next chapter.




VII. EDUCATIONAL FACTORS.


It is not overstating the case to say that the pianola is the first
practical means ever devised in history through which people in
general, whether they have had previous instruction in music or not,
can become familiar with the world's best musical compositions. Not
only can they familiarize themselves with the past, they are able to
keep up with the present. For example, many of Richard Strauss's
works, including selections from "Salome," are to be found on the
rolls prepared for this modern instrument. In fact every new composer
whose work has any significance is represented in the catalogue of
music rolls. Supposing a pianolist is planning to attend an opera or a
concert. It would have to be a very peculiar opera or a very peculiar
concert program which he could not obtain and try over beforehand.
Needless to say that, by trying it over beforehand, his appreciation
of the performance would be increased a thousandfold.

Singers who cannot accompany themselves on the pianoforte, will find
this new instrument a boon. For there is a special list of
accompaniments in which the principal works in the vocalist's
repertory are represented. Lovers of chamber music in which the
pianoforte figures, will find pieces like sonatas for pianoforte and
violin or violoncello, trios for pianoforte, violin and violoncello,
pianoforte quartets, quintets and similar works, arranged so that the
pianolist can play the pianoforte part. "This is the first time I ever
have heard every note of the pianoforte part of the Schumann quintet,"
said the first violinist of a well known string quartet to Mr. E.R.
Hunter, a professional pianolist, after a performance of this famous
work with Mr. Hunter at the pianola.

The importance of the educational value of this new instrument is
recognized by many of the leading educators in music. Harvard, Yale,
Columbia, the University of California, the University of Michigan,
Vassar and many other institutions of learning use the instrument in
connection with their musical courses. At Harvard, in connection with
the lectures on music, the students are not only allowed but
encouraged to go in groups of six or eight to the hall in which the
instruments are installed, and play for themselves the symphonies of
Beethoven, the music dramas of Wagner and other music that has formed
the subjects of the lectures. "As a self-educator," writes Henry T.
Finck, "this instrument is worth more than all other instruments
combined, for the reason that any one can, without practice, play on
it any piece ever written."

Under the editorship of Carroll Brent Chilton, assisted by a staff of
musicians and writers on music, among them Paul Morgan and Edward
Ziegler, thorough educational courses for pianolists have been
devised. The courses collectively are known as "The New Musical
Education," and are conducted in connection with the Music-Lovers
Library of music rolls. These courses are admirably arranged. There is
a "Popular Course on the Great Composers" with a supplementary one on
the "Modern Great Composers." The former is divided into five lessons:
Bach and Haendel; Haydn and Mozart; Beethoven and Schubert; Schumann
and Mendelssohn; and Chopin and Wagner. The course on the modern great
composers also is divided into five lessons: Liszt and Wagner; Chopin
and Brahms; Tschaikowsky, Dvorak and Paderewski; Saint-Saens,
Moskowszki and Chaminade; and Grieg and MacDowell, the last named the
most distinguished among American composers.

Care has been taken in arranging these two courses not to aim above
the head of the musical novice. For example, in dealing with Bach and
Haendel, two of their lighter pieces are taken up and analyzed.
Biographical data are given and, in addition to the pieces that are
analyzed, supplementary rolls of seven compositions by Bach and five
compositions by Haendel are given, together with lists of reference
books. The other lessons in these two courses are planned in the same
popular style. They give the pianolist a bird's-eye-view of music and
its development from Bach to Wagner.

The "New Musical Education" also takes up the great composers
separately and gives most thorough-going courses on them. The
Beethoven course, for example, is arranged in twelve lessons. The
course furnishes the student with the Beethoven biography by Crowest;
with twelve "lesson pamphlets," each pamphlet relating to a division
of the course and written by Thomas Whitney Surette; with twelve
scores, orchestral and pianoforte; and sixty-two "educational" music
rolls. The scores correspond with the twelve works discussed in the
twelve lessons, each lesson being devoted to the analysis of one
composition. The rolls include not only those which give the works
complete, but also special rolls with music quotations illustrating
the points made in the lesson pamphlets. The various musical forms
employed by Beethoven are explained and analyzed, and in the complete
rolls the different sections characteristic of each form are clearly
indicated in print, so that the student, having read the analysis, can
follow it intelligently on the roll. There are many other practical
details of this kind in all the courses and which go to enhance their
value to the pianolist-student.

There are two splendid Wagner courses to which I direct special
attention because of the frequent performances of his works in opera
and concert, and because a comprehensive knowledge of the development
of his theories adds so greatly to the enjoyment of his music. The
first course begins with his early opera "Rienzi" and ends with
"Parsifal." All his works for the stage are embraced in this course
which consists of ten lessons, each lesson having, in addition to the
ordinary rolls, a "quotation roll," illustrating the points in the
lesson pamphlets, and in the case of the music-dramas, giving the
"leading motives," so that the student can familiarize himself with
these, and with their significance in the drama, and readily recognize
them when he hears them, while playing the complete rolls or at a
performance.

The second Wagner course relates to the "Ring of the Nibelung." It
takes up consecutively the four great divisions of the work,
"Rhinegold," "The Valkyr," "Siegfried" and "Dusk of the Gods,"
devoting a lesson to each. Each lesson contains a quotation roll of
leading motives and the following examples from the scores:--Lesson
I., "Rhinegold." Prelude and scene of the Rhine-Maidens, Loge's
Narrative, and the finale of the work. Lesson II., "The Valkyr."
Siegmund's Love Song, Ride of the Valkyries, and the Magic Fire Spell.
Lesson III., "Siegfried." Forge Song, Siegfried and the Forest Bird,
Siegfried and Bruennhilde. Lesson IV., "Dusk of the Gods." Siegfried's
Rhine Journey, Song of the Rhine-Maidens, Siegfried's Funeral March. I
know from the experience of one of my pianolist friends, how admirable
this course is. He took it before hearing the "Ring" for the first
time, with the result that he knew the music and the names of all the
leading motives, recognized them whenever they occurred in the score,
and in consequence, enjoyed the performance as much as if he had
become familiar with it through repeated hearings. I may add that the
catalogue of music rolls contains a complete collection of Wagner's
works, making the music of this composer accessible to the pianolist
whether he wishes to play it for study or enjoyment.

The pianolist holds in his hand the future of the development of music
in this country. The instrument on which he plays is the only
practical means as yet devised of making the great masterpieces of
music penetrate to the minds and hearts of the masses. Art has to
advance on its own shoulders. "I cannot rest contentedly on the past,
I cannot take a step forward without its aid." The pianolist has both
the past and present of music at his command.




VIII. A FEW "DON'TS" FOR PIANOLISTS.


By way of postscript I give here a few hints to pianolists. General
directions on how to play the pianola are provided in pamphlets and
circulars which can be obtained without charge, and I do not propose
to traverse these. The instrument is capable of great brilliancy and
great power, greater than lie in the ten fingers of any pianist. This
very fact is what has caused the instrument to be called "mechanical."
But in reality it is the fault of the player, because, carried away by
the capacity of the instrument, he is apt in the beginning to play too
loudly and too brilliantly. One of the first don'ts for the pianolist
is that he refrain from putting the instrument to the full test of
its--not really mechanical but superhuman--capacity for brilliancy and
power.

Indeed, not only the beginner, but all pianolists should bear in mind
that the chief distinction of the instrument lies in its exceeding
delicacy. No virtuoso can play as delicately and lightly and, at the
same time, as distinctly as can the pianolist those rapid pianissimo
runs and those exquisite traceries and ornamentations which are found
in modern music; all of which does not mean that the pianolist never
should play loudly and brilliantly, but that he should not allow
himself to be carried away by the possibilities of the instrument in
these directions.

Certain refinements of interpretation which the pianist long has made
his own also should be observed. Don't start a trill and keep it up
with an evenly sustained strength of tone and rapidity from beginning
to end. Begin it a shade slower and a shade more softly than the tempo
and dynamic signs indicate, let it swell and grow louder, then taper
down, and slightly retard the turn which leads back to the melodic
phrase. This is not a hard-and-fast rule, but one which usually it is
safe to follow. The pianolist can execute his trills with a
combination of delicacy and clearness that is absolutely unique.

Don't rip off runs as if you were tearing cloth. Come down with
decision on the first note, begin somewhat slower than the indicated
tempo and then increase the time to the proper acceleration. This is
the true virtuoso effect, adopted, no doubt, because on the pianoforte
it is easier to execute a run in this manner; and so, however
erroneously, it has come to be considered the genuine musical
way--showing that even in art we are creatures of habit.

Don't use the sustaining pedal too frequently, not even as frequently
as indicated on the rolls. The pedal directions on the rolls follow
those of the printed sheets too closely. The pianist often is obliged
to use the sustaining pedal to hold a note that he cannot keep down
because his fingers are otherwise employed. But the music rolls are
cut so that every sustained note is held down as long as the composer
directs that it should be. Remember too that the term "loud pedal" as
applied to the sustaining pedal, as it properly is called, is
incorrect. This pedal sustains but does not increase the power of the
sound that is produced. That effect is secured by a stronger pressure
of the feet upon the pumping pedals. In fact by varying the degree of
pressure of the feet on the pumping pedals the pianolist can vary the
degree of sound from a whispered pianissimo to the strongest
fortissimo.

The pianolist should remember that, as the instrument on which he
plays relieves him of all burdens of technique and enables him to
play anything, no matter how difficult, with absolute technical
accuracy, it is all the more his duty to play with as much expression
as he can call forth from his inner nature. Emotion, the power of
expression, the art of interpretation, can be developed by practice as
well as any other latent capacity. It is an excellent plan for the
beginner to take one piece, the Nevin waltz that I have described, for
example, and play it over many times, not necessarily at the same
sitting, in fact better not; but without attempting anything else.
Each time let the pianolist try to get more meaning, more expression
out of it than he did before. He will find, if he does this, that,
when he takes up another composition, the expression, the art of
interpretation, will come to him more naturally and more quickly,
until, from an ignorant beginner, he soon will have developed into a
musical artist who can give himself and hundreds of others the most
exalted pleasure--that of listening to music, not to mere playing.


       *       *       *       *       *

    +-----------------------------------------------------------+
    | Typographical errors corrected in text:                   |
    |                                                           |
    | Page  21: "other more slowly" replaced with               |
    |            "others more slowly"                           |
    | Page  34: atachment replaced with attachment              |
    | Page  46: base replaced with bass                         |
    | Page 112: Saint-Saeens replaced with Saint-Saens           |
    | Page 113: Saint-Saeens replaced with Saint-Saens           |
    | Page 144: Saint-Saeens replaced with Saint-Saens           |
    | Page 149: unnecesary replaced with unnecessary            |
    | Page 153: Saint-Saeens replaced with Saint-Saens           |
    |                                                           |
    +-----------------------------------------------------------+

       *       *       *       *       *





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pianolist, by Gustav Kobbé

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PIANOLIST ***

***** This file should be named 24622.txt or 24622.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/2/24622/

Produced by Jeannie Howse, Bryan Ness and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
