The Project Gutenberg EBook of A harum-scarum schoolgirl, by Angela Brazil

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: A harum-scarum schoolgirl

Author: Angela Brazil

Illustrator: John Campbell

Release Date: February 19, 2008 [EBook #24645]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HARUM-SCARUM SCHOOLGIRL ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Casey Peel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









A HARUM-SCARUM SCHOOLGIRL

[Illustration: "COULD YOU DO ME A KINDNESS, MISS?" SHE ASKED _Page 252_]




A HARUM-SCARUM SCHOOLGIRL

BY

ANGELA BRAZIL

_Illustrated by John Campbell_

NEW YORK FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY PUBLISHERS

_Copyright, 1920, by_

FREDERICK A. STOKES COMPANY

_All rights reserved_




Contents

  CHAP.                              Page

      I. A PIXIE GIRL                   9

     II. STARS AND STRIPES             23

    III. A PENNILESS PRINCESS          39

     IV. THE RUSH-BEARING              51

      V. DIANA DARES                   65

     VI. FRENCH LEAVE                  77

    VII. LAND GIRLS                    91

   VIII. ARMISTICE DAY                108

     IX. DIANA'S ENGLISH CHRISTMAS    128

      X. A FIT OF THE BLUES           141

     XI. DIANA TO THE RESCUE          153

    XII. DIANA BREAKS OUT             167

   XIII. CRUSOE ISLAND                178

    XIV. SPOOKS                       195

     XV. JOY-RIDING                   207

    XVI. A FAMILY CREST               219

   XVII. THE GREEN-EYED MONSTER       235

  XVIII. DIANA'S FOUNDLING            247

    XIX. AMBITIONS                    259

     XX. A TANGLED PLOT               271




Illustrations

                                                          Page

  "COULD YOU DO ME A KINDNESS, MISS?" SHE ASKED
                                           _Frontispiece_

  "O-O-O-OH! HOW GORGEOUS TO BELONG TO A HIGH-FALUTING
  FAMILY THAT'S GOT LEGENDS AND GHOSTS!"                    48

  TWO PAIRS OF BARE FEET WENT SPLASHING JOYOUSLY
  INTO THE BROOK                                            72

  WE SET OFF AND RODE ALL THE MORNING                      144

  ITS COWL FELL BACK, AND DISCLOSED A WELL-KNOWN
  AND DECIDEDLY MIRTHFUL COUNTENANCE                       200

  DIANA CALLED AND SHOUTED TO THEM. THEY TOOK
  NO NOTICE                                                240




A HARUM-SCARUM SCHOOLGIRL




CHAPTER I

A Pixie Girl


"If I'd known!" groaned Winifred Cranston, otherwise Wendy, with a note
of utter tragedy in her usually cheerful voice. "If I'd only known!
D'you think I'd have come trotting back here with my baggage? Not a bit
of it! Nothing in this wide world should have dragged me. I'd have
turned up my hair--yes, it's _quite_ long enough to turn up, Jess Paget,
so you needn't look at it so scornfully; it's as nice as yours, and
nicer! Well, I tell you I'd have turned up my hair, and run away and
joined the 'Waacs' or the 'Wrens', or have driven a motor wagon or
conducted a tramcar, or scrubbed floors at a hospital, or done
anything--_anything_, I say!--rather than stay at the Abbey without Mrs.
Gifford."

"It's pretty stiff, certainly, for the Head to go whisking away like
this," agreed Magsie Wingfield, sitting on the other shaft of the
wheelbarrow. "And without any notice either! It leaves one gasping!"

"Stiff? It's the limit! Why didn't she give us decent warning, instead
of springing it on to us in this sudden fashion? I feel weak!"

"There wasn't time," explained Sadie Sanderson, who, with Violet Gorton
and Tattie Clegg, occupied, in a tight fit, the interior of the
wheelbarrow. "It was all done at a day's notice. Geraldine's been
telling me the whole history."

"Well?"

"Mr. Gifford got suddenly exempted, and was made Governor of some
outlandish place with an unpronounceable name in Burma. He telegraphed
to Mrs. Gifford to join him at Marseilles, and go out with him. So she
went--that's the long and the short of it!"

"Went and left her school behind her," echoed Vi.

"I call it simply running away," commented Wendy. "Why couldn't she have
stopped to arrange things--say till Christmas--and then followed him?"

"It's some tiresome red-tape business at the War Office. They'd give her
a passport to travel out _with_ him, but not to join him afterwards, so
she thought she'd better take the opportunity and go out with him while
she could. It must have been a terrific scramble for her to get off. I
believe she just bundled her things together and bolted, and left the
school to Miss Todd."

"Will she ever come back?"

"I shouldn't think it's likely now."

"Then we're left for evermore to the tender mercies of Toddlekins?"

"That's just about the size of it. Toddlekins has taken the whole thing
over."

"She's been longing and yearning to seize the reins and drive the coach
ever since she came," commented Tattie.

"Well, she's got her chance now."

"And she'll use it, too! You bet there'll be changes!"

"Changes! There are changes already, although Mrs. Gifford can hardly
have reached Marseilles yet."

"It's going to be a queer term," grunted Wendy.

The five girls were sitting in a retired corner of the garden at
Pendlemere Abbey. On one side, above the tops of the rhododendron
bushes, they could see the tall, twisted chimneys and flagged stone roof
of the old house; on the other side, below the lawn and across the
paddock, gleamed the silver waters of the lake, with its banks of rushes
and alders, and beyond lay a range of grey hills that seemed to melt
away into more distant peaks that merged into the mists on the horizon.
It was a beautiful view, and on this hazy September afternoon, with the
hidden sun sending long shafts of light from behind radiant masses of
cloud, it formed a prospect that should have afforded keen aesthetic
satisfaction to anybody who cared to look at it. Usually the girls
appreciated its changeful glories, but to-day--this first day of a new
term--they were too much taken up with their own grievances to think
about scenery. In fact, they sat huddled together in the wheelbarrow
with their backs towards the view.

It had certainly been a considerable shock to the girls to find, on
arriving after the holidays, that their popular Principal had deserted
them in so sudden a fashion. It was not indeed the first surprise which
she had given them. Two years before she had been Miss Housman, with a
purely educational outlook in life, and a horizon bounded by her school;
but Cupid, who plays strange pranks even with head mistresses, brought
her fate along in the shape of a major from the temporary camp by the
lake, and shot his arrows with such deadly aim that the whole romantic
business--courtship, engagement, and war wedding--took place in the
course of a few weeks, almost under the very noses of her interested
pupils. They had gone home for their Easter holidays much thrilled about
her engagement ring, and had returned to school to find her a war bride,
with her husband already in the trenches. When the excitement of
choosing her a wedding present was over, matters seemed to settle down
pretty much as before. Except in an increased anxiety for news from the
front, Mrs. Gifford had differed in no degree from Miss Housman. To the
school the Major was a mere abstraction; his leave had always occurred
during the holidays, and up to this time his existence--apart from the
element of romance with which it invested their head mistress--had not
affected the atmosphere of Pendlemere in the least. It had occasionally
occurred to some of the girls to question what would happen when the war
was over, but they generally ended by deciding: "He'll have to come and
live here, I suppose, and turn the junior room into a smoke-room". Some
of the more imaginative had even ventured the suggestion that he might
teach drilling and Latin. It never struck any of them that instead of
settling down at the school he would want to whisk away his bride to the
other side of the world. The unexpected had happened, however. Pretty
Mrs. Gifford had decided that the claims of matrimony outweighed all
consideration for her pupils, and had gone without even a good-bye,
leaving Miss Todd to reign in her stead.

There was no doubt that Miss Todd was admirably fitted to fill the post.
Possibly, unknown to the girls, she had been gravitating towards it ever
since her principal's hasty war wedding. Certainly she was ready, with
the utmost calm, to take over the school at the critical moment, and
transfer the connection from Mrs. Gifford's name to her own. She was a
woman of decided character, at her prime intellectually and physically,
tremendously interested in reconstruction problems, and longing to try
some educational experiments. So far, her ambitious schemes had been
much hampered by her Head. Mrs. Gifford, pleasant and popular both with
girls and parents, had clung to old-fashioned methods, and had been very
difficult to move in the matter of modern innovations. She had always
put on the curb when the second mistress's fertile imagination had
pranced away on Utopian lines. To an ardent spirit, steeped in new
race-ideals, and longing for an opportunity of serving her generation,
it was a proud moment when she suddenly found herself in a position to
carry out her pet schemes unchecked. On this first day of the new term
she moved round the school with the satisfaction of an admiral reviewing
a battleship.

It was much to Miss Todd's credit that she was able to take her fresh
duties quite calmly, and without any fuss or exhibition of nerves. She
was not a nervy woman, to begin with, and she had made a great point of
cultivating self-control. With her tall figure, clear grey eyes, bright
complexion, and abundant chestnut hair, she made a very favourable
impression upon those parents who had brought their daughters back to
school in person. At the moment when Wendy, Sadie, Tattie, Magsie, and
Vi were sitting grousing in the wheelbarrow, Miss Todd, in the
drawing-room, was completing an arrangement which was largely to affect
their future.

"It's very short notice, of course," she was saying. "But, as it
happens, there's a vacant bed, and I can manage it perfectly well."

"That's just a real relief to me!" replied a pleasant American voice
from the sofa. "We can't take Diana with us to Paris, and I don't want
to burden my cousin with her, so I said to my husband: 'There's nothing
for it but school, only it must be a good one'. Well, we motored along
to the nearest clergyman, introduced ourselves, and asked him to
recommend a real first-class, high-toned British school that would take
in Diana, and he said: 'Why, there's one on the spot here--you needn't
go any farther!' Time was getting short, so we brought her right along.
I must say I'm satisfied with all I've seen, and the talk I've had with
you, and I feel we're leaving her in good hands. My cousin, Mrs.
Burritt, will send over the rest of her things from Petteridge, and if
there's anything else she needs please get it for her. Well, Steve, if
we've to catch that 4.30 train, we must be going."

The tall dark gentleman in the arm-chair consulted his watch and rose
hastily.

"Just time if we put on some speed; but the roads are execrable," he
vouchsafed.

The central figure around whom this conversation had revolved had been
sitting in the window gazing at the view over the lake. She now turned
her head sharply, with an inscrutable expression in her dark grey eyes,
and, walking across to her father, linked her arm in his. He bent down
and whispered a few rapid words into her ear. Her mother patted her on
the shoulder reassuringly.

"You're going to have a good time, Diana. Why, I expect you won't be
wanting us to come back, you'll be so happy here. Address your letters
under cover of the American Embassy, Paris, till we send you the name of
our hotel. Good-bye! Be a good child and a credit to us."

The leave-taking was perhaps purposely cut short. Mr. and Mrs. Hewlitt
each bestowed a swift kiss upon their daughter, then made a hasty exit
to their waiting car, and were whirled away in the direction of Glenbury
Station and the 4.30 train, and their ultimate destination of Paris.

Ten minutes later Lennie Browne, one of the juniors, disturbed the
quintette on the wheelbarrow with a message.

"Miss Todd's sent me to find you," she announced. "You've got to come
and make friends with a new girl."

Sadie, Vi, and Tattie quitted their seats so suddenly that Magsie and
Wendy, still resting on the handles, came croppers on to the grass.
Wendy rolled over into a comfortable position, and did not trouble to
rise.

"Bunkum!" she remarked incredulously. "Don't try to rag _me_, Lennie
Browne, for it won't come off. As it happens, I asked Toddlekins half an
hour ago, and she said there were _no_ new girls. There!"

"Well, there's one now, at any rate."

Wendy looked at her pityingly, and shook her head.

"Lennie, you're a decent kid, but you're not clever. If you'd really
wanted to have us on successfully, why didn't you try something more out
of the common? You've a great lack of imagination. Anybody--yes,
_anybody_--could have thought of inventing a new girl!"

"But I _haven't_ invented her--she's really here! She walked with me as
far as the sundial, and I left her sitting on the seat while I went to
look for you. I said I wouldn't be a minute. Why, there she is!--come to
see what's become of me."

The quintette turned hastily, to find themselves confronted with an
absolute endorsement of the truth of Lennie's statements. A stranger of
about fourteen was walking towards them, or perhaps "shambling" would be
a better description of her method of progress. She stooped badly, swung
her arms in an awkward fashion, and shuffled her feet along the grass;
her eyes were vacant, her chin was retreating, and her mouth was set in
a foolish smile. For a full ghastly minute she stood and stared at the
girls, and they, in utter and amazed consternation, could not think of a
single intelligent remark with which to break the silence. Magsie was
the first to recover herself.

"You--you've only just come, I suppose?" she gasped, as politely as she
could.

The stranger gave a sickly giggle.

"Are you my new schoolfellows?" she asked in a low creaking voice.
"Miss Todd said you'd be pleased to see me, and I must make friends with
you. I've been wanting a bosom friend, so I'll just pick one of you out.
Let me see"--running her vacant eyes over the group and singling out
Wendy--"I may as well choose you as anybody. Are you ready to be my
chum?"

Wendy flushed scarlet, and, jumping up from the grass, brushed some dead
leaves from her dress.

"It's too soon to think about chums yet," she returned. "You haven't
even told us your name, and you don't know ours. Where do you come
from?"

"That means, I suppose, that you don't want me for a friend!" rasped the
creaking voice. "Don't you like the look of me? What's wrong with me
now? Please tell me, for I'd really like to know. I'm just crazy to make
friends."

In huge embarrassment Wendy and her companions stared at the
extraordinary stranger. She bore their united gaze without flinching.
She even turned round slowly, so that they might have an adequate view
of her foolish profile, protruding lips, and retreating chin.

"Do tell me what's wrong with me?" she repeated.

No one volunteered a criticism, and for another whole minute there was
dead silence. Then a brisk voice remarked:

"Would this style suit you better now, I wonder?"

The girls caught their breath in amazement. The stooping, slouching
figure had suddenly straightened itself up, the protruding lips had set
into a small, neat mouth, the receding chin had come forward, and the
vacant eyes were twinkling with mirth. Instead of a half-idiotic, and
wholly unattractive, specimen of girlhood, a very charming little
personality stood before them. The transformation was so utter that at
first the audience simply gaped, then with one accord they exploded into
laughter and words.

"Oh, I say!"

"You fraud!"

"I really thought you were dotty!"

"How _did_ you do it?"

"You looked too awful for words!"

"You haven't told us your name yet!"

"Can you do it again?"

The stranger curtsied, dropped her jaw, set her eyes in a glassy stare,
and, resuming the creaking voice, bleated forth:

"Thank you! Thank you for welcoming me! I'm called Miranda Jane Judkins,
and I come from Conic Section Farm, Squashville, Massachusetts. Which of
you wants to chum with me? Don't all speak at once!"

"Oh, for goodness' sake drop that awful face! It absolutely gives me
spasms!" hinnied Magsie. "It's the very image of a village idiot who
used to terrify me when I was a kiddie. Don't look at me with those
horrid eyes! I shall have a fit!"

"Look here, you mad thing!" said Vi. "Can't you tell us who you really
are?"

"Miss Judkins."

"No, no! Your real name! Stop ragging!"

Once more the half-witted, shambling figure gave place to a sparkling,
self-possessed, laughing young witch of fourteen, who with another mock
curtsy introduced herself.

"Diana Hewlitt--quick-change artiste. Entertainments arranged at any
moment. Reserved seats, five shillings. Proceeds to the Red Cross Fund.
Oh, I believe at first I really _did_ take you in!"

"You did," admitted Wendy; "because, of course, we weren't expecting it.
We shall know you better now, and be prepared. I say, you're rather a
sport! Where have you turned up from? Miss Todd said only an hour ago
there weren't any new girls."

"No doubt she told the truth. There weren't then! Why, an hour since we
were just half-way between Glassenrigg and Scawdale, pelting along at
about double the speed limit. Miss Todd didn't even know of my
existence. I've been dropped upon her like a bolt from the blue. I must
say I admired the calm way she fixed up to take me, all in ten minutes.
Most Britishers wouldn't have fallen in so quickly with Dad's lightning
methods, but she seemed to understand right away."

"Are you American, then?"

"Rather! I was born under the Stars and Stripes. Never saw England till
we crossed this summer. Dad's just been called over to Paris, and d'you
know, they've let Mother go with him, but they wouldn't give _me_ a
passport. Wasn't it real mean of them? I do think the War Office is the
limit! Well, of course, the question was: what could be done with me. I
said: 'Leave me at Petteridge'. But Mother said: 'No; I'm not going to
dump you on Cousin Coralie; she'd be down with nervous exhaustion at the
end of a fortnight. School's the place for you, and we've got to rake
round and find a school in double-quick time'. Dad nodded, and just rang
up and ordered the car, and we started out with no more idea than the
man in the moon where I was going to be landed. I'm glad fate tossed me
here, though. It looks nice; kind of a real old-world flavour about the
place, somehow. I'm crazy on old things--Scott's novels, you know, and
castles, and all the rest of it. When I heard this was called Pendlemere
Abbey, I said: 'That'll do! Take me there!' So here I am!"

"It takes one's breath away," commented Tattie. "I don't know that I'd
like to be whisked off to school in such a precious hurry myself."

"It's rather as if the pixies had dropped you," laughed Vi.

"Right you are! I guess I'm a pixie sort of girl. Please don't expect
'prunes and prism' from me, for you won't get them!"

"I don't know that we want them," chuckled Wendy.

"That takes a weight off my mind, then," twinkled Diana. "I like
mediaeval abbeys and black beams and raftered roofs, and even ghosts; but
I don't know that I exactly want mediaeval schoolgirls."

"Don't alarm yourself," said Wendy, clapping her on the shoulder. "I
assure you you'll find us all absolutely and entirely modern and
up-to-date."




CHAPTER II

Stars and Stripes


If Diana was possessed with a passion for antiquities, she might
certainly congratulate herself that a kindly fate had popped her into
such an appropriate spot as Pendlemere Abbey. It offered every
attraction to those in search of the romantic and picturesque. The
Cistercian monks who had founded it in the thirteenth century had
exhibited their proverbial good taste in the choice of a situation. It
was built on rising ground above the lake, and commanded a glorious view
across the fells. The garden, with its hill-side of rhododendrons, its
clumps of sweet-smelling pines, and its borders of such hardy flowers as
did not mind the nip of the northern air, ran steeply from a flat
terrace towards the lake, where it ended in a landing-stage and a locked
boat-house. Its orchard linked branches with the apple-trees of a
neighbouring farm. The house itself, though preserving the name and the
traditions of the Abbey, had been converted during Tudor times from
religious to lay uses. Very little of the old monks' building remained
intact, though evidences of it cropped up in unexpected quarters. There
were the remains of a piscina in the pantry; a groined arch roofed the
back kitchen; two carved stone pillars supported the fire-place in the
dining-room; a Gothic doorway led into the courtyard, and the remnants
of some ancient choir stalls were fitted as a window-seat on the stairs.
The Tudor and Elizabethan periods had left more permanent traces, and,
though later architects had played havoc with the simplicity of the
style, they had not altogether destroyed its sixteenth-century
appearance. The greater part was built of northern stone, with mullioned
windows, twisted chimneys, peaked gables surmounted with stone balls,
and a roof of flat slabs of the same yellow-brown stone that formed the
walls. A section of black and white timbered Elizabethan work, a Queen
Anne wing, and some early Victorian alterations made a strange
conglomeration of styles of architecture; but the roses and ivy had
climbed up and clothed ancient and modern alike, and Time had softened
the jarring nineteenth-century additions, so that the whole now blended
into a mellow, brownish mass, with large, bright windows enclosed in a
frame of well-clipped greenery.

There was accommodation in the roomy old house for twenty boarders, and
though no day pupils were supposed to be received a special exception
had been made in the case of Meg and Elsie Fleming, the Vicar's
daughters, who arrived every morning by nine o'clock, and Nell Gledhill,
whose governess brought her each Friday afternoon for dancing-lessons.
So far the school had jogged along very happily under Mrs. Gifford's
mild regime. Fathers and mothers had sometimes shrugged their shoulders
and hinted that her methods were old-fashioned, but they always added
that the tone of the place was so excellent, and the health of the
pupils so well looked after, that there was really no just cause for
complaint. Miss Todd, sitting in her study, and writing twenty neat,
well-thought-out letters to explain the sudden transfer of the school,
assured parents that, while preserving all the traditions of her
predecessor, she hoped to introduce a modern element of progress in
keeping with the needs of the day. "I realize that we must march with
the times," she wrote; and she meant it. She began her innovations on
that very first day. Several disconsolate seniors congregated on the
upper landing viewed change number one with dismay.

"But Mrs. Gifford promised that Geraldine and Ida and I might have the
East room," urged Nesta Erskine. "It was all arranged last term, and we
clubbed together to buy a bookcase. What are we to do with it if we're
separated? It belongs to us all three."

"I can't help it; those are Miss Todd's orders," answered Miss Beverley
briskly. "Your names are on cards pinned on to the doors of your new
rooms. Pass along at once, and find your quarters and begin to unpack.
Don't stand here blocking up the passage! Yes, Betty? Miss Hampson wants
to speak to me? Tell her I'm coming now."

As Miss Beverley bustled away the seniors moved slowly and forlornly
along the landing in quest of billets. It reminded them of finding their
places in an examination-room. Their names were unquestionably on the
doors in black-and-white, but their distribution called forth a storm of
indignant comment.

"I'm actually put with Tattie Clegg and Jess Paget!"

"And I'm boxed up with Dorothy, and Nora Haddon, and Glynne Hamilton!"

"Why, we're all mixed up with the kids!"

"Look here, you know, we can't stand this kind of thing!"

"Somebody had better go to Miss Todd!"

"It's no use; I've just been," said Loveday Seton, joining the group of
malcontents. "We had it all out in the study, and she listened quite
kindly and politely, but she was firm as nails. She says it's an
experiment for the sake of good tone, and she hopes it will work well.
We seniors are sandwiched up with intermediates and juniors so that our
influence may permeate through the school."

The five listeners groaned.

"Couldn't we permeate enough during the daytime?" sniffed Ida. "I don't
see what influence I can have while I'm asleep. I call it a jolly
nuisance to be saddled with three kids in one's room."

"Of course you have your curtains."

"What's the use of curtains? A cubicle's only semi-private after all.
What it means is that we seniors are always on duty policing those
juniors. What a life!"

"Where are you put, Loveday?" asked Geraldine.

"In the little ivy room upstairs. There are two beds, and I'm to act
mentor to this new American girl who's just arrived."

"Poor you! What's she like?"

"I don't know. I haven't seen her yet, but I wish she were at Jericho."

In a decidedly ruffled frame of mind, Loveday passed along the landing,
and climbed the stairs that led to the ivy room. She found her room-mate
already in possession, and with her belongings half-unpacked. Photos
adorned her dressing-table, a large American flag draped the mirror, and
her bed was spread with odds and ends. She smiled broadly as Loveday
entered.

"So here you are!" she greeted her. "Goody! What a relief! I've been
worrying about what you'd be like, and just praying you wouldn't have
spectacles and talk with a lisp. Miss Todd gave me to understand you
were a peach, and I might think myself in luck to room with you, but you
never can trust head mistresses till you see for yourself. She's told me
the truth, though, after all. Yes, I like you right straight away, and I
always make up my mind about people, slap bang off at once."

Loveday stared in surprise at the impetuous little figure kneeling
beside the big trunk. Diana's dark-grey eyes shone like stars, her oval
face, if not exactly pretty, was piquant and interesting, her
light-brown hair curled at the tips. It was, of course, an unheard-of
liberty for a new girl, and an intermediate to boot, thus to address a
senior, but the greeting was spontaneous and decidedly flattering. The
grey eyes, in fact, expressed open admiration. On the whole, Loveday
decided to waive ceremony and tradition for the nonce.

"We've been put together for the term, so we must make the best of each
other," she conceded, more graciously than she had intended to address
the interloper. "I'm glad to see you've kept to your own side of the
room, and haven't overflowed into mine."

"No fear!" chuckled Diana. "I've been at school before, and learnt not
to spread myself out. We're on rather a short allowance of space, aren't
we? Are these drawers all I've got? I shall have just to wedge my things
in. There's my cabin trunk to come yet."

"You may have three pegs in the landing cupboard, and a locker in the
cloak-room, but anything else will have to be stored in the box-room. I
should think you had enough clothes there to last you a year, instead of
wanting another trunk full."

Diana shook her head.

"They're all mixed up. We packed in half an hour. I just flung in the
first things that came to hand. Cousin Cora promised to send on the
rest of my luggage after me. If she doesn't, I'd best 'phone."

"You'd have a little difficulty to do that," said Loveday dryly.

"D'you mean to say there's no 'phone here, or"--looking round the
room--"no electric light either?"

"Certainly not. We go to bed with candles."

"Well! I wanted mediaeval ways, and it looks as if I was going to get
them. It'll be rather a stunt to go to bed by candle-light. Are there
any ghosts about this place? Or skeletons built into the wall? Or
dungeons with rusting chains? Or mysterious footsteps? Oh! I thought
there'd have been at least something spooky in a house that claims to be
six hundred years old."

Diana's cabin trunk arrived in the course of a few days. She sorted out
a selection of her numerous belongings, arranged them in her limited
number of drawers, and consigned the surplus back to her boxes to be
stored in the attic. This done, and a telegram received to announce the
safe arrival of her father and mother in Paris, she seemed prepared to
settle down. Her fellow intermediates, biased largely by her generosity
in the matter of chocolates, gave her, on the whole, a favourable
reception. Wendy even went further, and proffered friendship.

"You're just the jolly kind of girl I like," she explained. "I think we
might have some topping times together, and wake up the school. Things
are apt to get a little dull sometimes."

Diana nodded intelligently.

"I know. It was just the same at my last school. Everyone got into a
sort of stick-in-the-mud mood, and one felt it was only _kind_ to stir
them up. I guess I did it!"

"I shouldn't wonder if you did," twinkled Wendy. "I vote we make an
alliance, and, if one of us thinks of any rather ripping rag, she just
tells the other, and we'll play it off together."

"Right you are! Let's shake on it!" agreed Diana, extending a small,
slim hand, with a garnet birthstone-ring on the middle finger.

The little American did not fit into her niche at Pendlemere without
encountering a certain amount of what her schoolmates considered
necessary discipline for a novice. She had to go through an ordeal of
chaff and banter. She was known by the sobriquet of "Stars and Stripes",
or "The Yank", and good-natured fun was poked at her transatlantic
accent. She took it good-temperedly, but with a readiness of repartee
that laid the jokers flat.

"One can't get much change out of Diana," commented Magsie, after an
unsuccessful onslaught of teasing.

"I think she's a scream," agreed Vi.

The baffling part of the new schoolmate was that her powers of acting
were so highly developed that it was impossible to tell whether she was
serious or playing a part. She "took in" her teasers times out of
number, and in fairness they deserved all they got. Towards the end of
the first week she came into the intermediate room one morning fondling
a letter.

"From Paris," she vouchsafed. "Dad and Mother have got anchored at last.
The journey must have been a startler. Paris is so full of Americans,
it's like a little New York."

"Why do you call it 'Parr-is'?" sniggered Sadie.

"It's more like the French than your way of saying it, at any rate,"
retorted Diana smartly. "This letter's been four days in coming
through."

"You might give me the stamp."

"Certainly not. You don't deserve it. I wish I were in Paris, too. Yes,
I shall call it 'Parr-is'. I'm beginning to want some of my own folks."

"I've never met any Americans, except you," volunteered Vi. "What are
they like?"

"What do you imagine they're like?"

"Like the pictures of 'Uncle Sam', with a limp shirt front, and a big
tie, and a goatee beard. I want to meet some real out-and-out Yankees."

"Won't your cousins from Petteridge ever come over to see you, Di?"
asked Magsie.

"Perhaps they may, sometime," replied Diana thoughtfully. "I should say
it's quite within the bounds of possibility, considering they only live
ten miles away."

"Gee-whiz! I guess I'd just admire to make their acquaintance!" mocked
Vi. "I reckon they'll be _some_ folks!"

Diana's eyes were fixed upon her with an inscrutable look, but she
answered quite calmly:

"I'll take care to introduce you if they come."

It was in the course of the next few days that a parcel for Diana
arrived from Petteridge Court. What it contained nobody saw except
herself, for she did her unpacking in private. Judging from certain
outbursts of chuckling, the exact cause of which she steadily refused to
reveal, the advent of her package gave her profound satisfaction. The
next Saturday afternoon was wet: one of those hopelessly wet days that
are apt to happen in a land of lakes and hills. Banks of mist obscured
the fells; the garden walks were turned to running rivers, the bushes
dripped dismally, and cascades poured from the gutters. The school,
which had been promised a country tramp, looked out of the windows with
woeful disappointment. The seniors consoled themselves by holding a
committee meeting, from which all but their elect selves were rigidly
excluded. The juniors took possession of the play-room, and relieved
their spirits by games which made the maximum of noise. Several of the
intermediates peeped in, but, finding the place a mixture of a
bear-garden and the Tower of Babel, they retired to the sanctuary of
their own form-room, where they sat making half-hearted efforts to read
or paint, and grousing at the weather.

"Is _every_ Saturday going to be wet?" demanded Magsie in an injured
voice.

"Seems like it!" mourned Jess Paget. "Of course it can be beautifully
fine on Friday, when we have to stop in and do dancing; and it just
keeps all the rain for Saturday. I call it spiteful! I wish I knew what
to do with myself. I'm moping."

"Get a book out of the library."

"I loathe reading."

"Do some painting."

"You know I can't paint."

"Go and romp with the juniors."

"I'd as soon spend an hour in a monkey-house."

"Then I can't do anything for you, I'm afraid. You'll just have to
mope."

"Where's Sadie?" asked Peggy Collins. "She promised to give me back my
crochet-needle, and I can't get on without it."

"She went off with Diana and Wendy half an hour ago. I saw them running
upstairs together. Don't flatter yourself she'll remember about your
crochet-needle."

"I know she won't--the slacker! I shall just have to go and rout her up,
and make her find it. Oh, kafoozalum! It's a weary world!"

Peggy rose languidly, stretched her arms, and strolled in the direction
of the door, which at that identical moment opened to admit the missing
Sadie.

"Here, you old blighter, where's that crochet-needle?" demanded Peggy
impolitely.

"Bother your crochet-needle! I've no time to go and hunt for it now. I
say, girls!" continued Sadie excitedly; "anybody know what's become of
Diana? She's wanted. Those American cousins of hers have turned up. I
told them she was in here, and they're waiting outside the door. Oh!"

Sadie's exclamation was caused by the door, which she had carefully
closed suddenly opening, and nearly knocking her over. Apparently the
visitors did not approve of being left to wait in the passage, and
judged it expedient to make an entrance.

"Excuse me if we walk right in," said a nasal-toned voice; "but I was
told we'd find Miss Diana Hewlitt in here."

The five girls, scattered about the room, stared for a second in blank
amazement at the intruders. They were certainly unlike any other
visitors who had ever come to Pendlemere. The speaker was a little,
short, wiry man, in a slack-fitting, brown tweed suit, with a rather
obtrusive striped tie. His raggy, grey beard straggled under his chin
and up to his ears; his eyes twinkled through a pair of gold-rimmed
spectacles; in defiance of European etiquette, he wore his hat over a
crop of rough, grey hair. Clinging to his arm was a very stout lady in a
green coat and a velvet turban adorned with feathers. She also was
grey-haired, and her features were somewhat obscured by a thick, black
veil. The most prominent thing about her was a large and obtruding
tooth, which gave her somewhat the appearance of a good-natured walrus;
she held a morocco-leather satchel in her unoccupied hand, and wore a
large feather-boa round her neck.

Magsie, to her eternal credit, was the first to remember her manners,
and offer some sort of a greeting to the extraordinary strangers.

"Er--good afternoon!" she stammered. "I'm afraid Diana isn't here.
Shall--shall I go and fetch her?"

"Well, now, I'd call that real elegant of you," returned the stout lady
heartily. "We can't stay long, and we don't want to waste time."

"Cora, I guess we'd best introduce ourselves," observed the gentleman,
gently disengaging her from his arm. "We're Mr. and Mrs. Elihu Burritt
of Petteridge Court. I reckon you're Diana's schoolfellows? Pleased to
meet you, I'm sure."

"Did you have a wet drive?" asked Jess Paget, making a desperate and
most gallant attempt to pump up some item of conversation.

The stout lady shook her head eloquently.

"I _do_ say that in the matter of weather a British wet day just about
takes the cake!" she replied.

Her voice was slightly tremulous and muffled; perhaps the weather
agitated her. Moreover, her large tooth seemed to cause her some
inconvenience--it wobbled visibly as she spoke.

"If Diana don't turn up, I guess we'll have to be getting on," ventured
Mr. Elihu Burritt, pulling out a big watch and consulting it. "We've
got to call at the drug store at Glenbury, and time presses."

"Magsie's gone to fetch her. Peggy, you go too, and hurry her up. Won't
you sit down while you're waiting?" asked Jess, pulling forward two
chairs.

The visitors seated themselves, that is to say, they sank heavily down,
and planted their hands on their knees. Their eyes took an interested
review of the embarrassed faces of the girls, then they suddenly
collapsed into gurgles of laughter. An instant wave of comprehension
swept through the room.

"Diana and Wendy!" exclaimed a chorus of voices.

Mr. Elihu Burritt was guffawing to such an extent that his hat, and the
venerable locks stitched inside it, tumbled to the ground, revealing a
crop of brown hair. Mrs. Cora had lost her tooth altogether, and her
turban was tilted to a most disreputable angle. She slapped her partner
on the back, and commanded, between sobs of mirth:

"Elihu--stop laughing! I guess we'd best wangle ourselves off!"

But the girls had crowded round to examine the details of the costumes.

"They're topping!" they approved. "Absolutely A1! Can't think how you
did it! Diana, where did you get those togs?"

"Sent to Petteridge for them," exulted Diana. "They came in that parcel.
It's an old suit of Cousin Hugh's. I told Cousin Coralie I wanted it to
dress up in. The beard's just made out of tow, and so's Wendy's hair.
Flatter myself I came up to your expectations of a real backwoods Yank.
I wonder if I'd take in Miss Todd. I'd give a hundred dollars to try.
But it might be rather a risky experiment. Don't you think my old girl
is a peach? I'm nuts on her!"

"I simply shouldn't have known you, Wendy," said Jess. "How did you make
yourself so fat?"

"I'm stuffed out with all sorts of things," laughed Wendy. "Vests, and
nightdresses, and stockings, and anything we could lay our hands on.
I'm specially padded over the shoulders. The toque is one of Diana's
hats turned inside out with some feathers pinned on. The tooth? Why,
that was a piece of india-rubber tucked inside my lip. It was fearfully
difficult to make it stick, I can tell you. It kept jiggling about when
I tried to talk. Elihu, old man, shall we dance a tickle-toe?"

"Stop, you mad creatures! If you make such a racket you'll be bringing
Bunty down upon us," interposed Magsie, as the masquerading couple
twirled each other round and round. "If you want to be ready in time for
tea, you'd better go and get out of those weird garments."

"I'd like to go down to tea in them," declared Diana. "What a lovely
sensation they'd make! Magsie, just peep out and see that the coast is
clear before we make a dash for it along the passage. It might upset
Bunty's nerves if she met us."

As it happened, during the very next week Diana received a visit from
her cousins, Mr. and Mrs. Burritt of Petteridge Court. They arrived in
their Daimler car, and lunched with the school. They were the very
epitome of cultured and polished America, and the girls raved over them.
After half an hour of their company, seven intermediates had determined
to mould themselves absolutely on the lines of "Cousin Coralie", and to
marry exact replicas of Mr. Burritt. It was felt that ambition could
soar no higher.

"I'm glad you like them," said Diana, as she stood on the steps with
some of her friends watching the Daimler pass out through the gate. "I
thought you would--when they really turned up. That was why I wanted you
to see 'Cousin Elihu' and 'Cousin Cora' first. They were more your idea
of typical Americans, weren't they? Ah!"--shaking her head
commiseratingly--"that's because you benighted Britishers just don't
know anything about the _real_ America."




CHAPTER III

A Penniless Princess


Miss Todd, sitting at her desk in her study, with a row of the very
latest publications on the most modern theories of education in a
bookcase so near that she could stretch out her hand for any particular
one she wanted, rapidly reviewed some of her new experiments. First and
foremost came the plan of sandwiching seniors and juniors together in
their bedrooms. She hoped the influence of the elder girls would work
like leaven in the school, and that putting them with younger ones would
give them the chance of developing and exercising their motherly
instincts. She tapped her book with her pencil as she mentally ran over
the list of her seniors, and considered how--to the outside view of a
head mistress--each seemed to be progressing.

"It's difficult to foster just the spirit one wants in them--it depends
so largely on the girl," she decided.

And there she was right--the girl made all the difference. Hilary
Chapman had listened to her remarks on "the mother instinct", and had
walked straight into her dormitory, tow-rowed her young room-mates for
their untidiness, snapped at their excuses, and sent them downstairs
with a snubbing, returning to the bosom of the seniors ruffled, but with
a strong sense of having performed her obvious duty. Betty Blane, Erica
Peters, and Peggy Collins, comparing injured notes, viewed the matter
from a different angle.

"Calls herself a mother, does she? Jolly more like a step-mother, I
should say," objected Erica.

"Pretty grizzly to be boxed up with Hilary for a whole term," lamented
Betty.

"I'm _not going_ to be 'mothered' by her," proclaimed Peggy with energy.
"She's only two years older than I am, and yet from the airs she gives
herself you'd think she was Methuselah."

"You don't _look_ like her daughter," remarked Betty, who was
literal-minded to a fault.

Peggy made an eloquent grimace.

"I'm an undutiful one, at any rate," she laughed. "I'm afraid Hilary
will find me somewhat of a handful."

Up in the little ivy room, however, matters were going somewhat better.
Diana and Loveday, after a few minor differences, dovetailed both their
possessions and their dispositions so as to admit of the least possible
friction. It was fortunate for Diana, for she had a side to her
character that would have bristled into porcupine quills had she been
placed with Hilary. Loveday's particular temperament soothed her down.

"I'm falling in love with her," she admitted to Wendy. "I was taken
with her, of course, the moment I saw her, but I believe now I'm going
to have it badly. I think she's beautiful! If there were a Peach
Competition, she'd win at a canter."

Such a pandering to the "pomps and vanities" as a Beauty Show was
certainly not an item in the list of new experiments at Pendlemere, but
there was a general consensus of opinion that Loveday held the palm in
the matter of looks. She was a fair, slender girl, with delicate
features, a clear complexion, and a quantity of long flaxen hair. She
spoke prettily, but without affectation, and always gave an impression
of great refinement. The wistful look that sometimes shaded her blue
eyes was, on the whole, attractive.

"She's like a picture I once saw of Eve just turned out of Paradise,"
commented Diana, sitting with Wendy and Tattie in the window-seat on the
stairs.

"Not half a bad shot," said Wendy. "In fact, it just about hits the
mark. In a way, Loveday _is_ turned out of Paradise. That's to say, I
suppose, if her grandfather hadn't gambled, the Abbey would have
belonged to her."

"What Abbey?"

"Why, this, of course, stupid!"

"Do you mean to say Loveday's folks used to _own_ this place?"

"They did. Owned it for hundreds of years. They were an old Border
family, and mixed up with the rebellion of 1745, and all sorts of
interesting things. Loveday's grandfather was the regular old-fashioned
sporting kind of squire you read about in books. He gambled the whole
property away. I suppose it used to be a fine place in his day. I've
heard he kept eight hunters, and always had the house full of guests
while his money lasted. Then there was a grand smash up, and everything
had to be sold--house, horses, furniture, and all. He went abroad and
died of a broken heart--never smiled again, and all that sort of thing,
you know."

"How fearfully romantic!" gasped Diana. "Of course it was his own fault
for gambling, but still one feels sorry for him. Did Loveday live here
too when she was little?"

Wendy shook her head.

"I shouldn't think so. I believe it happened ever such a long time ago;
before she was born, even."

"Couldn't her father get it back?"

"I suppose not. Besides, he's dead too. Loveday is an orphan. She's
neither father nor mother."

"Where does she live, then, when she's at home?"

"With an uncle and aunt--her mother's relations. But she never talks
very much about them, so we fancy they're not particularly nice to her.
She has no brothers or sisters. I think she feels lonely, if you ask my
opinion, but she's too proud to say so."

"And Pendlemere ought to be hers! How romantic!" repeated Diana. "I
wanted to stay in a real old-fashioned mediaeval British house, and here
I'm plumped into a story as well. It's most exciting! What's going to
happen next? Is Loveday going to get it back? Will she marry the man who
owns it? Or will somebody leave her a fortune? Or will she find a lost
will? How do stories generally end?" continued Diana, casting her mind
over a range of light literature which she had skimmed and half
forgotten.

Wendy disposed of each of the suggestions in turn.

"There isn't anybody to leave her a fortune; and what's the good of
finding a will when the place is sold? The present owner is a fat old
fellow of fifty, with a wife already, and, even if _she_ died, I
shouldn't think Loveday would want to marry him. He has three daughters
older than she is, and he's quite bald."

Diana looked baffled. Her romantic plan of restoring the fortunes of the
Seton family through matrimony certainly did not seem hopeful.

"I'm fearfully sorry for Loveday," confided Tattie. "I know something
about her, because some friends of ours live near her aunt. They say she
gets very much snubbed; her cousins make her feel it's not her own home.
She wants to go to college, but it's doubtful if she'll be able. Nesta
Erskine says Loveday is just _counting_ on a career. She wants to be
independent of her aunt."

"It must be horrible to be snubbed," commented Diana thoughtfully.

She had admired Loveday before, but now she looked at her room-mate with
new eyes. To Diana there was something fascinating about the idea of a
"penniless princess".

"Do your ancestors go right slap-bang back to the Conquest?" she asked
interestedly, while she was undressing that evening.

"Well, not quite so far as that," smiled Loveday, diligently brushing a
flaxen mane ripply with plaiting. "But I believe there were Setons in
the fourteenth century, long before they had the Abbey from Edward the
Sixth's commissioners. There are all sorts of stories and legends about
them, of course."

"What kind of stories? Do tell me! I'd just admire to hear. I'm crazy on
Border ballads and legends. Tell me, while I fix my hair."

"Well, there was little Sir Rowland. When he was only six years old his
father was killed in one of the battles of the Wars of the Roses. They
were Lancastrians, and the Yorkists seized his estate, and Rowland was
only saved from the fury of the conquering party by the devotion of his
nurse. She managed to hide him in a secret place in the tower till there
was an opportunity to escape, and then she got him away to her father's
house in the midst of a wild tract of forest. He lived there, disguised
as a forester, for years and years, and helped to cut wood and to hunt,
and only two or three people knew the secret of his birth. He used to go
errands sometimes to the great Hall of the neighbourhood, and there he
saw Lady Anne, the beautiful daughter of Lord Wharton, and fell
desperately in love with her. One day when she was out riding he was
able to save her from the attack of an infuriated stag, and I suppose
she was very grateful, and perhaps showed her feelings too plainly, for
her father shut her up in a turret-room, and ordered her to marry
somebody whom she didn't like at all. I don't know what would have
happened, but just then Henry VII came to the throne, and one of his
first acts was to restore Sir Rowland Seton to his possessions and
dignity. Lord Wharton must have thought him an eligible suitor then, for
he was allowed to marry the Lady Anne, and take her away to his castle.
Their tomb is in Dittington Church. He was killed at the Battle of
Flodden, and one of his sons with him.

"There's a romantic story, too, about Sir Roderick Seton, who lived at
the Abbey here in the days of Charles I. He had a stone seat made, and
put just by the front door. The first person who sat on it was a lovely
girl named Katherine, and he said to her: 'Katherine, you have sat on my
seat, so you must give me three kisses as toll'. Not very long after he
went away to London, leaving his brother William to look after the
estate. Then civil war broke out, and he joined the Royalist forces, and
followed the young King Charles into exile. After the Restoration he
journeyed north, and came on foot to his old home. It was years and
years since he had left there, and nobody had had any tidings about him,
or knew whether he was alive or dead. He found his brother William, who
was now married to Katherine, sitting with her and their two children on
the stone seat by the door. He asked them for a night's lodging, and,
though they did not know who he was, they took him in and treated him
kindly. Next morning he asked his hostess to accompany him to the door,
and, pointing to the stone seat, said:

"'It is many years since I had three kisses from the dame who first sat
on it.'

"She recognized him then, and ran joyously to call the rest of the
household. His brother at once wished to hand over the keys to him, but
he would not accept them. 'I am old and childless,' he said. 'All I ask
here is bed and board till you carry me to the churchyard.' He lived
with them for some years, and devoted himself to study. The people of
the neighbourhood venerated him as a sage, and after his death he was
supposed on very special occasions to appear and give the family warning
of future trouble. They say he was seen before the Battle of Culloden,
and several times during the Napoleonic wars; but of course I can't
vouch for that--it's only legend."

Diana, sitting up in bed with the curtains of her cubicle drawn aside to
listen, gave a long-drawn, breathless sigh.

"O-o-o-oh! How gorgeous to belong to a highfaluting family that's got
legends and ghosts. I'm just crazy to hear more. What about the house?
Aren't there any dungeons or built-up skeletons or secret hiding-places?
There _ought_ to be, in a real first-class mediaeval place like this."

Loveday was plaiting her flaxen hair into two long braids; she paused
with the ribbon in her hand.

"I don't know--as you say, there ought to be. I've often
wondered--especially since----" She hesitated.

"Since what?" urged Diana, scenting the beginning of a mystery.

"Since something that happened once."

"When? Oh, _do_ tell me!"

"I've never told anybody."

Diana hopped out of bed, and flung two lace-frilled arms round her
room-mate, clinging to her with the tenacity of a young octopus.

"Oh, Loveday! Ducky! Tell me! I shan't let you go till you promise.
Please! please!" she entreated.

"If you strangle me I can't tell anything. Get back into bed, Diana! I
don't know whether it was really important, but it may have been. It
happened when I was quite a little girl. I had a slight attack of
measles, and of course I was kept in bed. Mother was nursing me, and one
afternoon she went out to do some shopping and left me to have a nap. I
wasn't sleepy in the least, and it was horribly dull staying there all
by myself. I remembered a book I wanted to read which was in the
dining-room bookcase, so I did a most dreadfully naughty thing: I jumped
up, put on my dressing-gown and bedroom slippers, and ran downstairs to
fetch _At the Back of the North Wind_. I opened the dining-room door and
marched in, and then I got a surprise, for seated in a chair by the fire
was a stranger. He looked as much surprised as I was.

"'Hallo!' he said. 'We go to bed early in this part of the world, don't
we? Or are we only getting up?'

"I walked to the fire and warmed my hands, and looked at him calmly. I
was a funny child in those days.

"'It's neither,' I answered. 'I've got measles.'

"'Then please don't give them to me,' he laughed. 'I assure you I don't
want them. Look here! I called to see your father, or, failing your
father, your mother. They're both out, and I've been waiting half an
hour for either of them to come in. I can't stay any longer. Will you
give them a message from me? Say I've been over at Pendlemere Abbey, and
that I've made a most interesting discovery there. If they care to
communicate with me, I'll tell them about it. Here's my card with my
address. Now I must bolt to keep an appointment. You'll remember the
message?'

[Illustration: "O-O-O-OH! HOW GORGEOUS TO BELONG TO A HIGH-FALUTING
FAMILY THAT'S GOT LEGENDS AND GHOSTS!"]

"He flung his card on the table, went out of the room, and I heard the
hall door bang after him. I stood for a moment thinking. If I gave this
message, Mother would know that I had been out of bed and downstairs,
and I should be sure to get a tremendous scolding. I was a naughty
little girl in those days; I took the card, flung it on the fire, seized
_At the Back of the North Wind_ from the bookcase, and tore upstairs
again. Of course I caught cold, and had rather a serious relapse which
puzzled everybody. No one except myself knew the reason, and I took good
care not to tell. Only six months afterwards I lost both my father and
mother, and went to live with my aunt at Liverpool. What became of the
stranger I don't know. I didn't even remember his name."

"You weren't living at the Abbey then?"

"No, no! We never lived at the Abbey. It was sold before I was born. I
believe at that time it was empty, and a caretaker used to allow
tourists to look through it. I suppose that gentleman was a tourist."

"What had he found?"

"That's a question I've asked myself a hundred times. Was it a sliding
panel or a secret door? Or was he simply some antiquarian crank who
wanted to prove that the Abbey was of Norman origin, or built on a Roman
foundation? How I wish I hadn't forgotten his name! When I heard that
Pendlemere had been turned into a school I begged my aunt to send me
here. For a long time she wouldn't, and I went to a day-school. Then two
years ago she and uncle decided to send me to a boarding-school, so
again I asked to come here, and after a great deal of urging they let
me. I hoped I might find out something. I'm always hunting about, but
I've never yet made the 'interesting discovery'."

"Where have you looked?" asked Diana, immensely thrilled.

"Oh, everywhere! I've tapped panels, and pushed bits of carving to see
if they'd move, but they're all absolutely firm and solid. I've had no
luck."

"I'll go exploring on my own."

"Well, if you do, don't tell the other girls. I hate to pose as a sort
of turned-out heiress, and have them pitying me. If they knew I was
hunting for hiding-places, I believe some of them would rag me
dreadfully. I should never hear the last of it. They'd always be
pretending they'd found something, just to tease me."

"And yet you ought to have been the heiress," mused Diana.

"It's no use talking about being an heiress when the place was sold
before I was born," returned Loveday rather bitterly. "I've told you
this, but I trust you not to go blabbing it all over the school. If
you're ready, I'll blow out the candle. Miss Hampson will be round in a
minute."




CHAPTER IV

The Rush-bearing


Among Miss Todd's modern principles of education was the sensible theory
that if you can once get a girl interested in a subject she will learn
without any labour, and that self-acquired knowledge is far more readily
retained than facts which are crammed down one's throat. More especially
she applied this to history. Instead of making it a dry catalogue of
dates of kings and battles, she tried to show the gradual evolution of
the British nation from the barbarism of the Stone Age to present-day
civilization. She dwelt much on folk-lore, ancient customs and
traditions, and especially encouraged the study of all local legends and
observances. In this she found an ally in the new vicar who had lately
come to the church at Pendlemere, and whose daughters, Meg and Elsie,
attended the school as day-girls. Mr. Fleming was an enthusiastic
antiquarian, and revelled in the history of the neighbourhood. He went
round his parish collecting information from the oldest inhabitants with
regard to vanished and vanishing customs, and took notes for a book
which he hoped to write upon the folk-lore of the northern counties. In
the heat of his ardour he suggested the revival of several quaint old
festivals which had once held time-honoured places in the calendar of
the year. First and foremost came the Rush-bearing. In ancient days it
had been the custom of the parishioners to cut bundles of rushes, and,
walking in procession to the church, to strew the floor thickly with
them as a covering for the winter. They would be left till the spring,
and cleared away in time for Easter. This old ceremony had long fallen
into disuse, and was only remembered by village patriarchs as one of the
yearly events of their far-away childhood.

Though it might not be desirable once more to strew the floor with
rushes, Mr. Fleming suggested that it would be a pretty idea if the
girls at Pendlemere School were to cut some bundles of them, tie them
with ribbons, and carry them into the church on the date of the old
festival, as a memorial of the past observance. Anything so interesting
as going out to cut rushes appealed to the girls, and they readily
adopted the suggestion. Miss Todd decided to turn the afternoon into a
kind of natural history and antiquarian excursion.

"The rushes by the lake are not very easy to get," she explained, "but
there are beauties growing on Fox Fell. We'll have a ramble there on
Saturday, take our lunch, and bring back our bundles. Then we can plait
our ribbons at our leisure on Monday, in time for the festival on
Tuesday. Who wants to go? Anybody who likes may stay at home."

A rustle passed round the room, for nobody was anxious to be left out of
the fun. Rambles were considered special treats at Pendlemere, and
smiles decorated twenty faces at the prospect. At Geraldine's suggestion
they did their Saturday prep. in Friday's recreation time.

"And get all your practising finished too," she urged. "If we can tell
Miss Todd that our work's quite squared up, she'll let us stay out
longer; but you know her. If there's a single girl who hasn't learnt her
literature, or made up her music list, the whole crew of us will have to
come trotting back. I'd be sorry for that girl!" Geraldine looked round
the room grimly. "I should give her a very unpleasant time myself, and I
expect the rest of you would, too. She'd richly deserve all she got."

Warned by the head girl's awful threat, tasks were completed in good
time, and promptly by half-past ten the school, in a uniform of brown
jerseys, brown tam-o'-shanters with orange tassels, strong boots,
lunch-wallets slung over their shoulders, and sticks in their hands,
were prepared, like a group of pilgrims, to make their start. Spot, the
fox terrier, escorted them, barking his loudest. Meg and Elsie Fleming
joined them in the village; so with Miss Todd and Miss Beverley they
formed a party of twenty-four. They set their faces towards the fells,
and stepped out briskly. They were not bound to walk in a crocodile,
but, though some progressed in groups, most of the girls gravitated into
pairs. Diana and Wendy linked arms as naturally as two pieces of mercury
merge together in a box. Their spirits, usually high, were to-day at
bubbling-over point: they laughed at everything, whether it was a joke
or not.

"It's my first real mountain walk in England," announced Diana.

"Oh! I'm glad you allow they _are_ mountains," said Sadie, coming up
from behind. "You've been bragging so hard about America, that I thought
perhaps you'd consider them hillocks."

"They _are_ hillocks compared with the Rockies," flashed Diana. "I'm not
going to give way an inch about America, so there!"

"All right, Uncle Sam, brag away. Everything over there is ten times
bigger and better than here--the apples are the size of pumpkins, and
the brooks are so wide you can't see across them, and it takes you years
to ride round a single farm! We know! You needn't tell us again."

"I wasn't going to!" retorted Diana. "What's the use, when you can make
it all up for yourself?"

"Oh! my invention's nothing to yours. I expect you're telling Wendy some
startlers. I'm going to walk with Vi, she's more interesting than you
two."

"What's the matter with Sadie?" asked Diana, as their schoolmate ran on
to catch up Violet.

"Jealous!" said Wendy, shaking her head sagely. "She has these attacks
sometimes, and I know the symptoms. She doesn't like to see you and me
walking together. Last term she and I and Magsie and Tattie were in
Dormitory 4. Magsie and Tattie did the 'twin cherries on one stalk'
business all the time, so in self-defence Sadie and I had to chum,
though we squabbled six times a day. I'm not going to be monopolized
now, so she needn't think it. Let her chum with Vi if she likes, I'm
sure I don't care. Hallo! Which stile do we go over here, I wonder?"

The two girls had lagged behind, so that the rest of the party, walking
at the brisk pace set by Miss Todd, had passed on in front. Wendy
mounted each stile in turn, and surveyed the prospect of fields and high
hedges. There was not a solitary tam-o'-shanter to be seen from either
of them. In much doubt she hesitated.

"It'll probably be to the left, because I know we have to go through
that wood over there before we get out on to the fells," she
conjectured.

"I can't help you," said Diana. "Is it any use tossing for it?"

They ventured to the left, and, after walking over three fields, found
themselves in a narrow lane which terminated in a pond. It was such an
evident cul-de-sac that there was nothing for it but to turn back. When
they again reached the stiles they found Geraldine sitting upon the
right-hand one. Her expression was thundery, and her greeting the
reverse of cordial.

"Where _have_ you been, you two stupids? Why can't you keep up with the
rest of us instead of side-tracking like this? Here you're keeping the
whole party waiting, and I've had to turn back to hunt you up."

"Sorry to be on the earth!" apologized Wendy; "but we missed our way."

"Then it's your own fault, for we left the gipsy trail for you as plain
as plain could be. Some people have no eyes!"

"What gipsy trail?"

Geraldine pointed laconically to the grass.

There, just by the right-hand stile, lay two crossed sticks. They were
placed in a most obvious position. It was a marvel how they had escaped
notice.

"You may well stare!" commented Geraldine with sarcasm.

"I believe I did see them," said Diana, "but I didn't know what they
meant."

"Didn't know! Why, Sadie told you! I sent her on purpose. Miss Todd said
we were to leave the gipsy trail at every doubtful place."

"Sadie never told us. She never said a single word."

"You probably didn't listen. Well, I can't argue it out now, the others
are waiting, and Miss Todd's furious. Come along as fast as you can."

Diana and Wendy considered that the summary scolding which they received
from Miss Todd, who was in too big a hurry to listen to any excuses, was
entirely Sadie's fault, and a point to be settled up with her later. At
present she scuttled on ahead, conveniently out of their way.

"Just let her wait!" vowed Wendy darkly.

It was necessary to step along briskly if they meant to accomplish the
walk which Miss Todd had in her mind's eye, and anybody who has ever
acted leader to a party of twenty-four knows the difficulty of making
everyone keep the pace.

"I believe Toddlekins would like to rope us all together as if we were
Swiss mountaineers," giggled Magsie, "or a gang of prisoners clanking
chains. It's rather weak if one can't even stop to pick a flower."

They had passed through the wood by now, and were on the open fells. The
view was gorgeous. The October sun flooded the landscape and showed up
the wealth of autumn colour: tree-crested crags, ravines with brawling
brooks, stretches of heather-clad moor, banks of faded bracken, rugged
rocks and stony hill-crests were spread on the one hand, while to the
west lay a distant chain of lakes, embosomed in meadows green as
emerald, and reflecting the pale autumn sky in their smooth expanse. At
the top of the first fell, Miss Todd called a halt. They had reached
number one of the objects she had set in the day's programme. It was a
pre-historic cromlech--three gigantic stones reared in the form of a
table by those old inhabitants of our island whose customs and modes of
worship are lost in the mists of antiquity. The storms and snows of many
thousand years sweeping round it had slightly displaced the cap stone,
but it stood otherwise intact, a grey, hoary monument to the toil of the
short, dark neolithic race who once hunted on these self-same fells. The
girls crowded round the cromlech curiously. It was large enough for four
of them to sit underneath, and several crammed in as an experiment.

"Was it an altar?" asked Stuart.

"The altar theory is exploded now," said Miss Todd. "It is generally
recognized that they were burial-places of great chiefs. The body would
be placed inside, with stone weapons and drinking-cups, and any other
articles the man had loved when he was alive. Then a great heap of
stones and earth would be piled over and round it, to keep out the
wolves which were the terror of early man. The weather, and perhaps
farmers, have taken away the mound, and laid bare the cromlech; but
look! here is one that is almost in its natural position."

The girls turned, and saw close by a rocky mound that jutted from among
the crags. In its side was a small opening, just large enough to squeeze
through. Miss Todd had brought candle and matches, and personally
conducted relays of girls into the chamber within. They went curiously
or timorously as the case might be.

"Is there a skeleton inside? I don't know whether I _dare_," shivered
Tattie. "It's like going into a grave, and I'm scared to death."

"Don't be silly!" said Geraldine, who, with Loveday and Hilary, was
making her exit. "There's nothing inside it. It's only like a cave."

"You're sure bogeys won't catch my legs?"

"Stop outside, if you're afraid."

"It's like a fairy-tale, and going into the gnome's hill," fluttered
Magsie.

Everybody was determined to have a peep, and even Tattie mustered up
sufficient courage to screw through the narrow portal, though she
squealed in the process, and clung tightly to Magsie's hand. Diana and
Wendy were among the last to effect the investigation. By that time the
piece of candle was guttering out, and Miss Todd, tired of acting
show-woman, returned to the open air, and gave marching orders.

Diana and Wendy, rather fascinated with the "Goblin Hole", as they
called it, lingered, poking their noses inside the entrance.

"I didn't go in," said a voice behind them. Turning, they saw Sadie's
face, interested, and half-regretful.

"Then you've lost your luck," said Diana decisively. "If you go in and
turn round three times inside, you can have a wish, and it's bound to
come true. You'd better do it. You've just time."

"In the dark?" hesitated Sadie.

"Quick! Go on!" urged her companions, standing back to make way for her.
"Here are the matches."

Sadie struck a match, and cautiously ventured forward. The moment she
was well inside Diana motioned to Wendy, and, catching up a piece of
wood that lay on the ground, tilted it like a door across the entrance,
and piled some stones against it. Then the pair fled. They heard an
agonized shriek behind them, but they turned deaf ears to it.

They were half-way down the heathery hill-side when a very ruffled and
indignant Sadie overtook them.

"Hallo! I thought you'd gone to live with the goblins," exclaimed Diana
cheerfully.

"You're a pair of BEASTS!" exploded Sadie.

"Don't mench! What kind of beasts, please? Young gazelles or kittens?"

"Pigs would be more like it!" snapped Sadie. "To think of shutting me up
alone in that bogey-hole! I might have lost my reason."

"Didn't fancy you'd go stark staring mad as fast as all that," chuckled
Diana. "It didn't take you very long to push that door down."

"If we see any symptoms of insanity cropping out in you, we'll know the
reason," added Wendy smartly.

"And you see it's been very good for you to know what it feels like to
be left behind," rubbed in Diana. "You never told us about that gipsy
trail dodge. Tit for tat's my motto."

"I think you're the two horridest girls in the school! I sha'n't speak
to you again. You may consider yourselves funny, but no one else does,"
said Sadie witheringly, as she flounced away to hang on to Geraldine's
arm, and pour her woes into the head girl's not too willing ear.

It was a good hour's walk from the cromlechs to Birk Water, the lake
where they intended to pick the rushes. The path was the merest track,
and the tramp through the heather and over rough and rugged stones well
justified the thick footgear upon which Miss Todd had insisted. Birk
Water was a lovely little mountain tarn lying under the shadow of Fox
Fell, a smooth, grassy eminence down which hurried a noisy stream. They
found a sheltered place in the sunshine on the bank, and sat down to eat
their lunch. Hard-boiled eggs and cheese sandwiches tasted delicious in
the open air, and for a special treat there was an apple apiece. In
normal times the supply of apples was liberal, but this year the crop
had failed, and they were rare dainties.

"I sympathize with Eve," said Wendy, munching blissfully. "It must have
been a very great temptation, especially with 'knowledge' thrown in.
Just think of being able to eat an apple that would teach you all your
dates and French verbs."

"There weren't any dates then, unless they counted the geological
periods; and the Tower of Babel came later, so the French language
wasn't invented," objected Tattie.

"Oh! don't be so literal-minded. I never meant that Eve sat at a desk
and wrote exercises. I'm only telling you I like apples."

"Well, so do I, and yours is a bigger one than mine."

"It won't be long, don't you worry yourself. It's getting 'small by
degrees and beautifully less'."

The slopes of the hill were slightly marshy, and grew a crop of
remarkably tall and fine rushes. They were much easier to gather than
those on the borders of the lake. The girls had brought knives, and,
when lunch had vanished to the last crumb, they dispersed up the
hill-side to reap their rush harvest.

"If they're not all wanted for the church, I vote we ask Miss Todd to
let us put some down on the schoolroom floor," said Diana, hacking away
cheerfully. "I'd just admire to know what they feel like under one's
feet. It would take one back about five centuries."

"Spiffing! We'll ask her! Get as many as you can carry, and tell the
others. They'd be far more interesting than linoleum. Think of being
able to swish one's toes about in them. I hope the church won't want too
many."

"It oughtn't to claim more than its tithe. I suppose it's entitled to a
tenth of every harvest, if we stick strictly to the old customs," smiled
Loveday, whose arms were already filled with a sheaf of green and
orange.

On the open side of the fell the wind blew strongly, and it was a
struggle to toil upwards. The school tacked instead towards the
sheltered bank of the stream, and with one accord broke into Scotch
songs. Geraldine, in a full contralto, was singing "Green grow the
rashes, O". Betty Blane's chirpy voice proclaimed "I'm ower young to
marry yet",--a self-evident proposition, as she was only thirteen.
Stuart and Loveday were crooning "Flowers of the Forest" as a kind of
soprano dirge, which was drowned by a chorus of juniors roaring "Auld
Lang Syne".

  "We twa hae paidled i' the burn
  Frae mornin' sun till dine",

chanted Diana after them. "And that's just what I want to do. I've never
had a chance yet to 'paidle' in a British burn."

"You won't to-day, then," said Geraldine, who chanced to overhear, and
stopped her singing to interpolate a remark. "Shoes and stockings aren't
allowed off, except in the summer term."

    "Green grow the rashes, O!
     Green grow the rashes, O!
  The sweetest hours that e'er I spent
  Were spent among the lassies, O!"

Diana stood frowning as Geraldine passed along, carolling at the pitch
of her voice.

"What nonsense!" she growled. "Who made such a silly old rule? I'm not
going to keep it."

"It's quite as warm to-day as it sometimes is in summer," agreed Wendy.

"I believe it's only 'swank' on Geraldine's part, because she's head
prefect. I _shall_ paddle! Just because she said I mustn't. Come on,
Wendy! Let's scoot into this hollow and enjoy ourselves. Geraldine makes
me feel real bad when she bosses. I want to go and break all the rules I
can."




CHAPTER V

Diana Dares


If Diana--a modern Eve--hankered after the apples of new experiences,
Wendy succumbed to her persuasions as readily as Adam. The little
purling brook was attractive, mistresses and prefects were safely out of
sight, and schoolmates, if they chanced to appear on the scene, might be
bribed not to blab. In a twinkling laces were unfastened, and two stout
pairs of boots stowed away among the stones, each with its stocking
tucked inside; while two pairs of bare feet went splashing joyously into
the brook. It was fun paddling in the little pools and scrambling over
the rocks, waving a foot occasionally into a foaming fall, and dancing
out on to the grass when the water grew too cold to be endured any
longer. They wandered for some distance up the hill-side, supremely
happy, though taking care not to allow their exuberant spirits to
overflow into song. So far not a soul seemed to have noticed them--they
were enjoying the sweets of undiscovered crime. Suddenly through the
clear autumnal air rang out the shrill, bubbling call of the regimental
whistle with which Miss Todd was wont, on country walks, to collect her
scattered flock. The two sinners jumped so uneasily that Wendy slipped
from a stone and splashed into a pool, with rather disastrous
consequences to her skirt.

"We'd best go back and find our boots," she said, hurriedly wringing the
water from the brown tweed.

They had not realized how far they had roamed up the stream, and the
length of the way back surprised them. It is not an easy matter to hurry
over slippery stones, though they made what speed they could, urged by
another summons from the whistle.

"I think this was the place," declared Diana, at last arriving at
landmarks that seemed familiar. "I left mine just over there."

Both girls sought their hiding-places, but, to their utter dismay, the
boots were missing. They searched about here, there, and everywhere, but
not so much as the tab of a lace could be found. Meanwhile the whistle
sounded impatient blasts.

"What _are_ we to do?" flustered Wendy. "Toddlekins will be furious if
we don't go; and yet how _can_ we go without our boots?"

"We must have mistaken the place," gasped Diana. "Perhaps it was farther
down."

"No, no! I'm certain it was just here."

"Well, we're in a pretty fix, at any rate."

"T-r-r-r-r-ee-ee!" came again from the fell side. To disobey the summons
deliberately was open mutiny. An agitated voice on the bank called to
them.

"Wendy and Diana, can't you hear the whistle? Come this instant!"

It was Stuart Hamilton, who stood beckoning violently.

"We've lost our boots," wailed Wendy.

"Then come without them. Miss Todd has sent me to find you. Hurry up!"

It was a scratchy and painful performance to hurry through heather and
over sharp stones to the spot where the school was assembled. Miss Todd
stood staring at them as they approached, with her "report yourself in
my study" expression. They felt their bare legs and feet most
embarrassingly conspicuous, and wished that fickle fashion had clothed
them in longer skirts.

"What is the meaning of this?" asked the Principal, eyeing their
uncovered extremities severely.

"We've--we've--lost our boots," stammered Diana, speaking for both.

"And why were your boots taken off? You were aware of the rule, for I
happen to know that you had just been reminded of it." (Here Wendy fixed
a reproachful gaze on Geraldine, who coloured slightly.) "You've
deliberately disobeyed orders, and you will be confined to 'bounds' for
a fortnight. It's absolutely essential in our country rambles that
discipline should be kept up, and any girl who breaks rules will stay at
home next time. You deserve to walk back with bare feet, but Miss
Beverley will give you your boots. Put them on at once!"

It was horrible to have to sit down upon the heather and pull on
stockings and boots under the critical supervision of twenty-two pairs
of eyes. Diana's lace broke, and Wendy's fingers seemed all thumbs. Miss
Todd superintended till the last knot had been awkwardly tied, then she
gave the signal for marching. Considerably crestfallen, the delinquents
dropped towards the rear.

"Did Geraldine sneak?" whispered Wendy to Violet.

"No, it wasn't exactly her fault--it was Spot really. He routed out the
boots, and began barking and worrying them, and Miss Beverley rushed up
to see what he'd got--she thought he'd caught an otter or a water-rat.
When she saw it was boots--well----"

"She knew she'd caught us," finished Diana.

"She took the boots straight to Miss Todd, and Toddlekins blew her
whistle and counted us over like sheep to find who was missing. Then she
asked who'd seen you last, and if anyone had given you leave to wade.
She dragged it all out of Geraldine. I don't think Gerry would have told
on her own."

"Spot!" said Diana, turning reproachful eyes on that panting specimen of
the canine race. "I used to think you a dinky little dog, but I'm out of
friends with you now. It's a real mean trick you've played us. Oh! you
needn't come jumping up on me and licking my hand. What possessed you to
unearth those boots? 'Bounds' for a whole fortnight! And I wanted to go
to Glenbury on Wednesday. It's too disgusting for words! Vi, d'you think
if I looked an absolute hallowed saint all Sunday, and Monday, and
Tuesday, Miss Todd would let me go to Glenbury? My name's down for the
exeat, you know."

Violet regarded Diana for a moment or two as if making mental
calculations.

"You couldn't do it," she decided at last. "You couldn't look the least
tiny, weeny atom like a saint if you tried till doomsday. Saints ought
to be thin and wan, with straight noses and fair hair parted in the
middle. You're rosy and substantial, and your nose isn't straight, and
your hair's too brown, and as for your eyes--they've a wicked twinkle in
them the whole time. No, my good girl, whatever else you may do, you
won't succeed in looking saintly."

"Well, I guess I've got some bounce in me, certainly," agreed Diana.
"But I thought perhaps if I went about on tiptoe and whispered,
and"--hopefully--"I could keep my eyes half-shut, couldn't I?"

Violet shook her head decisively.

"That twinkle would ooze out of the smallest chink, and besides, even if
you managed to look a saint, that wouldn't influence Toddlekins. You
don't know her yet. Once she says a thing she sticks to it like glue.
_She_ calls it necessary firmness in a mistress, and _we_ call it a
strain of obstinacy in her disposition. In the old days we could get
round Mrs. Gifford, but now Toddlekins rules the show, you may as well
make up your mind to things and have done with it. What she says is
kismet."

"Why do you want to go to Glenbury?" asked Jess.

"Oh! just a reason of my own," evaded Diana.

"You'll very likely get an exeat the week after," consoled Violet.

"It would be no use to me then," said Diana dismally.

The procession of rush-bearers, each carrying a good-sized sheaf in her
arms, wound down the hill-side to go back to Pendlemere by a different
route. This was a wild track over the moors, past the old slate-quarry,
where rusty bits of machinery and piles of broken slates were lying
about, then over the ridge and down by Wethersted Tarn to the gorge
where the river took its rise. Here a stream of considerable force
thundered along between high walls of rock. It was a picturesque spot;
rowan-trees hung from clefts in the crags, their bright berries
rivalling the scarlet of the hips and haws; green fronds of fern bent at
the water's edge, and brilliant carpets of moss clothed the boulders. At
one point a great tree-trunk, a giant of the fells, rotten through many
years of braving the strong west wind, had fallen and lay across the
torrent. It stretched from bank to bank like a rough kind of natural
bridge, with the stream roaring and foaming only six feet below. The
girls scrambled over its upturned roots, and stood looking at the
straight trunk and withered branches that lay stretched before them.

"Shouldn't care to venture across there," said Loveday with a shiver.

"It looks particularly slippery and horrid," agreed Geraldine.

"The water must be so very deep down there," said Hilary.

"I don't believe there's one of us who'd go across for a
five-pound-note," said Ida. "What offers? Don't all speak at once!"

The girls smiled, and were turning away to follow Miss Todd, when
Geraldine stopped and held up a finger.

"What's that noise?" she asked.

"I don't hear anything but the stream," said Ida doubtfully.

"I do, though," said Diana, who with Wendy and Vi had joined the
seniors. "It sounds like somebody whimpering."

"I'm going down the bank to see."

The others followed Geraldine, and swung themselves down to the water
level. Sitting under the arch formed by the roots of the tree was a
small boy of about seven, rubbing two swimming eyes with two grimy
little fists and sobbing lustily.

"Hallo! What's the matter here?" said Geraldine briskly. "Where do you
come from, and why don't you go home? Are you lost?"

At the mention of "home" the little fellow's tears redoubled, and the
whimper rose to a roar. Ida sat down on the rock beside him, and tried
to comfort him. It was a difficult process to get any coherent or
sensible replies to her questions, but after considerable coaxing, and a
last piece of chocolate which Wendy fortunately fished from her pocket,
she managed to wring from him that his name was Harry, that he lived at
a farm on the other side of the torrent, that he had come down to the
river with several other boys, and that they had dared him to cross by
the fallen tree. Once over, he was too frightened to go back, and, after
waiting and calling to him for some time, the other boys had run away.
How was he going to get home?

The situation was difficult, for there was no bridge across the river
for many miles. Unless the child could go back the way he had come, it
was a problem what was to be done.

"You were a silly boy ever to try to cross," said Geraldine
sententiously.

"They said I durstn't!" sobbed the small sinner.

"Oh, don't scold him!" pleaded Diana. "I do know so exactly how he felt.
I've often been dared to do things myself, and done them, though I
shivered."

"Well, you'd surely never do such a silly thing as cross that tree?"

[Illustration: TWO PAIRS OF BARE FEET WENT SPLASHING JOYOUSLY INTO THE
BROOK]

"Wouldn't I? I believe I'm going to do it now."

"Diana!"

"He's got to get home somehow. Look here, Harry!"--Diana knelt on the
pebbles, and put her arm round the little blue-jerseyed figure--"suppose
I were to go too, would you dare to cross again? We'd both crawl on our
hands and knees."

The sobs stopped, while Harry took a swift survey of her face.
Apparently he found it satisfactory.

"If you'll go first," he stammered.

"Then come along--we've no time to waste," said Diana, springing up and
giving him her hand.

"Diana! You surely don't mean----" began Geraldine in eager
remonstrance.

"Yes, I do!" interrupted Diana. "I've done worse things before, and I'm
not scared. Come on, Harry! We'll have you home in forty cracks."

The girls did not attempt to interfere. They stood and watched while
Diana hauled the little boy up the bank. Perhaps each secretly wished
she were capable of such a piece of pluck. Though the tree was tall
enough to span the stream, its bole seemed very narrow to form a bridge,
and the rounded surface made it all the more slippery; the few branches
here and there were of little help. Diana hoisted up her protege, then
going in front of him began to crawl across on her hands and knees,
speaking to him all the time, so as to encourage him to follow her.
Beneath them the water foamed and roared over the rocks: to slip would
mean to be whirled into the depths of a dark pool below. It was a slow
progress, but inch by inch they crept along till the most dangerous part
was passed, and they had reached comparative safety. The girls cheered
when at last Diana scrambled to her feet and lifted Harry on to dry
ground. A path led up the side of the gorge, and along this he set off
at full speed for home. His preserver stood looking after him for a
minute or two, and then she turned to re-cross her perilous bridge. Six
hands were stretched out to help her as she completed the venturesome
journey.

"You're a trump, Di!"

"_I_ daren't have done it!"

"You've been a guardian angel to that child!"

"Was it _very_ awful?"

"I can't think how you managed it!"

"I nearly screamed when you reached the middle!"

"It felt worse coming back than going," said Diana, brushing her skirt,
which had suffered considerably. "Somehow I minded it more. Well, it's
over now! We'd better be getting on, hadn't we?"

"Yes, indeed; the others will think we're lost," agreed Geraldine.

The t-r-r-ee-ee of the whistle was sounding from the far distance, so
the girls made a spurt and hurried along to catch up the rest of the
party. Geraldine, in virtue of her office as head prefect, briefly
explained to Miss Todd the cause of the delay.

"I shouldn't have let you do it, Diana, if I had been there," said the
Principal. "But I've no doubt the little boy's mother is blessing you.
We should have had to take him to Pendlemere with us, and have sent
somebody from the village to take him home. There would have been no
other way. Remember, though, that I'm responsible for you to your
parents, and I really can't allow these harum-scarum tricks. Suppose
there had been an accident!"

"Dad knows me, and he wouldn't have blamed you," said Diana cheerily.
"He says I'm like a cat with nine lives, or a bad halfpenny that always
turns up again. I've done worse things than this."

"Then you won't do them while you're at this school," returned Miss Todd
firmly, motioning her to walk along in front with Geraldine.

On Monday afternoon, with the aid of some ribbons, the girls made their
rushes into pretty little sheaves. They plaited bands for them, and
twisted them securely. Miss Todd, much interested, superintended their
operations.

"You may pick some flowers from the garden to-morrow, and put garlands
round them," she suggested. "We're reviving a most ancient custom that
dates back to the early days of Christianity in Britain. Pope Gregory IV
recommended that on the anniversaries of the dedication of churches
wrested from the Pagans, the converts should build themselves huts with
the boughs of trees round their churches, and celebrate the day with
feasting. The rush-bearing is probably the last relic of that ancient
ceremony. At one time there was always a village feast in connection
with it, though it degenerated at last into a sort of rustic saturnalia,
and had to be suppressed."

"Old customs are very interesting," said Diana, staring at the Principal
with wide-open, steady eyes.

"I'm glad you find them so."

"It's nice to see them _all_ kept up. If we have the rush-bearing
to-morrow, oughtn't we--just to revive an old ceremony--to have the
feast as well?"

A rustle passed over the school at Diana's temerity. Miss Todd returned
the steady gaze, then the corners of her mouth twitched.

"You've stated the case very accurately. As a matter of fact, I have
ordered seed-cake and scones, and have invited the Vicarage people to
tea."




CHAPTER VI

French Leave


The sheaves of rushes were duly carried into the church, and stacked
artistically in the deep window-sills, where they gave somewhat the
effect of a harvest festival. The girls were eager to lay bundles of
them in the particular pews occupied by the school, but the verger, who
looked askance at the whole business, and whose wife was hovering about
with a broom to sweep up bits, vetoed the suggestion so emphatically
that the Vicar, wavering with a strong balance towards ancient custom,
hastily and regretfully decided in the negative. Neither would Miss Todd
allow them to be strewn upon the schoolroom floor, although Diana
ventured to suggest the advisability of practical study of mediaeval
methods.

"There are some things best left to imagination," replied the Principal
dryly. "For instance, there would be no need to dispense with forks, and
let you hold mutton bones with your fingers at dinner, in order to
demonstrate fourteenth-century manners, nor to bleed you every time you
had a toothache, to test ancient practices of medicine. If you're so
very anxious to skip a few hundred years, I have, in an old Herbal, a
prescription to cure 'swimming in ye heade and such like phantasies'. It
consists mainly of pounded snail-shells, mixed with boiled tansy and
snippings from the hair of an unbaptized infant born between Easter and
Michaelmas. Any one who wishes has my permission to try it."

"No, thank you!" said Diana, screwing up her mouth. "Unless," she added
hopefully, "I might go out and gather the tansy. We saw some growing on
the way to Fox Fell."

"There's a fine clump at the bottom of the garden, so you needn't go out
of bounds to get it," replied Miss Todd, glancing at her pupil with eyes
that clearly saw through all subterfuges.

The Principal was determined that Diana and Wendy, having deliberately
broken a rule, should suffer the just consequences, and she did not
intend to remit one jot or tittle of the punishment she had inflicted.
"Bounds" at Pendlemere were sufficiently extensive to allow ample
exercise, and any farther excursions must be deferred till the end of
the appointed fortnight.

Diana, looking at the exeat list which hung in the hall, shook her head
at sight of her own name scored through with a blue pencil.

"Just to think that removing my boots and stockings for ten short
minutes should have cut me off from going to Glenbury," she
philosophized. "I was only 'laving my feet', as the poets say. Nymphs
always did it in classical times. Indeed, I don't suppose they ever had
boots and stockings to take off, so they could paddle as they pleased."

"They had a warmer climate in Greece," sniffed Wendy, who had a bad cold
in her head as the result of her paddling; "and I suppose they were
accustomed to it. If there is anything you want particularly in
Glenbury, Magsie's going, and I expect she'd get it for you."

"I don't know whether she could."

"What is it you want?"

Diana hesitated, then whispered in Wendy's ear:

"Three packets of Turkish cigarettes."

"O-o-o-oh!"

Wendy's eyes were wide. Diana nodded determinedly.

"But what do you want them for?"

"That's my own business."

"You surely don't _smoke_!"--in a horrified voice.

"I don't want them for myself--I'll tell you that much."

"For whom are they, then?"

"I shan't tell you!"

"Magsie would never dare to bolt into a tobacconist's and buy
cigarettes."

"I was afraid she wouldn't," said Diana sadly.

"And you'd better be careful yourself if you go to Glenbury next exeat
day. Toddlekins would draw the line at cigarettes. You wouldn't like to
get expelled?"

"I don't know that I'd very much care," sighed Diana.

She revenged herself for her enforced seclusion by clumping noisily
about the passages, till Miss Todd, hearing the racket, dropped a
significant hint as to the necessity of compulsory felt slippers for
girls who had not learnt to walk lightly. So, fearing that the Principal
might really carry out this threat, Diana betook herself to the garden,
and expended her superfluous energy on a fast and furious set of tennis.
Having lost three balls, she left Vi and Peggy to look for them, and,
still in a thoroughly bad temper, strolled round the corner of the
house. On the front drive she saw a sight that set her running. Exactly
opposite the door stood the car of her cousin, Mrs. Burritt. It was
empty, but the chauffeur, at the top of the steps, was in the very act
of handing two envelopes to the housemaid.

"Anything for me, Thompson?" cried Diana eagerly.

"Yes, miss. Letter for you, and one for Miss Todd," replied the man,
touching his cap.

Diana seized hers from Edith, the maid, devoured its contents, and
clapped her hands.

"I'll be ready in five minutes, Thompson!" she exclaimed, and fled
indoors.

Half-way down the corridor she nearly ran into Miss Todd, emerging from
her study with an open letter in her hand.

"Where are you going, Diana?"

"Cousin Cora's asked me for the night! She's sent the car for me. My
cousin Lenox is there on leave!" panted Diana.

"So I understand from Mrs. Burritt's letter, but I certainly cannot
allow you to go."

"Not go?"

Diana's face was a study.

"I had no authority from your father and mother to allow you to accept
invitations."

"But I _know_ they'd let me! Oh, Miss Todd, I simply _must_!"

"That's for me to decide, Diana, not you, and I say 'no'."

Mistress and pupil looked at each other squarely. Miss Todd's mouth was
set in a firm line. Evidently she considered that she was fighting a
campaign against Diana, and she meant to carry this outpost. Diana had
the sense to realize her defeat. She drooped her lashes over her eyes.

"May I send a note to Cousin Cora?" she asked in a strangled voice.

"You can if you wish, and I'll write to her myself, and explain that it
is against our rules."

Murmuring something that sounded dangerously like "Strafe rules!" Diana
darted upstairs for blotting-pad and fountain-pen. She frowned hard
while she scribbled, thumped the envelope as she closed it, then ran
down to give it into the personal charge of the chauffeur. She would
have added some comments for his benefit, had Miss Hampson not been
standing upon the doorstep.

"You're not coming, miss?" enquired Thompson civilly, but with evident
astonishment.

"_No!_" grunted Diana, turning indoors and clumping down the hall past
Miss Todd's study with footsteps heavy enough to justify the demand for
felt slippers.

She was too angry at the moment to mind what happened, and the
Principal, who was wise in her generation, allowed her to stamp by
unchallenged.

At tea-time, at preparation, at evening recreation, and at supper Diana
sat with a thunder-cloud on her face. When she went to bed it burst. She
squatted in a limp heap on the floor and raged at fate.

"I'm sorry, but you're really making a most fearful fuss!" said Loveday,
whose sympathy and sense of fitness were playing see-saw. "It's one of
the rules of the school that we don't go away for odd holidays. We may
have Friday to Monday at half-term, but even Mrs. Gifford never let
anyone off in the middle of the week to stay a night. You're only served
the same as everybody else. Why can't you take it sporting?"

"You don't understand!" wailed Diana, mopping her moist cheeks.

"Do get up from the floor, at any rate. It looks so weak to be huddled
up like a bundle of rags. You haven't brushed your hair yet. Don't be a
slacker, Diana!"

Thus morally prodded, Diana rose dejectedly, put on her bedroom
slippers, and took the hair-brush which her room-mate handed. She did
not like to be called a slacker, particularly by Loveday. The atmosphere
was not altogether harmonious: she felt as if their thoughts were
running round in circles, and had not yet met at a mutual angle of
comprehension.

"Loveday doesn't understand me--she thinks me a spoilt cry-baby!" she
kept repeating to herself, and the mere fact of realizing that attitude
in her companion prevented her from trying to explain the situation.
Hair-brush drill proceeded in dead silence, only broken by an occasional
gasping sigh from Diana, which echoed through the room about as
cheerfully as a funeral dirge. Loveday stared at her once or twice as if
about to make a remark, but changed her mind; she dawdled about the
room, opening drawers and rearranging her possessions. When at last she
was ready to put out the light she paused, and turned to the other
cubicle. Diana lay quietly with her nose buried in the pillow. Loveday
bent over her and dropped a butterfly kiss on the inch of cheek visible.

"Poor old sport! Was I rather a beast?" she said; then, hearing Miss
Beverley's patrol step in the passage, she dabbed the extinguisher on
the candle and hopped hastily into bed.

All night long Loveday had uneasy and troubled dreams about Diana. They
met and parted, and quarrelled and made it up; they did ridiculous and
impossible things, such as crawling through tubes or walking on roofs;
they were pursued by bulls, or they floated on rivers; yet always they
were together, and Loveday, with a feeling of compunction and no sense
at all of the ridiculous, was trying with a sponge to mop up Diana's
overflowing rivers of tears that were running down and making pools on a
clean table-cloth. She awoke with a start, feeling almost as if the
sheets were damp. Stealthy sounds came from the next cubicle, and the
candle was lighted there.

"What's the matter, Diana?"

"S-h-s-h!"

"Aren't you well?"

"Yes, I'm all right."

"What is it, then?"

As a grunt was the only answer, Loveday got up and drew aside the
curtains. Her room-mate was ready dressed, and was in process of combing
her light-brown locks and fixing in a slide.

"What the dickens are you up to, child?" ejaculated Loveday in
amazement.

Diana turned quickly, pulled Loveday down on to the bed, flung an arm
round her, and laid a fluffy head on her shoulder.

"Oh, _do_ be a sport!" she implored.

"But what do you want to do?"

"Look here--it's like this! I'm such a duffer at explaining, or I'd have
told you last night. My cousin, Lenox Clifford, has come over to England
with the American contingent. He has just thirty-six hours' leave, and
he rushed over to Petteridge to see the Burritts. Lenox and I were
brought up together; I've stayed whole months with them when Uncle Carr
had a ranch in New Mexico. It was Lenox who taught me to ride, and to
fish, and to row, and to skate. There's no one in the world so clever as
Lenox! It's his birthday to-day. It was for him I wanted to get those
cigarettes--I thought he'd like them in camp. I couldn't think of
anything else to send him that he could pack among his kit. Well, he's
going off this week to the front, and, as likely as not, he'll be killed
right away, and I'll never see him in this world again. It makes me
crazy to think of it. He's only ten miles away, and I mayn't even say
good-bye to him. Lenox, who's called me his 'little indispensable' ever
since I was four! If he was killed, and I hadn't had one last word with
him, I'd break my heart. Yes, I would! You English girls are so
cold--you laugh at me because I feel red-hot about things."

"We're not cold really. I didn't understand," said Loveday. "You never
told me all this about your cousin. Does Miss Todd know he's just off
for the front?"

"Cousin Coralie said so in her letter. That's what made me so furious. I
wouldn't have asked to go to Petteridge just for the sake of a holiday;
but when it's a case of seeing Lenox, perhaps for the last time, I'm
desperate. Rules are cruel things!"

"I do think Miss Todd might have made a special exception," said
Loveday, hugging the agitated little figure that clung to her. "I'm
sure Mrs. Gifford would have let you go. It's because Miss Todd is new,
and also because, when once she's said a thing, she sticks to it. You
were kept to 'bounds'."

"I know. But, Loveday, I'm going to break them this morning. I must say
good-bye to Lenox whatever happens. I'm going to cycle over to
Petteridge--now don't talk, for I've planned it all out. I can climb
down the ivy, and I left Wendy's bicycle outside last night on purpose.
I shall be back by half-past seven."

The audacity of the proposal nearly took Loveday's breath away.

"But--but----" she remonstrated.

"No buts," said Diana, getting up and putting on her tam-o'-shanter.

"But, you silly child, you'll never do it in the time, and they won't be
up when you get to Petteridge."

"Won't they? I rather guess they will! I told Cousin Cora I was coming
to breakfast at six o'clock, and they must send me back in the car,
bicycle and all."

"Did you put that in the letter you sent by the chauffeur?"

"Yes. Miss Todd didn't ask to read it. I reckon they'll have a nice
little meal waiting. If I can manage to slip in here before the gong
sounds for prayers, nobody need know a word about it except you,
Loveday, and I trust you not to tell."

"It's frightfully against my conscience," faltered Loveday doubtfully.

"Oh! Suppose you had a brother or a cousin of your own who was going out
to the front, wouldn't you want to say just one word of good-bye?
Especially when you hadn't seen him for a year! It isn't as if I were
doing anything that Father and Mother would be angry about. And Cousin
Cora will send me back in the car."

"It really is red-tape of Miss Todd," murmured Loveday yieldingly.

"Then you'll promise? Oh, good! What a sport you are! Help me on with my
coat. No, I don't need a scarf--it's quite warm. I must take my watch,
though."

The girls drew aside the curtains and looked out of the window. It was
only about half-past four; the stars were shining, and there was a thin,
horned moon hanging in the east, its radiant rim turned towards the spot
where the day would break. No hint of dawn was yet in the air, though
curlews were calling from the meadows by the lake. Bushes and garden
paths were plainly distinguished in the starlight.

"It'll be light soon," said Diana, "and, at any rate, I can see quite
well enough to ride. I shall just enjoy spinning along."

"Be careful going down hills," urged Loveday. "By the by, you're on the
early practising-list this morning--had you forgotten?"

"Oh, kafoozalum! So I am! Suppose Bunty comes to see why the piano's
silent? Well, I can't help it! I'm going! Do the best you can for me,
won't you?"

The close ivy which grew up the side of the house had stems as thick as
tent-posts. Diana let herself down over the sill, found a footing, and
descended hand over hand with the agility of a middy. Wendy's bicycle
was leaning against the wall at the bottom. She took it, and waved
good-bye to Loveday, then walked along the side-path that led to the
gate. A minute later she was free-wheeling down the hill that led
through the village in the direction of Petteridge Court. Loveday,
shaking her head, went back to bed.

"I'm thankful I'm not a prefect, or I should have felt bound to stop
her," she reflected. "If I'd had a brother or a cousin whom I hadn't
seen for a year, and who was just off to the front, I declare I'd have
done it myself. I don't blame her! But there'll be a row if Bunty
doesn't hear her scales going."

Exactly at a quarter to eight o'clock a Daimler car whisked through the
village, and stopped by the gate of Pendlemere Abbey. A small figure
hopped from it, and the chauffeur handed out a bicycle, then drove away
at full speed. Girl and bicycle crept through the laurels to the side
door, whence the former fled upstairs like a whirlwind. From the
intermediates' room came the strains of the Beethoven sonata with which
Loveday was at present wrestling. Diana, wrenching off coat and hat in
her bedroom, paused to listen.

"Bless her!" she muttered. "She's actually gone and taken my place! What
an absolute trump she is!"

It was not until morning school was over that the confederates had the
slightest chance to compare notes.

"Well, did you see him?" asked Loveday, when at last they met in their
bedroom to brush their hair for dinner.

Diana's eyes filled with tears.

"Yes, and Cousin Cora said she was glad I came. She lost her own boy,
you know--he went out with the American Red Cross, and was killed when a
Zepp. bombed the hospital. That's two years ago now. I wouldn't have
missed saying good-bye to Lenox for worlds. I'd quite a nice ride to
Petteridge. It got light directly, and the hills looked beautiful in the
dawn. Loveday, you did my practising for me!"

"Not exactly _for_ you! I took your half-hour, and you must take mine
instead, from half-past four till tea-time."

"Right-o! But did Bunty come in?"

"Yes; and I told her I wanted to go out with Nesta this afternoon. So I
do."

"You don't think anybody suspects?"

"Not a soul!"

Diana came close, and laid a hand on her room-mate's arm.

"Loveday, I'll never forget what you've done for me to-day--_never_! If
I ever get the chance to do anything for you in return, you bet I'll do
it, no matter _what_ it costs me! You've been a real mascot. There isn't
a girl in the school who'd have played up better, certainly not among
the seniors. I do think you're just ripping! Did Bunty look _very_
surprised to see you at the piano?"

"She did, rather; but I asked her if Nesta and I might have an exeat
this afternoon to go to the Vicarage. Mrs. Fleming gave us an open
invitation, you know, to come and see her sketches."

"What a brain! You really are too lovely!" chuckled Diana.




CHAPTER VII

Land Girls


With the bond of such a secret between them, Diana and Loveday cemented
a firm friendship. To be sure, Loveday's conscience, which was of a very
exacting and inquisitorial description, sometimes gave her unpleasant
twinges like a species of moral toothache; but then the other self which
also talked inside her would plead that it was only sporting to screen a
schoolfellow, and that no one but a sneak could have done otherwise. She
sincerely hoped that Diana had escaped notice both going and returning,
and that no busybody from the village would bring a report to Miss Todd.
If the matter were to leak out, both girls would get into serious
trouble--Diana for running away, and her room-mate for aiding and
abetting her escapade. That she was really in some danger on her account
gave Loveday an added interest in Diana. She began to be very fond of
her. The little American had a most lovable side for certain people, on
whom she bestowed the warmth of her affection, though she could be a
pixie to those who did not happen to please her. With the seniors in
general she was no favourite. She had more than one skirmish with the
prefects, and was commonly regarded as a firebrand, ready at any moment
to set alight the flame of insurrection among turbulent intermediates
and juniors.

"Diana's at the bottom of any mischief that's going!" proclaimed
Geraldine one day, after a battle royal over an absurd dispute about the
tennis-court.

"And the worst of it is, she makes Wendy just as bad!" agreed Hilary
warmly.

"Wendy wasn't exactly a saint before Diana came," put in Loveday.

"Oh, you always stand up for Diana! I can't think what you see in her--a
cheeky little monkey, I call her!" Geraldine was still ruffled.

"She has her points, though."

"She'll get jolly well sat upon, if she doesn't take care," muttered
Geraldine, who held exalted notions as to the dignity of prefects.

It was at the beginning of the second week in October that Miss Todd, in
whose brain ambitious projects of education for the production of the
"super-girl" had been fermenting, announced the first of her radical
changes. She had not undertaken it without much consultation with
parents, and many letters had passed backwards and forwards on the
subject. Most, however, had agreed with her views, and it had been
decided that at any rate the experiment was to be tried. Pendlemere,
which so far had concentrated entirely on the Senior Oxford Curriculum
and accomplishments, was to add an agricultural side to its course.
There was to be a lady teacher, fresh from the Birchgate Horticultural
College, who would start poultry-keeping and bee-keeping on the latest
scientific principles, and would plant the garden with crops of
vegetables. She could have a few land workers to assist her, and the
girls, in relays, could study her methods. Miss Todd, who in choosing a
career had hesitated between teaching and horticulture, snatched at the
opportunity of combining the two. She was bubbling over with enthusiasm.
In imagination she saw Pendlemere a flourishing Garden Colony, setting
an educational example to the rest of the scholastic world. Her girls,
trained in both the scientific and practical side of agriculture in
addition to their ordinary curriculum, would be turned out equipped for
all contingencies, either of emigration, or a better Britain. She
considered their health would profit largely. She explained her views to
them in detail, painting rose-coloured pictures of the delights in store
for them in the spring and summer. The girls, very much thrilled at the
prospect, dispersed to talk it over.

"Is Pendlemere to be a sort of farm, then?" asked Wendy.

"Looks like it, if we're to keep hens and bees, and grow all our own
vegetables! Bags me help with the chickens. I love them when they're all
yellow, like canaries. Toddlekins hinted something about launching out
into a horse if things prospered."

"A horse! Goody, what fun!" exulted Diana. "I just _adore_ horses! Bags
me help with stable-work, then. I'd groom it instead of learning my
geography or practising scales. I say, I call this a ripping idea!"

"Don't congratulate yourself too soon," qualified Magsie. "You'll
probably find the geography and the scales are tucked in somehow. All
the same, I think it sounds rather sporty."

"It will be a change, at any rate, and we'll feel we're marching with
the times."

"When does the 'back-to-the-land' teacher come?"

"On Friday, I believe."

Miss Chadwick, the graduate of Birchgate Horticultural College, who was
to run the new experiment, arrived at the end of the week, and brought
two students as her assistants. They were a fresh, jolly-looking trio,
with faces rosy from open-air work, and serviceable hands which caused a
considerable flutter among those of the school who went in for manicure.
At tea-time they talked gaily of onion-beds, intensive culture,
irrigation, proteids, white Wyandottes, trap-nests, insecticides,
sugar-beets, and bacteria. Miss Todd, keenly interested, joined in the
conversation with the zeal of a neophyte; Miss Beverley, the
nature-study side of whose education had been neglected, and who
scarcely knew a caterpillar from an earthworm, followed with the uneasy
air of one who is out of her depth; the school, eating their
bread-and-butter and blackberry jam, sat and listened to the talk at the
top end of the table.

"It sounds rather brainy," commented Diana in a whisper.

"Yes," replied Wendy, also in a subdued tone. "Poor old Bunty's
floundering hopelessly. Did you hear her ask if they were going to
cultivate cucumbers in the open? I nearly exploded! I believe she thinks
pineapples grow on pine-trees. She's trying _so_ hard to look as if she
knows all about it. I'll be sorry for the infant cabbages if she has the
care of them."

"It wouldn't be her job, surely."

"I'd agitate for a 'Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Vegetables'
if it were. I believe I'm going to adore Miss Chadwick! She looks so
sporty. She wrinkles up her nose when she laughs, just like a baby
does."

"The little dark student with the freckles is my fancy."

"Oh! I like the other, with the bobbed hair."

Miss Chadwick, with her assistants Miss Carr and Miss Ormrod, brought a
new and decidedly breezy element into the school. They spent Saturday in
reviewing the premises, and on Monday they set to work. The girls, who
as yet were only in the position of onlookers, watched the operations,
much thrilled. All sorts of interesting things began to arrive: portable
hen-houses packed in sections, chicken-coops, rolls of galvanized wire
netting, iron stakes, the framework of a greenhouse, and a whole cargo
of tools. The three enterprising ladies seemed to have some knowledge of
carpentry, and at once began to fit parts together and erect sheds.
Their sensible land costumes excited admiration and envy.

"It's what I mean to do when I grow up," resolved Magsie. "Did you see
the way Miss Carr ran up that ladder? And she's begun to thatch the roof
so neatly. She does it far better than that old man from the village who
potters about. I'm just yearning to try my hand at thatching. I wish
Miss Carr would let me!"

While they were busy getting the place in order, Miss Chadwick and her
assistants declined all offers of inexperienced help, assuring the girls
that they would have their "jobs" given them later on, when there was
time to teach them. This did not at all content the enthusiastic spirits
who were burning to throw lessons to the winds and spend their days in
mixing putty, lime-washing hen-houses, and fixing up wire netting. They
hung about disconsolately, snatching at such opportunities of assistance
as holding ladders or handing nails.

"You _might_ let me tar the roof of the chicken-coop," begged Wendy.
"I'd just love to let it all squelch on, and I adore the smell!"

But Miss Carr, who the day before had rashly allowed Diana the use of
the lime-wash pail, was firm in her refusal.

"I haven't time to show you how, and I don't want things spoilt. Put
down that tar-brush, Wendy! If you get smears on your skirt, you'll
never get them off again."

"I don't see where _we_ come in!" groused Wendy. "I thought we were to
learn agriculture."

"You won't learn it by dabbing tar on the end of your nose," laughed
Miss Carr.

In the course of a few weeks, however, the preliminary stages were over.
Some fowl-houses and runs were finished, and their feathered occupants
arrived and took possession. A consignment of spades, rakes, and hoes
was delivered by the carrier, and arranged by the students in the new
tool-shed. Miss Carr announced herself ready to begin her course of
instruction. To the girls the crowning-point of the preparations was the
opening of several large boxes posted from a London shop. They contained
twenty land costumes in assorted sizes. The excitement of trying them on
was immense. Twenty little figures in smocks and gaiters went capering
about the school, wild with the fun of the new experiment, and feeling
themselves enthusiastic "daughters of the soil".

"It was A1 of Toddlekins to let us have a 'land uniform'."

"Couldn't do any decent work without, I should say."

"I believe Miss Carr insisted on it."

"Sensible woman!"

"It feels so delightfully business-like."

"Shall we win green armlets?"

"I'm just dying to start and dig!"

"And I want to climb a tree!"

Miss Chadwick and her students set to work methodically. They gave
classroom lectures on the principles of agriculture, and practical
demonstrations in the garden. The girls learnt the constituents of
soils, and also how to trench; the theory of scientific poultry-raising,
and the actual mixing of the food. They prepared plots that would be
sown in the spring, cleared and rolled paths, planted bulbs, and divided
roots of perennials; they sawed wood, lifted rhubarb, and helped to
prepare a mushroom bed. It was all new and exciting, and there was a
spice of patriotism mixed up with it. They felt that they were training
to be of some service to the community.

"It's fearfully weird," said Wendy, writing her essay on _Insect Pests_,
"to have to find out whether your insect has a biting or a sucking
mouth, so as to know whether you must spray the beastie direct, or apply
poison to the plant. I'd feel rather like a dentist examining their
jaws."

"I heard of an editor in America," laughed Magsie, "who got his 'answers
to correspondents' mixed up, and in reply to 'how to kill a plague of
crickets' put 'rub their gums gently with a thimble, and if feverish,
administer Perry's Teething Powders'; while to 'Anxious Mother of
Twins', he gave the advice: 'Burn tobacco on a hot shovel, and the
little pests will hop about and die as dead as door-nails'."

"You always fix these yarns on America," pouted Diana. "It sounds a
great deal more like one of your British editors."

To some of the girls the greatest event of all was the arrival of the
horse and trap which Miss Todd had decided to add to her establishment.
Pendlemere was some distance from the station and from Glenbury, the
nearest town, and she thought it would be a great convenience to be
independent of carriers and able to fetch supplies for themselves.
Diana, keenly interested, was allowed by Miss Ormrod to make the
acquaintance of "Baron", the pretty chestnut cob, and even to help in
his toilet. Diana loved horses, and used the curry-comb with enthusiasm,
talking to Baron in what she called "horse language"--a string of
endearing terms that on the whole he seemed to appreciate.

"I'd just adore to drive him!" she sometimes hinted; but Miss Ormrod
always ignored the hint, and, instead of offering her the reins, never
even invited her into the cart. Diana would stand watching wistfully
when Baron was harnessed, and the governess car would start out on a
pilgrimage to the town. She considered that a practical part of her
education was being obviously neglected.

"If we could each keep a pony and go for rides on the hills, it would be
ripping!" she sighed.

"Goody! What a circus we'd look!" said Vi, who did not take so kindly to
horsemanship, and preferred a car.

Early in November, Miss Todd, having some urgent business to transact,
went up to London for a few days, leaving Pendlemere in the hands of
Miss Beverley. The school jogged along without any mishaps during her
absence. She was expected home upon the Thursday. On Wednesday
afternoon, which was a holiday, Miss Chadwick, Miss Carr, Miss Ormrod,
and Miss Hampson mounted bicycles, and rode away with a party of seniors
to Glenbury. The juniors, by special invitation from Mrs. Fleming, went
to tea at the Vicarage. Two intermediates were in bed with a mild form
of "flu", and the remainder amused themselves as they liked best. Peggy
sat indoors, doing pen-painting; Vi brought stones for a rockery; Sadie
and Magsie played a set of tennis on the cinder court; Diana and Wendy,
who had asked to join the cycle party, and had in consequence received a
severe snub from Geraldine, wandered about the garden like unquiet
spirits.

"It's the limit to be an intermediate!" groused Wendy gloomily. "Seniors
and juniors get all the fun! Did you ever hear of _our_ form being taken
to do anything special while the others stopped at school? Of course you
didn't, because we never are! The seniors get first innings, and we only
have the crumbs that are left, and those juniors are treated like babies
though they're nearly as tall as we are. I'm fed up with it!"

"We'd better have a demonstration--parade the corridor with a placard:
'Fair play for Intermediates! Equal treats for all!'" suggested Diana,
who was always ready with ideas.

"Much good it would do us! We should only get sat upon by everybody.
Hullo! Here's Peggy wandering down. What's the matter with you, chucky?
You look disturbed."

"I hate coming out in a wind," said Peggy, holding her hands over her
rumpled hair. "I say, did you, or did you not see Miss Chadwick, Miss
Ormrod, _and_ Miss Carr bike off to Glenbury? Are they all three gone?"

"Of course they're gone!"

"You saw them with your own eyes?"

"Helped to blow up their tyres, which we thought was really saintly,
when we weren't asked to go with them," said the still injured Wendy.

"Well, it's a pretty go they're all off! Bunty's just had a telegram
from Toddlekins. She's coming back this afternoon, and wants the trap to
meet the four-thirty train."

"She should! She's in a precious hurry to leave her beloved London.
Whence this thusness?"

"I don't know. She's coming, at any rate," said Peggy, rather crossly.
"Bunty sent me to find out if everybody had really gone. Toddlekins will
have to get a taxi, that's all. Whew! I'm being blown to bits! I want to
get back to my pen-painting. I'm making a birthday present for my
cousin. Ta-ta!"

Diana stood watching Peggy's retreating figure as the latter raced up
the garden and into the house.

"Toddlekins will be rather savage not to be met," she commented.

"Yes; she's so keen on the trap, and the amount it saves in taxis and
carriers."

"It does seem rough on her, especially when she's sent a telegram. Look
here, old thing, let's take it to meet her ourselves!"

"What? You and me?"

"Why not? I can drive, and I know how to harness Baron. I have helped to
put him in the trap heaps of times. Bunty? Best not tell her anything
about it; she's always such a scared rabbit, and she'd only have fits!"

Wendy's eyes shone like stars.

"It _would_ be a stunt! Fancy driving in state to the station and
fetching Toddlekins! She'd be pleased to save a taxi."

"Bless her, she shall! We'll show her that her girls have some spirit
and self-reliance at a crisis. It's only making a practical
demonstration of our new agricultural course! What's the use of learning
if you can't apply it at the right moment? Run and fetch our coats and
hats and gloves, that's a cherub, while I go and tell Baron all about
it."

Wendy, much thrilled, and fired with the excellence of Diana's notion,
went indoors, and, taking elaborate precautions not to meet anybody,
secured outdoor garments worthy of the occasion. She rolled them in a
Union Jack for camouflage, and bore them off to the stable.

"I've brought 'bests'," she said. "Toddlekins wouldn't thank to be met
by two Cinderellas!"

Diana was standing with her arms thrown round Baron's neck, whispering
sweet nothings into his twitching ear. If he did not understand the
substance of her remarks, he realized the force of her affection, and
kept rubbing his nose against her shoulder in a sort of caress, very
gently catching her jersey with his lips and pulling it.

"I've told him, and he's delighted to go," declared Diana. "He's just
pining for a run. It's so dull for him standing here with no one to talk
to. It takes away his appetite. He'll enjoy his supper twice as much
when he comes back. Won't you, dear old man?"

"We mustn't be all day about starting. If you've finished making love to
him, let's get out the trap."

"Right you are!"

Diana was perfectly capable of accomplishing what she had undertaken.
She took down the harness, led Baron out into the yard, and proceeded to
put him into the shafts in quite a professional fashion. She looked over
all the straps, fetched the whip, donned the garments which Wendy had
brought, and proclaimed herself ready.

"We'll go out quietly by the back way," she chuckled. "Open the gate;
that's a mascot!"

There was nobody to say them nay, so in a few minutes they were trotting
briskly along the Glenbury Road. Diana was a capital little Jehu, and
held the reins with a practised hand. Baron, perfectly conscious of who
was driving him, behaved admirably. The girls felt their spirits at
high-water mark. They had certainly scored over the rest of the school,
and secured a superior jaunt to anybody. Moreover, it was a pleasant
afternoon to be out. The weather, which for some days had been damp, had
changed to windy. Long, dappled mare's-tail clouds stretched across the
pale November sky, and every now and then the sun shone out between
them. The glory of the autumn tints had been blown away, but the
infinitely intertwined, almost leafless boughs of the woodlands had a
beauty apart from foliage. Bushes covered with crimson masses of hips or
haws foretold a hard winter; birds twittered restlessly in the
hedgerows; and the withered leaves came whirling along the road with a
scurrying, rustling sound as of the little footsteps of innumerable
fairies. A seed-vessel of the sycamore, flying like a miniature
aeroplane, struck Diana full in the face. She picked it up as it fell on
her coat, and put it in her pocket.

"I shall keep it as my mascot," she said. "It was evidently meant for
me, so it will bring me luck. Do you believe in luck?"

"Very much, sometimes, but I don't often have any."

"We've got it to-day, though. Baron's going splendidly. I think the wind
excites him. You wouldn't believe he'd been out every day this week.
He's as fresh as a daisy. What's the time? I can't get to my watch."

"Quarter past four."

"Gee whiz! We must hurry ourselves. We've to be waiting at the station
by half-past. Baron, can you put on a spurt?"

They were bowling along a good macadam road and down hill, so that Baron
did not object to the extra strain put upon his legs. The spire of
Glenbury Church loomed ahead; in a few more minutes they began to see
the roofs of the houses. They crossed the bridge over the river, turned
the corner by the King's Arms Inn, and were trotting at a good pace
along Castle Street, when suddenly Wendy's side of the trap dipped down.
There was a horrible jarring and grinding, and horse and governess car
seemed to be trying to practise sliding. With great presence of mind,
and also strength of arm, Diana pulled Baron up.

"We've lost our wheel!" she gasped.

A crowd immediately collected round the little carriage, which stood
lop-sided in the gutter. One passer-by held the horse, another helped
Diana and Wendy out; a boy came running up with the wheel that had
danced across the street. People stood at shop doors and stared.
Sympathetic voices asked if the girls were hurt. Several connoisseurs
were feeling Baron's legs. In that most critical and agitating
situation, who should be seen riding up from the town but a group of ten
cyclists, led by Miss Chadwick, and displaying the familiar hatbands of
Pendlemere School. Diana and Wendy turned the colour of boiled beetroot.
The cyclists dismounted in a body, and Miss Chadwick, staggered at the
amazing spectacle of the wreck before her, took over instant possession.
She tilted her bicycle against a lamp-post, sent a boy for a blacksmith,
and began to unharness Baron. When he was clear of the shafts, and being
led away by a friendly ostler, she demanded explanations. Diana supplied
them briefly. Miss Chadwick looked at her keenly, but forbore to comment
before the crowd.

"Miss Ormrod and I will stay in town and come back with Miss Todd," she
said, with compressed lips. "You and Wendy can ride our bicycles. Miss
Carr, will you please go as quickly as you can to the station and
explain to Miss Todd what has happened. The train must be in by now. I
think, Miss Hampson, you'd better take the girls on."

It was ignominious to be thus dismissed, and to be forced to mount
machines and cycle back to school, instead of having the proud
distinction of driving the head mistress. Diana and Wendy felt their
feathers fall considerably, especially when they contemplated the fuller
explanations which must inevitably follow.

It was quite dark before Miss Todd arrived in the mended cart. She and
Miss Chadwick and Miss Ormrod had tea together in the drawing-room.

Later in the evening Diana and Wendy received orders to report
themselves in the study. They entered with sober faces. Outside, a band
of thrilled intermediates, who had listened with bated breath to the
account of the adventure, hung about and discussed possible punishments.
Miss Todd was not a mistress to be trifled with, and the trap was her
latest toy. It was nearly half an hour before the door opened, and two
very subdued and crushed specimens of girlhood issued, mopping their
eyes.

"She says Miss Chadwick knew the wheel wasn't safe, and had gone to get
a fresh pin for it," volunteered Wendy with a gulp. "But how could _we_
know that? She doesn't believe in practical demonstrations of our
lessons, or in self-reliance; she says we've just to do what we are
told. She got quite raggy when Diana mentioned it. We mayn't go near the
stable for a week, and we've each to learn ten pages of poetry by
heart."

"Ten pages! What an atrocious shame!" sympathized Vi. "It'll take all
your recreation time this week."

"I know it will, and I wanted to do some sewing."

"She never said _what_ poetry," put in Diana, her moist eyes suddenly
twinkling. "I'll learn something out of the _Comic Reciter_--the very
maddest and craziest one I can manage to find."




CHAPTER VIII

Armistice Day


Diana had a fairly retentive memory, and learned poetry without much
trouble. By far the hardest part of her punishment was to be forbidden
to visit the stable for a week. She was sure Baron would miss her, and
that, though he might receive other offerings of bread and carrots, he
would be looking out and pricking his ears in vain for the friend with
whom he had grown to be on such intimate terms.

Miss Chadwick, much annoyed at the accident to the cart, treated Diana
distantly. Instead of smiling at her when she came into the room, she
would look round her or over her head, and flash recognition to somebody
else. It was humiliating to find herself out of favour, especially as it
was noticed and commented on by her form-mates, all of whom were
candidates for Miss Chadwick's friendship. Wendy, toiling away at her
punishment task and grumbling at its difficulty, was not at all a
cheerful companion. Moreover, it rained--rained for two days and nights
without stopping; rained as it only can rain in a northern and
mountainous district in the month of November. The fells were covered
with mist, rivers ran down the garden paths, and from the eaves came a
continual and monotonous drip-drip-drip. Diana, whose letters from Paris
had been delayed, and who was home-sick in consequence, vibrated between
a fit of the blues and a wild outbreak of spirits. She had reached the
stage when she must either laugh or cry. She wandered restlessly round
the schoolroom on Saturday afternoon, while the others were amusing
themselves with reading, painting, or sewing.

"What a quiet set you are!" she raged. "Anyone would take you for 'Miss
Pinkerton's Academy for Young Ladies'! Why can't you wake up? This is
the dullest hole I've ever been in in my life. Magsie, stop that eternal
sewing, and be sporty! You look like a model for 'gentle maidenhood'. I
want to stick a pin into you, to see what would happen."

"Draw it mild, Stars and Stripes," answered Magsie, biting off the end
of her cotton. "And be careful about experiments with pins, or something
more may happen than you quite bargain for."

"I don't care! Anything for an excitement! I want some fun, and there'll
be a shindy if I don't get it. Wendy! Vi! Sadie! Do brace up and be
sports! Let's go on the upper landing and let off steam. It's better
than moping here."

Diana, by sheer force of will, carried the day, detached her friends
from their several occupations, and bore them, three steps at a time, up
the stairs to the top story. The upper landing was long, and had a
polished oak floor; it looked gloomy on this wet afternoon, and the rain
made a continual patter on the roof. In Diana's eyes, however, it
afforded a field for enterprise.

"I've a gorgeous idea!" she purred. "We'll pretend the floor's a
skating-rink. I've borrowed Loveday's roller skates, and we'll take it
in turns."

That roller skates were hardly meant for indoor amusement did not occur
to the girls. They agreed with enthusiasm. In order to share the
pleasure Vi and Sadie each buckled one on, and began a series of glides,
punctuated by pushes from the other foot. Wendy and Magsie, not to be
outdone, began to slide down the polished floor, and Tattie, who had
powers of invention, fetched a cake of soap and a sponge, and perfected
their activities by making a slippery course along the boards.

"It's like Alpine sports," exulted Wendy, taking a turn with one of the
skates, and skimming at top speed. "Can't you just imagine you're in
Switzerland? I want to make snowballs. Oh! why can't we do some
toboganning? I'd like to go tearing down a hill on a bob-sleigh. It
would be priceless."

"You shall do next best to it, my child," said Diana cheerily. "Trust
your granny to find the way for you. I've coasted indoors before now.
Wait a second, and you'll see!"

She disappeared, and in a short time returned with her drawing-board.

"You just squat on this," she explained, "and you go skimming down the
stairs like a water-chute. It'll be prime!"

"O-o-o-oh!"

"You _are_ priceless!"

"Great is Diana of the Americans!"

The improvised bob-sleigh worked admirably, and if it happened to catch,
there was always the banister to clutch at. Its popularity eclipsed even
that of the soap-slide and the roller skates. The fun waxed fast and
furious, not to say noisy. Bumpings and bursts of laughter began to echo
downstairs on to the lower stories. Miss Hampson, coming to unlock the
jam-cupboard in preparation for tea, stood for a moment in the corridor,
listening like a pointer. Then she thrust the key into her pocket and
dashed to the upper regions, just in time to behold Wendy, with scarlet
cheeks and flying hair, coasting down the stairs on a drawing-board. For
a moment Miss Hampson was without words. She stared, gasping, at Wendy,
who hurriedly picked up both herself and the drawing-board, and stood at
attention. The sporting party on the upper landing would gladly have
melted away had there been any possible cover, but there was not. Vi and
Sadie had not even time to kick off their roller skates. Miss Hampson's
keen eyes took in every detail of the trails on the polished oak floor,
and the soap-slide. Then they focused on Diana.

"I can imagine who's been the instigator of all this!" she said
sharply. "We've never been accustomed to such doings at Pendlemere
before. Miss Todd will be appalled at the damage you've done to the
floor. Go downstairs to the schoolroom at once, and remember that this
landing is prohibited in future. I'm astonished that all of you don't
know better!"

It was on the following Monday that tidings of the armistice were
proclaimed. The girls heard the church bells ringing when they were in
the middle of morning lessons, and unanimously "downed books and
pencils" and trooped to the front door, where Miss Todd was verifying
the good news from the butcher boy. For five minutes the school went
wild; everybody joined hands and danced in a circle on the drive,
shouting "Hurrah!" After all the long suspense and anxiety the relief
was stupendous. There was hardly a girl who had not some relation at the
front over whose safety she might now rejoice. That the shadow of more
than four years had at length been removed, seemed almost too good to be
true. Miss Todd and Miss Beverley had gone indoors to find all the
available stock of bunting; Miss Chadwick was already climbing on a
ladder up the porch to hang the Union Jack over the threshold.

"We ought each to have a flag of our own," said Geraldine, who was
intensely patriotic. "I'm going to ask Miss Todd if we may go and buy
some."

Wild schemes for celebrating the day floated in the air, varying from a
picnic to a bonfire.

"The ground is too wet yet for either," decreed Geraldine. "How could we
tramp over the fells when everything's a quagmire? And if you think you
can light a bonfire with damp wood, you're jolly well mistaken. We'll
collect sticks, and have one when they're dry. I plump for a flag-hunt.
There must be some in the shops."

Geraldine's suggestions were generally received with favour at
head-quarters. Miss Todd felt that the school was fizzing over, and must
find some outlet for its excitement. An expedition to Glenbury to buy
flags seemed feasible. They could have an early lunch, and start
immediately afterwards. Those who possessed bicycles could ride, and the
rest could walk a mile to Athelton village and catch the motor-omnibus
which passed there. Everybody was satisfied with the arrangement, and
the cyclists dispersed to oil their machines and pump tyres. Miss Todd
and Miss Chadwick were going in the trap; even Spot, with a bow of red,
white, and blue ribbon tied to his collar, was to accompany the party.

Diana did not possess a bicycle, so Wendy, out of sheer good-fellowship,
decided to lend hers to Sadie and to take the omnibus, so that she
herself might go in company with her chum. Nine girls and a mistress
started off in good time for Athelton, slightly in advance of the
cyclists, who expected to meet them in Glenbury. Even in the village of
Pendlemere and the little hamlet of Athelton people were making peace
rejoicings: flags hung from windows, and children ran about blowing tin
trumpets, whistles, and mouth-organs. A string of small urchins had
improvised a band, and paraded proudly along, banging on tin trays and
old kettles, and yelling the National Anthem. Men talked eagerly
together outside the post office; women stood at their doors and
watched, some radiant and excited, and some quieter, with a heartache
behind the smile, as they thought of those lads who would not come
marching home with the others.

The wild weather of the last few days seemed to have rolled away with
the war clouds. The sky was flecked with blue, and the trees by the
roadside were hung all over with drops that sparkled in the sun like
jewels. The brook that ran down from the fells was tumbling along in a
great brown stream, thundering under the bridge; robins, hopping in the
wet hedgerows, twittered their plaintive little autumn song. A woman
picked a marigold from her battered, rain-sodden garden, and handed it
over the wall to Wendy. Everybody seemed to want to speak, even to
strangers, and to tell how many of their relations had served in the
war.

At last the omnibus, ten minutes late, came rumbling along, and stopped
to pick up passengers. The school scrambled in, and with difficulty
found places. It was a jolting journey, much crammed up among country
people with baskets, but it was fun, even though the rattling almost
shook them off their seats, for all the passengers seemed so
good-tempered and jolly. On their arrival at Glenbury they found the
town _en fete_, with bunting hanging across the streets, and large
banners decorating the public buildings. The pavements were so full that
the crowd overflowed into the road. The cyclist members of the
Pendlemere party had arrived first, and had already bought flags, which
they pinned in their hats. The motor-omnibus contingent rushed off
immediately to secure any that were left, and to try to get some sweets.
Miss Todd, who had put up the cart at the Queen's Hotel, met them as
they were emerging from the confectioner's, sucking pear-drops and
toffee.

"You're lucky, for sweets are scarce," she commented. "Thanks very
much--I won't have one just now. Where are the others? Can you find
them? I'm going to take you all up the church tower to get a bird's-eye
view of the town. It will look nice to-day, with the flags out, and we
ought to be able to see for miles round."

Glenbury Church was almost as large as a cathedral, and possessed a
steeple which was a landmark for the neighbourhood. It was possible to
ascend as far as the flying buttresses, and to walk round a stone
causeway that encircled the tower just where the spire tapered up. The
entrance was in the nave, through a small oak door studded with nails.
The verger, aged, wheezy, and inclined to conversation, admitted them.

"You'll get a fine view," he said huskily; "you ought to be able to see
the prison and the cemetery, and, with luck, the lunatic asylum as well.
It's over amongst the trees to the east of Chatford. You can't miss it
if the sun's shining on the roof. There's been a-many folks up to-day."

The narrow corkscrew staircase was old and worn, and seemed to twist
round and round in an absolutely endless ascent as the girls toiled up
its hundred-and-eighty-six steps. To add to their difficulties, parties
of people kept coming down, and the problem of passing was difficult; it
could only be accomplished by the school flattening itself against the
walls while the descending sightseers gingerly made their way round the
narrow centre of the staircase. Tiny lancet windows here and there let
in streams of sunshine, but most of the pilgrimage was made in a
decidedly "dim religious light". Everyone's knees were aching when at
last they emerged through a small door on to the causeway. They were
standing on a flat terrace edged by a stone parapet just tall enough to
allow them to lean their arms on it and look over. Above them rose the
spire, tapering thinner and thinner till its slender point ended in a
weather-cock. Below, the town lay spread out like an architect's design.
They could see the roofs of all the buildings, and the streets, and the
lawns, and the pond in the park; all seemed viewed at an unusual angle,
for they were gazing down on the tops of things. Round the town
stretched miles of misty woods and fields, melting into the grey haze
of the fells. The objects of attraction mentioned by the verger--the
jail, cemetery, and lunatic asylum--were not particularly conspicuous,
and nobody was very anxious to localize them. The girls walked all round
the causeway, so as to get the view at every point.

"I suppose Pendlemere's over there?" said Diana, pointing a brown-gloved
finger in the direction of the fells.

"Yes; you can see the road we came by in the 'bus," explained Stuart.
"It winds round by Athelton. There's a much shorter way back, though, if
we were walking. Do you see that white farm-house on the hill above the
park? Well, you go through the fold-yard, across a field, and down a
lane, then there's a straight path over the moor, right to Pendlemere.
It saves two miles at least. Hilary and Nesta and I walked it once with
Miss Todd."

"Dinky, I should guess."

"Nice in summer, but it might be pretty wet now."

Most of the girls agreed that coming down steps was rather worse than
going up. Their ankles ached when they reached the bottom. The old
verger was taking the sixpences of another party of tourists, and
telling them, in his wheezy voice, to look out for the cemetery, the
jail, and the lunatic asylum--to him evidently the three prime points of
interest in the landscape. Spot, who had been fastened by his leash to
the railings outside, greeted the girls with noisy enthusiasm. Diana
untied him, and gave him a pear-drop.

"Bless him! He wants a bit of candy as well as the rest of us. He's a
'booful' dog with his patriotic ribbon on his collar. Stop barking,
that's a cherub boy, or you'll drive your Auntie Diana crazy!"

There was a short interval of shopping after the excursion up the tower,
and then Miss Todd pulled out her watch, compared it with the church
clock, and declared it was time to be returning. The motor-omnibus,
which started from Shipham, five miles away, was due in Glenbury at a
quarter to four. Miss Hampson marched her contingent to the
market-place, where it always stopped to pick up its passengers. Already
quite a crowd was waiting for it--people who had come in from the
neighbouring villages to see the peace rejoicings. There was no
policeman to insist on an orderly queue, so when the great scarlet
vehicle lumbered up, a wild scramble ensued. Some of the Pendlemere
girls were pushed in amongst the jostling throng, and some were elbowed
out. Wendy, Diana, and Miss Hampson, at the tail-end of the crush, tried
to scramble on to the step. The conductress, a brawny woman in uniform,
stopped them.

"Only room for one more," she shouted; "and I can't take that dog!"

"But we'd stand!" entreated Miss Hampson piteously.

"They're standing as it is! Can't take more than the 'bus is registered
for, or we'd break down at the hills. Room for one! Which of you's
coming? Be quick! I can't wait all day!"

It was a matter that had to be decided in a moment. Miss Hampson,
knowing that seven of her girls were already packed in the omnibus, felt
that she must go and escort them. She turned desperately to Wendy and
Diana, and panted:

"Miss Todd won't have started yet. Run to the 'Queen's'. She'll take you
back in the trap."

Then she allowed herself to be hustled inside by the impatient
conductress.

The two girls left behind stood staring for a minute after the
retreating omnibus. Spot, straining at his leash, barked his loudest.

"Well, I don't envy them their drive. They're packed like sardines,"
commented Wendy.

"I guess we've got the best of it," agreed Diana.

Evidently the next thing to be done was to walk to the Queen's Hotel and
report themselves, to Miss Todd. Diana was even beginning to speculate
whether she could advance any possible argument, such as a desire to
save strain on her mistress's arm, whereby she might induce the
Principal to allow her to take the reins and drive Baron home. They went
along Westgate, and turned the corner of Hart Street; in another two
minutes they would have been in Castle Street. Then fate interfered.
From a narrow alley on the right came sounds resembling explosives, and
three small boys, yelling gleefully, shot out into the road. Wendy,
pausing to ascertain the cause of the excitement, ejaculated the one
word, "Squibs!"

"Gee whiz! You don't mean to say they've got fireworks!" exclaimed
Diana. "Then I'm not going back till I've bought some. Here,
sonny!"--catching a bare-headed urchin by the shoulder--"tell me where
you got those squibs, and I'll give you my last bit of candy. Mrs.
Cobbes's in Beck Street? Where's Beck Street? Is it far? You ought to
come and show us for that big bit of candy."

"Can't! Got to go 'ome to my tea," returned the youth, whose small teeth
were already in the toffee. "Cobbes's is down there!" pointing an arm
like a sign-post in the direction of a by-street.

Diana and Wendy did not even wait to discuss the expediency of thus
side-tracking. The magic lure of fireworks drew them on, and with one
accord they trotted off to seek Mrs. Cobbes's shop. It took a little
hunting about and asking to find it; and then Mrs. Cobbes was stout and
slow, and seemed to need an eternity of time to wrap up their purchases
in an old piece of newspaper.

"We shall have to hurry!" said Diana, emerging at last, hugging her
parcel, and dragging Spot away from the pursuit of an impudent and
provocative tabby cat, with a torn ear, that was spitting at him from
the railings.

They did hurry. They nearly ran up Jessamine Street and Vine Street,
and clattered up the steps behind the post office into Castle Street,
and tacked through the crowd into the yard of the Queen's Hotel. A whole
row of conveyances was standing with shafts down, but the familiar
governess car was not among them. Perhaps it had been put inside the
coach-house.

"Miss Todd's trap, did you say?" replied the ostler, removing the
fag-end of a cigarette from his lips. "Why, she's gone! I harnessed her
only five minutes ago!"

Here was a blow indeed! They had never expected Miss Todd to drive away
without them, though, considering that she did not know they had been
left behind by the omnibus, she was scarcely to be blamed for doing so.
The two girls looked serious as they walked into the street again.
Somehow they felt aggrieved.

"If the rest haven't started, Magsie and Vi might take us behind them on
their bicycles," suggested Wendy dubiously. "Hodson's would know if
they've gone. They were to call for some parcels there."

It proved a forlorn hope. The girl behind the counter assured them that
a party on bicycles, wearing brown tam-o'-shanters, had come and claimed
their purchases, and ridden off up the street ringing their bells. The
next motor-omnibus would come through at seven. It was always crowded,
and no doubt would be particularly full to-night.

"There's nothing else for it, Di--we shall have to walk," said Wendy
blankly.

"Whew! It's a pretty good step."

"Six miles."

"Je-hoshaphat!"

"Well, it's no use waiting for the 'bus. We should never get places."

"Let's take that short cut that Stuart was talking about. She said it
saves two miles."

"What a brain wave! It's only a quarter past four. We'd be home long
before dark. You can walk four miles an hour, can't you?"

"Ra-ther!"

So they turned across the park, and up the hill to the white farm, and
through the fold-yard, and over the field, and along the lane on to the
open moor. They felt decidedly pleased with themselves, for it was far
nicer here than plodding along the high road. The ground was not so wet
as Stuart had prognosticated; indeed the path was quite firm and well
trodden, and in parts was even paved with stones. Spot, released from
his leash, careered about like a mad creature. Diana could not help
dancing a few steps, and Wendy, though she was growing hungry, stopped
grousing to admire the view. The sun, a red ball among grey masses of
mist, was sinking behind the fells, and a golden glow tipped the brown,
withered heather. The whole atmosphere seemed to reflect peace.
Overhead, little radiant clouds stretched themselves into the semblance
of angels' wings moving lightly across the evening sky. To watch them
was like gazing at the portals of a heavenly world.

The girls walked along as briskly as they could, but on the rough
moorland path it was impossible to keep the pace at four miles an hour.
They were going uphill, and, unless they went in single file, one of
them, owing to the narrowness of the track, was obliged to keep stepping
into the heather. At the top of the crest they dipped down again into a
high, narrow valley between two fells. It was swampy here, and in places
there were quite wide pieces of water to jump across. The path, which
had been growing worse and worse, finally separated into a fork. The
girls came to a halt, and stood looking first at one track, then at the
other. They were in doubt which to choose, for each looked equally bad.
They had turned so often that they had rather lost their sense of
locality.

"I should think Pendlemere must be over there," said Wendy, pointing to
the right, but looking frankly puzzled.

"Well, you know the place better than I do," answered Diana, following
her lead.

So they went to the right, through a small thicket of hazel-bushes, over
some rocks, and on up the bleak fell-side. The sun had disappeared, and
the little golden angels' wings had given place to sombre, grey clouds.
It was growing distressingly dark. A spot or two of rain began to fall.
The path, degenerated into a mere sheep track, was increasingly
difficult to trace. Though neither would admit it, both the girls felt
uneasy. They could not recognize any familiar landmarks to show them
their whereabouts. Suppose darkness came on, and found them still
wandering about on the moor?

"Do you think we've come the right way?" asked Diana at last.

Wendy looked round in the fading light, hoping against hope to see the
corner of Pendlemere gleaming below her in the valley. By now it
certainly ought to be visible. Nothing in the shape of a lake, however,
appeared in the landscape; only an interminable waste of brown heather
under threatening rain-clouds.

"No," said Wendy, with a shake in her voice. "As a matter of fact, I
believe we're lost."

Diana was plucky as a rule, but she was very tired now, and hungry as
well. Two somethings that may have been rain-drops splashed down her
cheeks; she turned her face away from Wendy as she wiped them off.

"What's to be done?" she asked huskily.

"Go back, I suppose. Goodness knows where this will lead to!"

"We ought to have taken that other turning."

"It's too dark to go that way now. We'd better get back to Glenbury, and
try for the 'bus."

Very soon the girls realized that it was getting too dark even to
distinguish the path at all. They stumbled blindly on through the
heather, conscious only that they were going downhill, but whether they
were really retracing their steps or not, it was impossible to tell.
Spot, whose spirits had failed him, followed at their heels. Faster and
faster fell the darkness; the girls linked arms to avoid getting
separated. They were both thoroughly frightened. Would they be obliged
to spend the night upon the moor? If there were only some means of
finding the way back to Glenbury!

Suddenly, a long distance in front of them, a light flashed out, as
though a candle had been placed in a cottage window. Hope revived. If
only they could reach some human habitation, they could ask to be
directed. They dragged their tired feet along, splashing in the dark
through puddles, sinking in soft ground, or stumbling over stones. It
seemed an interminable tramp before at last they struck the end of a
wall, and, feeling their way with their hands, groped along till they
reached a gate. The next moment they were rapping with their knuckles on
a door.

It was opened by a thin, middle-aged woman, who stared at them in
suspicious amazement as they asked to be directed to Glenbury; then,
seeing that they were only girls with their hair down their backs, she
cautiously invited them to come in. They accepted thankfully. After the
dark and the damp outside, the farm-kitchen seemed a haven of refuge.

A little boy, who had been sitting by the fireside, sprang up at their
entrance, and faced them with wondering eyes. Something in the small
figure seemed familiar. Diana's mind galloped rapidly back to a day in
late September when she had crawled along a tree-trunk across a racing
torrent, with a frightened, blue-jerseyed atom of humanity creeping
behind her.

"Gee-whiz! I guess you're Harry!" she exclaimed heartily.

The mental thermometer of the kitchen, which had stood at about
freezing-point, suddenly thawed into spring. Harry, recognizing his
former friend in need, hastily explained to his mother, who turned to
the girls with a light in her face.

"I've always wanted to thank you," she said to Diana; "but I never knew
who it was who'd helped Harry home that day. Sit you down, both of you,
by the fire. You'll let me make you a cup of tea?"

Rest, warmth, and tea were what the tired girls craved. They sat on the
settle, with a little round table in front of them, and ate the scones
and blackberry jam that with true northern hospitality were piled on
their plates. Harry's father came in presently, and, after a whispered
conversation with his wife in the back-kitchen, offered to take a
lantern and escort the girls back to Pendlemere.

"It's a goodish step, but you're rested now, maybe, and it's no use
risking missing the 'bus at Glenbury, and having to walk it after all."

A very tired Diana, and an equally weary Wendy arrived at the school
just when Miss Todd was getting absolutely desperate about their
absence. She had sent Miss Chadwick to Athelton to meet the seven
o'clock omnibus, and the teacher had returned to report that they had
not come on it. Miss Todd forbore to scold two such limp wrecks, and
sent them straight upstairs, with orders for hot baths, bed, and basins
of bread-and-milk. Explanations were reserved for next day, and they did
not get off scot free by any means. Miss Todd had an aggravatingly
mathematical mind. She calculated the time the omnibus left the
market-place, the exact moment when she herself started in the trap from
the Queen's Hotel, the distance between these two given points, and in
how many minutes at the rate of not less than three miles an hour two
ordinary walkers should accomplish it. The answer left ten whole minutes
to spare, and of that ten minutes of the afternoon she demanded a strict
account from Diana and Wendy.

The sinners, whose bones still ached after their adventure, appeared in
such crushed spirits that they did not receive the entire scolding their
head mistress had intended, and were for once dismissed with a caution.

"She didn't say we mightn't go to the bonfire," sneezed Wendy, on their
way down the passage. Wendy as usual had taken a cold in her head.

"I kept the squibs dry, thank goodness!" sighed Diana. "Nobody knows
about them yet, so we'll let them off as a surprise. Won't they all just
jump when they hear them? I'm looking forward to that bonfire as the
event of my life!"




CHAPTER IX

Diana's English Christmas


Diana had fondly hoped that the armistice meant an immediate declaration
of peace, that her father and mother would return post-haste from
France, take her away from Pendlemere, and cross at once to America, so
that they might spend Christmas in their own home. To her immense
disappointment, nothing so nice happened. The peace conferences were
lengthy. Mr. and Mrs. Hewlitt remained in Paris, and did not even speak
of booking passages to New York. They wrote instead to make arrangements
for Diana's holidays in England. It was at first decided that she should
spend the time with her cousins, the Burritts, but influenza broke out
so badly at Petteridge Court that all in a hurry the plans had to be
changed. It ended in Diana passing Christmas with the Flemings at
Pendlemere Vicarage. So far she had scarcely realized Meg and Elsie
Fleming. They came to school daily, and she had seen them among the
juniors, and remarked that they were "sweet kids". She was now to meet
them at nearer acquaintance, and not only Meg and Elsie, but Monty,
Neale, and Roger as well.

They were an interesting and lively family, and after a preliminary
half-hour of painful politeness, they thawed over schoolroom tea, and
adopted her into their midst. Monty, the eldest, was an eccentric,
clever lad in spectacles, fond of making scientific and chemical
experiments, which generally ended in odours that caused the others to
hold their noses and open the schoolroom windows, top and bottom. He had
a philosophical mind and a love of argument, and would thrash out
questions for the sheer fun of debate in a growling sort of tone that
was not really bad-tempered, only put on.

Neale, six months older than Diana, was a bright, jolly-looking boy,
with a freckled nose and chestnut hair that rather stood on end. As
regards book-learning, the less said about his attainments the better,
and he had an unpleasant half-hour in his father's study, explaining
details of his school report; but in all practical matters he was ahead
of Monty. He was a thorough young pickle, up to endless pranks, and
determined not to let time hang heavy on his hands during the holidays.

Roger, the youngest, a smart little chap of nine, followed in the wake
of his brothers, poking interfering fingers into Monty's chemical
messes, or acting scout for Neale's escapades. At the end of twelve
hours Diana felt that she knew them perfectly, and had shaken down into
a place of her own amongst them.

Six young people home for the holidays are apt to turn a house upside
down, and it was fortunate for Mrs. Fleming that she had an easy-going
and happy-go-lucky disposition, and could view with comparative
equanimity the chaos that reigned in the schoolroom. To Diana it was
delightful; she preferred a floor littered with shavings, a table spread
with paints, plasticine modelling-clay, and other descriptions of mess,
and chairs encumbered with books and papers, to the neatest, tidiest
room where everything you want is put away out of reach in cupboards.

"When I heard I was coming to the Vicarage, I thought: 'My, I guess I
won't have to bounce there!' But you're a real set of sports," she
assured her new friends.

"Well, I don't think we're exactly what you'd call prim and proper,"
chuckled Meg.

There were still a few days before Christmas, and the energies of the
whole family were focused on decorations. There were not many people in
the village with leisure to help, so most of the work fell upon the
Flemings. They tramped down to the church, bearing great armfuls of
evergreens, strings of holly-berries, and texts cut out in paper
letters. The girls sat in a pew and twisted garlands of yew and laurel,
which the boys, with the aid of a short ladder, fastened round the
pillars. Mrs. Fleming was fitting panels of cotton wool on to the
pulpit, and sprinkling them with artificial frost.

"We ought to have lots of flags about the place this Christmas," said
Monty, "to make it a sort of victory celebration as well. I'll put two
or three over the organ, and stick some round the monuments. What I'd
like would be to see our huge Union Jack hanging down over that blank
wall there."

"Well, why don't you put it?" enquired Diana, looking up from her
wreath-twisting.

"All very well, madam, but how am I going to get it there? That's a
little detail which escapes your feminine observation. Please to note
the height of our ladder and the height of that wall, and compare the
difference."

"I'd get up on to that passage and fix it," nodding to the triforium.

"Would you, indeed, Miss America? I rather think I see you toddling
along there, with a drop of thirty feet below you."

"Do you dare me to?"

"You're brave enough down here in a pew, but I don't believe any girl
would have the head for that. Women aren't steeple-jacks!"

"You needn't speak so scornfully. There may be a few steeple-jennies
among them!"

"No fear," laughed Monty, turning away.

Diana said nothing more, but as she went on with her wreath her thoughts
were as busy as her fingers. She was more silent than usual at lunch,
and slipped away quickly afterwards, leaving the family talking round
the fire. First, she ran upstairs to the corner of the upper landing,
where she knew the big Union Jack was kept. She rolled it into a tight
bundle, tucked it under her arm, then tore off to the church. She found
herself alone there, for none of the other decorators had returned. It
was exactly the opportunity she wanted. The bunch of keys was hanging in
the big door. She pulled them out, and carried them to the tiny door by
the chancel steps. This she unlocked and flung open, disclosing a steep,
winding stair. Almost on her hands and knees Diana scrambled up, and up,
and up till she reached the triforium, the narrow stone gallery that ran
round the church under the clerestory windows. The first few yards were
safely protected with arches, pillars, and a balustrade, but after that
came a stretch of about twenty feet with no parapet at all. The gallery
was only twenty-four inches wide; on the one side was the wall, on the
other a sheer drop of about thirty feet. Diana paused, and set her
teeth. She did not dare to walk it, but she knelt down and crawled along
till she reached the next piece of balustrade. Then she unrolled her
Union Jack, and, tying it by its cords to the pillars, arranged it so
that it hung down into the church and covered the exact spot of blank
wall that Monty had indicated. She had just finished when she heard
footsteps in the porch. Not wanting to be caught by the Vicar, she began
to crawl back in the same way as she had come. Perhaps the sense that
someone might be watching her from below unnerved her, for the return
journey seemed far worse than the outward one had done. She did not
venture to look down, but kept her eyes on the wall. Half-way she was
suddenly seized with a horrible paroxysm of dizziness. For a moment or
two she lay flat, too frightened to move, while her giddy head seemed to
be spinning round. With a supreme effort she mastered the sensation, and
crawled on, inch by inch, till she once again reached safety. With
rather tottering knees she came down the winding staircase, and through
the small door to the chancel steps. Mrs. Fleming, Meg, Monty, and Neale
were standing by the lectern when she appeared. Mrs. Fleming was white
as chalk; the others were staring open-mouthed, with a queer strained
look in their eyes.

"Well, I've done it, you see!" said Diana jauntily.

The Flemings gazed at her without speaking. Monty went and locked the
door of the staircase and put the keys in his pocket. The silence was
embarrassing.

"I think it looks very nice hanging there," declared Diana, nodding at
her Union Jack.

"My dear," said Mrs. Fleming in a shaky voice, "if you knew what I
suffered when I saw you creeping along the triforium you couldn't speak
so lightly. It isn't right to risk your life in this fashion."

Diana tried to carry the matter off airily, but the boys were grumpy and
would not speak. Meg kept looking at her with a peculiar expression, as
if she were recovering from a shock. Altogether, Diana felt that her
deed of daring had fallen very flat. She was annoyed that no one
congratulated her upon it. She considered that for a girl of fourteen it
was rather a record. Monty would not be able to sneer at "Miss America"
again. She strolled in a casual way past the font which he was
decorating, and made a final effort to wring from him the appreciation
she craved.

"There _are_ some steeple-jennies in the world!" she remarked, staring
upwards at the clerestory.

Monty picked up another piece of holly, placed it deliberately in
position, and then turned his spectacles on Diana.

"And there are more jenny-asses in it too than I should have expected!"
he answered pointedly.

When Diana had undressed that evening Mrs. Fleming came into her room to
say good-night, and sat down for a minute on the edge of her bed.

"Have you thought, dear," she said, "what it would have meant to Mr.
Fleming and me to have been obliged to write to your father and mother
and tell them you were lying dead, or, worse still, a cripple with a
broken spine; and what your father's and mother's feelings would have
been at the news?"

Diana turned her face away.

"Thoughtlessness can sometimes amount to heartlessness in its lack of
consideration for others."

"Monty dared me to do it."

"He never dreamed you actually would. Besides, are you going to do every
idiotic, silly thing that every foolish person says you dare not? I
thought you were more sensible, Diana! Remember, we are responsible for
you during the holidays, and I wish to return you whole to your parents.
We use every reasonable precaution to take care of you, but I can't
calculate on safeguarding you as if you were a baby of three."

Diana drummed her fingers on the pillow. Mrs. Fleming waited a moment,
then tried a different tack.

"I'm not very strong, Diana. My heart is weak, and I'm afraid for some
days I shall feel the effect of the shock you gave me this afternoon. I
don't believe you're the kind of girl who'd deliberately want to make me
ill."

Diana wriggled round, but her head was bent down.

"Remember that we care about you, dear. It would grieve us very much if
the slightest little accident were to happen to you. We want you to have
jolly holidays here, and to go back to school safe and well, with, I
hope, a happy remembrance of the Vicarage."

Two soft arms were thrown round Mrs. Fleming's neck.

"I'd do anything for _you_, though I hate to be a molly-coddle!"
whispered Diana. "I'm most fearfully sorry if I've really made you feel
ill!"

       *     *     *     *     *

The decoration of the church was only one of the incidents of Christmas;
there were other things to be done before the festival arrived. The
Flemings liked to preserve old traditions, and finding that their
little American guest was very keen on all the details of a genuine
British Yule-tide, they did their best to satisfy her. Mrs. Fleming used
the cherished half-pound of currants--which in the war-time shortage of
dried fruits was all the grocer could send her--to make the frumenty and
spiced cakes that from time immemorial had been eaten in that northern
district to celebrate the feast of the Nativity. A Yule-log was sawn and
placed upon the dining-room fire, and a huge bough of mistletoe hung up
in the hall.

"We ought to have the Waits to make it just perfect!" said Diana.

"I believe some of the choir used to go round carol singing once," said
Meg, "but it's been given up. The mothers said the girls caught cold,
and they stayed out too late, so it was put a stop to. It's a pity in a
way. Mrs. James was saying only the other day that she quite missed
them, and so did Mrs. Holmes. They both said Christmas wasn't what it
used to be."

The pupils of Diana's eyes were growing large and round and shining, as
they always did when her fertile mind was evolving new ideas. She seized
Meg's arm.

"Oh, I've got such a brain-wave!" she confided. "Look here! Why
shouldn't we be Waits? We've learnt all those Christmas carols at
school. Let's go round and sing them. It would be ripping fun!"

The idea appealed to Meg and Elsie, and, rather to the astonishment of
the girls, the boys also took it up with enthusiasm, and volunteered
their assistance. They enlisted the help of the village schoolmistress,
and some of the most tuneful among her pupils, and all on the spur of
the moment made up their company.

"What always spoils carol singing," said Monty sententiously, "is that
everybody's generally so beastly out of tune. They don't seem able to
keep the pitch without a harmonium."

"Pity we can't carry a harmonium with us!"

"Why shouldn't we?" suggested Neale. "I don't mean I'm going to haul the
thing on my back, so you needn't grin. I've a better notion than that.
We'll see if the Blackwoods will lend us a cart. Put the harmonium
inside, hang up a lantern to see by, and there you are, with a movable
concert platform ready to take round where we like."

The others looked at Neale with admiration. It was such a very brainy
idea, they wondered they had never thought of it for themselves. Time
was short, as the performance was to be that evening, so they dispersed
to make their arrangements. Ted Blackwood, a member of the church choir,
agreed to bring his father's cart.

"I'll take t'owd mare," he grinned. "Shoo's steady, and won't bolt when
th' harmonium starts. Aye, I've a big stable lantern as 'ull do too."

Here indeed was an excitement for a young American visitor. Diana could
hardly wait till tea was over and darkness fell. Fortunately it was a
fine evening, with a hint of frost in the air, so the expedition would
not be damped by rain. Mrs. Fleming insisted upon all the party being
very warmly clad, and brought out an old picture of "The Waits" to
demonstrate that the use of mufflers was an integral part of the
ceremony. Diana, to her delight, was lent a Red Ridinghood cloak of
Meg's, clad in which she felt that she had stepped back at least three
centuries, and was walking in the days of the Stuarts.

"I might be one of the pilgrims in the _Mayflower_!" she exclaimed.
"What would Dad give to see me? I wish you were coming too," she added
to Mrs. Fleming.

"I'm too busy, child, to-night," said Mrs. Fleming, kissing the roguish
little face framed in the red hood. "Enjoy yourselves, chicks! And,
Diana,"--with a warning finger held up--"_don't_, please, do anything
desperately amazing!"

"I'll be an absolute model of mild mediaeval maidenhood," promised that
damsel, with twinkling eyes.

They went first to the Blackwoods' farm, then, when Ted had harnessed
"t'owd mare", they proceeded with the cart to the schoolhouse, and,
after a good deal of heaving and hauling, lifted in the harmonium and a
stool for Miss Simpson, the schoolmistress, to sit upon while she
played. The rest of the party having joined them, they jogged along to
the first house on their list, that of Mrs. Holmes at the Old Grange
Farm. They drew up the cart outside the door, placed lanterns on the
harmonium, and saw Miss Simpson settled at the instrument--a matter of
some difficulty, as the cart sloped, and the stool was inclined to slide
away. Ted held the old mare by the bridle, in case the music might
revive her youthful spirits and cause her to bolt. The others grouped
themselves round the cart. Miss Simpson struck up, and through the keen
night air rang out the cheerful strains of "Christians, awake!" The
Holmes family opened the door in quite a state of excitement, and
listened with much appreciation while "Good King Wenceslas", "The First
Nowell", and other old carols were sung. They insisted on bringing the
party indoors for slices of Yule cake, and would have given them hot
coffee as well, but Monty, who wished to visit other houses, declared
they had not time to wait while it was made. So they tramped on to the
James's farm, where they had an equally hearty reception, and were
regaled with cocoa, currant bread, and cheese.

It was a unique experience, trudging along country lanes with a cart and
lanterns, with hoar-frost under foot, and a few stars winking in a misty
sky, then standing in the cold night air to sing their carols. Diana
felt that she could never forget it, and that the shrill voice of little
Jack Greenhalgh warbling

  "Nowell! Nowell! Nowell! Nowell!
  Born is the King of Israel!"

would always be associated with her idea of Christmas.

She had her fill of old-world customs, for she was allowed, by special
favour, to go into the belfry and help for one brief minute to pull a
bell. And after service on Christmas morning she stood in the church
porch and watched the distribution of the "roth shillings", which, in
accordance with the terms of an old charity, were handed over to "twelve
worthy widows resident within the bounds of the parish". She helped in
the afternoon at the schools, where a big tea-party and Christmas-tree
were given to the children of the village, and joined nobly in the games
that were played afterwards, tearing round at "Drop the Handkerchief",
or pulling at "Oranges and Lemons", with unflagging energy.

"Have you had a nice Christmas Day, childie, away from all your own
people?" asked Mrs. Fleming, holding Diana's face between her hands as
she said good-night, and looking at her critically for signs of
home-sickness.

But Diana's eyes were without a suspicion of moisture, and her voice was
absolutely cheerful as she answered:

"Yes, thanks; just topping!"




CHAPTER X

A Fit of the Blues


The interest of experiencing a real old-fashioned English Christmas had
kept Diana's spirits up at fizzling-over point, but directly the
festival was over, her mental barometer came down with a run, and landed
her in a bad fit of the blues. There were several reasons for this
unfortunate plunge into an indigo atmosphere. First, the inevitable
reaction after the over-excitement of breaking up, sending off presents
and cards, and duly celebrating the Yule-tide feast. Diana was a
highly-strung little person, whose nerves were apt to get on edge, and
who made the common mistake of trying to live too fast. Her father's
"lightning methods", which she much admired and imitated, were decidedly
wearing to her vitality, and left her sometimes like a squeezed orange
or an india-rubber ball that has lost its bounce. Then secondly, the
French mails had been delayed, and, since the holidays began, Diana had
not received a single parcel, letter, or even solitary picture post card
from her parents in Paris. The blank was great, and though the Flemings
assured her that foreign posts were irregular, and that the whole of
her correspondence would probably arrive together in one big cargo, she
nevertheless could not rid herself of the uneasy impression that illness
or accident to father or mother might be the cause of the delay. Reason
three, a hackneyed but very present trouble was the weather. The English
climate had behaved itself during the first days of the holidays, and
had shown Diana quite a story-book aspect of Christmas, with a light
fall of snow on the fells, hoar-frost on all the plants and ferns in the
garden, and the sun a red ball seen through a rime-tipped tracery of
trees. After that, however, it revenged itself in rain, steady rain that
came down from a hopelessly grey sky without the least glint of sunlight
in it. It was very mild too; the air had a heavy languor that made
everybody feel tired and disinclined for any exertion. Mrs. Fleming
spread the table with sewing, and sighed at the largeness of the task
which faced her. The Vicar shut himself in his study, and pinned a
notice on the door stating that nobody must disturb him. Monty retired
to develop photos; Neale, clad in a mackintosh, went out into the wet;
Meg and Elsie buried themselves in books.

Diana, feeling that life was utterly drab, wandered from room to room
doing nothing. She could not settle to sew, read, paint, write letters,
or any normal employment, and had not even the patience to try to put
together a jig-saw puzzle. She missed Wendy and her other chums amongst
the intermediates, and was almost tempted to wish herself back at
school. Her piquant little face with this new _triste_ aspect was a
sorry spectacle, and Mrs. Fleming watched her uneasily.

"I hope the child isn't going to be home-sick," she said to herself. "I
shall be sorry we took her in if we can't make her happy."

It was evident that something must be done, and something beyond the
ordinary resources of books and dissected puzzles. Mrs. Fleming
cudgelled her brains. Her few days' acquaintance with her young visitor
had taught her that Diana needed judicious handling. It was no use
making palpable efforts to interest her. In her pixie moods she seemed
almost to resent it.

"I believe the secret of Diana is to switch her thoughts off herself on
to other people," ruminated Mrs. Fleming. "Instead of trying so hard to
amuse her, I shall ask _her_ to amuse _us_."

She waited till her guest, who had taken an aimless prowl round the
house, returned once more like a wandering will-o'-the-wisp to the
dining-room, then she tackled her.

"Diana, I want you to do something very kind. I'm in low spirits to-day,
and feeling as stupid as an owl. I believe we all are--Meg and Elsie,
and the boys, and even the Vicar! I'd give anything for something to
buoy me up and to look forward to. Suppose, after tea, we were to make a
circle round the fire and tell stories--really jolly stories that we'd
prepared beforehand. We'd each take the rest of the day to think them
out. If possible, they must be personal experiences; things that have
actually happened to ourselves. You must have had adventures in America,
I'm sure, that would interest us immensely. I'm just longing to hear
about your life out there. Can't you write down a few notes, and give us
a really good yarn? You've no idea how much I'd enjoy it."

Diana stopped whistling, and stood with her mouth screwed into a button.
Her grey eyes were fixed on Mrs. Fleming speculatively.

"I didn't know grown-up ladies ever got bored stiff!" she remarked at
last.

"They do horribly sometimes; indeed the more middle-aged they are the
more they need cheering up, I think. They don't like 'getting on in
years'."

"I guess you want me to act jester."

"That's exactly the role I'd like to assign to you."

The twinkle was slowly coming back to Diana's eyes, and the dimples to
the corners of her mouth. The effect was like sunshine bursting through
a rain-cloud.

"I guess I'll try if I can remember anything to startle you, if you're
out for sensations. It's a kind of literary society, isn't it? Can you
lend me a pencil, please, and some waste paper? I don't know what I've
done with my blotter. Thanks! Now I'm going right up to my bedroom to
sort of ruminate."

Mrs. Fleming's prescription for low spirits acted like a charm. Diana
spent most of the rest of the day scribbling. She came down to tea
looking quite elated. The others tried to question her, but she refused
to be drawn. "Wait and see!" was all she would vouchsafe.

[Illustration: WE SET OFF AND RODE ALL THE MORNING]

It was cosy in the drawing-room when the family collected and made a
circle round the log-fire. By unanimous vote Diana's story was given
first innings, and, seated in a basket-chair near the lamp, she opened
her manuscript.

"I thought I'd rather read it than tell it, if you don't mind," she
said. "I'm a duffer sometimes at telling things. Before I start off,
though, I'd best explain who folks are, or you won't understand. Uncle
Carr Clifford had a ranch in New Mexico, and I used to go and stay there
months. They always kept a special pony for me to ride. Her name was
Darkie, and she was just a peach. I used nearly to live on her back.
Lenox, my cousin, would take me all round the ranch. I'd great times.
Well, it was when I was staying at Buller's Creek (that was Uncle Carr's
ranch) that this happened. Have I made it clear?"

"Crystal! Bowl ahead!"

So Diana began:

                          "THE LOST PONY

    "I had been staying some weeks at Buller's Creek, and one morning,
    when I came down to breakfast, Lenox ran into the veranda. He looked
    fearfully excited.

    "'Do you know,' he cried, 'that Darkie's missing from the stable?'

    "We all sprang up at the bad news, and Uncle Carr whistled. Darkie
    was my special pet, and, apart from that, she was the best pony on
    the ranch. How had she got out of the stable? Lenox had tied her up
    himself the night before. Either some malicious person must have let
    her loose or, worse still, some one must have stolen her.

    "'I believe it's Lu Hudson!' declared Lenox and Uncle Carr nodded.

    "Lu Hudson, whom most people called 'Spanish Lu', was the owner of
    the next ranch, and a very disagreeable neighbour. He was a big,
    rough, dark, hot-tempered fellow, with a bad reputation for picking
    quarrels and using his revolver. He and Uncle Carr were continually
    having lawsuits about the boundary of their ranches, and his sheep
    were constantly trespassing on the Buller's Creek ranges. He had the
    greatest admiration for Darkie, and several times had asked to buy
    her, but Uncle Carr had always curtly refused to part with her. The
    last time there had been trouble about the boundary, Spanish Lu had
    sworn that he would pay Uncle Carr out, and he was just the sort of
    desperate fellow to keep his word. Of course the first thing to be
    done was to ride round the ranch and see whether Darkie could be
    found anywhere.

    "'I'm sorry I can't look after the matter myself to-day,' said Uncle
    Carr; 'but Jake and I have to get off to the mart at Louisville. She
    may have strayed, but it's not likely. I don't believe you'll find
    her.'

    "As soon as Uncle and Jake, the herdsman, had started off in the
    buggy, Lenox saddled Whitefoot, his own pony, to go in search of
    Darkie. I begged and prayed and implored to go too, so finally they
    let me have my way, and saddled Jap for me, a brown pony, quiet and
    steady, though not so clever as Darkie. Coonie, a little half-caste
    boy, went with us.

    "'The air feels heavy this morning,' said Aunt Frances, as we were
    starting. 'If a storm comes on, make for cover. Don't try to get
    home across the prairie till it's over.'

    "The sun was shining, and we did not think the weather looked at all
    like a storm. I rather laughed at Auntie as she fastened a wrap on
    to my saddle, with instructions to wear it if I felt cold. Lenox had
    the lunch-basket, and also a small axe, which he always took with
    him when going round the ranch.

    "We set off and rode all the morning, but never a trace of Darkie
    was to be found. We ate our lunch in a stony little glen, where a
    stream flowed down from the ridge above. I was very keen on getting
    wild flowers, and while our ponies rested, I wandered up the bank of
    the stream, gathering myself a posy. I went on and on, much farther
    than I intended. At the very head of the glen was a natural barrier
    of rock, with a few steep steps leading on to a kind of plateau at
    the top. This spot, I knew, marked the boundary between my uncle's
    ranch and that of Spanish Lu. The glen was the property of Buller's
    Creek; the farther side of the ridge belonged to the Hudson range,
    and the plateau was neutral ground.

    "Something, I don't know what, impelled me, as I stood there, to
    give the long-drawn, peculiar whistle with which we always called
    Darkie. To my astonishment, a whinny came from the plateau above. In
    another moment I was scrambling up the rock steps. There, tied to a
    cedar-stump, was Darkie. She recognized me at once, and whinnied
    again. There was nobody in sight. I did not even stop to think of Lu
    Hudson. I just ran to Darkie and untied her, and took her by the
    bridle. It was a fearful business to lead her down the rock steps,
    but she was as surefooted as a mule, and together we managed it
    somehow. The boys nearly had a fit when I made my appearance with
    the missing pony. It was pretty plain, so they said, that Spanish Lu
    must have stolen her and taken her there for safety, intending to
    come back and fetch her. Where was he now? The answer came
    unexpectedly.

    "'What's that smoke there?' asked Coonie.

    "Lenox and I turned to look in the direction in which he pointed. A
    grey haze was mounting from the horizon.

    "'It's more like dust than smoke,' said Lenox. 'I wouldn't mind
    betting it's sheep.'

    "Who could have the impudence to be driving sheep on to the
    Buller's Creek range? It seemed more than probable that Lu Hudson
    had broken his pledge, and was again trespassing on his neighbour's
    property. Lenox and I looked at each other. If Spanish Lu were
    within short distance of us, the sooner we got Darkie safely home,
    the better.

    "'I'll ride her, and you lead Jap,' I decided.

    "We started off at once. As we got out of the glen and on to the
    prairie we could see in the distance an immense flock of sheep,
    herded by two men on horseback. We were too far from them to
    recognize faces, but the general appearance of one of them suggested
    Spanish Lu.

    "'They're grazing east of the ridge, in spite of what the judge
    settled!' exclaimed Lenox angrily. 'If I hadn't to take care of you
    and Darkie, I'd go and tell them what I think of them.'

    "It seemed no use running our heads into danger, and perhaps having
    Darkie wrenched from us, so we made off east towards home. We had
    only gone about a mile when suddenly the sky to the west behind us
    turned black. In a few minutes we were in the thick of a terrific
    blizzard. My first instinct was to give Darkie her head and fly for
    the ranch, but Lenox caught at my bridle.

    "'Ride back to the glen!' he shouted.

    "Lenox knew enough about prairie blizzards to prevent him from
    trying to find our way home through this one. On the open plains,
    where the wind has full sweep, a blizzard is a thing to be dreaded.
    Though we had to face the storm to ride back to the glen, it was
    the safest thing to do, for we were not far away, and we should find
    shelter there. With our heads down, and sharp scraps of ice beating
    on our saddles, we urged our ponies along. Suddenly we caught sight
    of a great moving mass coming on with the storm. It was the immense
    flock of sheep, that had stampeded before the blizzard, and were
    drifting along across the prairie. Lenox stood up in his stirrups,
    and shouted to Coonie:

    "'Ride over there, and we'll turn them into the glen!'

    "Coonie understood in a second, and so did I. Unless we could drive
    the sheep into shelter, undoubtedly the whole number would perish in
    the storm. Lenox thrust Jap's bridle into my hand, and dashed ahead.
    In a few minutes he and Coonie had succeeded in turning the leaders
    towards the entrance of the creek, and after them swept the rest of
    the flock. We followed into the sheltered glen, and, dismounting
    from our ponies, found a nook under a projecting piece of rock.
    There were some tree-stumps about, and Lenox set to work to chop
    them with his axe, and soon made a roaring fire. How glad I was that
    Aunt Frances had made me bring the wrap! I should have been frozen
    without it. Even by the fireside the air was bitter. What must it be
    like out in the open prairie, we wondered? We had not sat long in
    our sheltered nook before we heard voices, and two figures, covered
    with ice and snow, made their appearance leading horses. They
    staggered to our camp-fire, half exhausted by the violence of the
    storm. Though his hair and his beard were white with snow, we had no
    difficulty in recognizing Spanish Lu. He thawed for a little, and
    then spoke to his herdsman.

    "'The sheep!' he gasped.

    "'They're all here,' answered Lenox in triumph. 'We saw them, and
    turned them into the creek.'

    "Spanish Lu stared at us as if he could hardly believe his eyes.

    "'You kids! You turned the whole herd?'

    "I expect he felt pretty grateful, for, if it hadn't been for Lenox
    and Coonie, several thousand of his sheep would certainly have been
    lost, and, as it was, they were safely grazing in shelter. When the
    storm was sufficiently over for us to venture home, he led out
    Darkie himself and helped me to mount. Neither he nor we said a word
    about her loss, though we were perfectly certain he must have taken
    her from the stable.

    "After that day he kept his sheep to his own side of the ridge, and,
    though he was never a pleasant neighbour, Uncle Carr wasn't obliged
    to go to law with him again about the boundary of the two ranches.
    So we felt that Darkie had patched up peace, particularly as we
    didn't accuse Lu Hudson of taking her. Horse-stealing is a very
    serious crime in the West, so I expect he thought he had got off
    uncommonly well."

"And what became of Darkie?" asked Meg, as Diana's manuscript came to a
rather abrupt end.

"Uncle Carr gave up the ranch when he went into Congress, and Darkie and
all the other ponies were left at Buller's Creek. She wouldn't have been
happy off the prairie, or I'd have begged to have her. Lenox? Why, he's
still in France; but I suppose he'll be demobilized soon, and going back
to Harvard. He wants to be a professor, not a ranchman. He's a fearfully
clever boy. Now, I've read my story, and I'm waiting for yours. Who's
going to come next?"

"After such excitements as horse-stealing and a blizzard, our poor
little adventures would seem very tame," said Mrs. Fleming, voicing the
general feeling of the family, each member of which was showing a plain
desire to shirk. "Suppose we keep our stories for another evening, and
play games now? Meg, get pencils and paper, and we'll have a round of
'telegrams'."




CHAPTER XI

Diana to the Rescue


Next morning the postman arrived quite laden with parcels and letters
addressed to "Miss Diana Hewlitt". As Mrs. Fleming had prophesied,
everything came at once, and her young guest spent a busy and ecstatic
half-hour opening her various packages. Scent, French chocolates,
Parisian embroideries, gloves, ribbons, and other dainty vanities such
as girls love were raved over and spread forth on the table, while Diana
devoured the contents of her letters. From one large envelope she drew
forth a photograph of a lovely lady in evening-dress.

"It's Mother! Oh, how perfectly sweet! And the very image of her, too!"
she cried, handing the photo to Meg for admiration.

Her fit of the blues had utterly vanished, and she was in a
rose-coloured mood to-day. Meg, leaning over the table, deeply
interested in the parcels, looked critically at the picture of the
bright-eyed lady with the soft coils of fair hair.

"She's not like you, Diana."

"No. A thousand times better looking than I am!"

"I suppose you're like your father?"

"Yes, so people say, though I can't see it myself."

"How pretty she is--and how young! She might almost be your sister. And
yet I suppose she must be middle-aged."

"What do you mean by 'middle-aged'?" demanded Diana sharply.

"Why, anything over thirty! I call _my_ mother middle-aged."

"Do you?"

"Of course!" (Meg was still examining the photo.) "What a perfectly
glorious dress to be taken in! And I adore her necklace. She's like the
pictures one sees in _The Queen_. It must be lovely to have a pretty
mother."

Diana was looking at Meg with an unfathomable expression in her grey
eyes.

"Don't you call your mother pretty, then?" she asked.

"Oh, yes! she's a darling; but she's had her day. She's not a society
beauty, is she?"

"N-n-n-o, I suppose not," said Diana thoughtfully.

The boys came into the room just then; the conversation was interrupted,
and Meg probably forgot all about it. Diana, however, did not. At
lunch-time she critically studied her hostess's features, and mentally
compared them with those of the photo which had arrived that morning
from Paris.

"I don't believe Mrs. Fleming is really any older than Mother," she
decided. "She's been very pretty some time, but she's let herself go.
It's a pity. All the same, I could shake Meg!"

An impression that had been gathering in Diana's mind ever since she
arrived at the Vicarage now shaped itself into definite form. She did
not like the attitude of her friends towards their mother. They were
devoted to her, but their love lacked all element of admiration. Mrs.
Fleming had made the common mistake of effacing herself utterly for the
sake of her children. She had dropped her former accomplishments, even
the music in which she had once excelled, and made herself an absolute
slave to her household. So long as Meg and Elsie wore pretty frocks she
cared nothing for her own dress; she never bought a new book or took a
holiday; her interests were centred in the young people's achievements,
and she had become merely the theatre of their actions. Going away
seldom, and reading little, had narrowed her horizon. She often felt her
ideas were out of date, and that she was not keeping up with the modern
notions her children were imbibing at school. They always spoke with
more respect of their teachers' opinions than of hers, and would allude
to subjects they were learning as if they did not expect her to
understand them. Sometimes they assumed little airs of patronage towards
her. Among themselves they occasionally referred to her as "Only
Mother!"

Diana, thinking it all carefully over, raged mentally. "I guess I've got
to make those Flemings admire their mother!" she said to herself. "Just
how to do it beats me at present, but I don't give up. I'd like to fix
her hair for her if I dared. She strains it back till she looks like a
skinned rabbit, and her dresses were made in the year one, I should say.
She's a dear, all the same, though. If she could only be cured of
feeling on the shelf, she'd grow ten years younger."

Having set herself the surprising undertaking of rejuvenating Mrs.
Fleming, Diana went warily to work. It would certainly not do to
reproach Meg, Elsie, and the boys for lack of appreciation of their
mother; they would simply have stared in utter amazement. Somehow, by
hook or by crook, she must be made to shine, so as to command their
honest admiration. Diana catalogued her personal attractions:

  1. A really quite classical nose.

  2. A nice, neat mouth.

  3. Good teeth.

  4. A pretty colour when she gets hot or excited.

  5. Quite fascinating brown eyes.

  6. Hair that would be lovely if it were only decently done, instead
  of scooped away and screwed into a tight knob at the back.

Anybody with these points might make so much of them, if they only knew
how to use them properly. Diana wondered if it would be possible to buy
a book on the secrets of fascination. It was just the element that was
lacking. Putting personality aside, she began probing into the extent of
her friend's mental equipment. She induced her to bring out the
water-colour sketches of former years, and even wrung from her a half
promise that some day--when the weather was nice, and if she had
time--she would paint a picture of the church.

"The boys would each like a sketch of their mother's to take to school
with them," decreed Diana. "Monty would have his framed and hang it in
his study, and show it to all his friends as _your_ work."

"Why, so he might," said Mrs. Fleming, looking much surprised. The idea
had evidently never occurred to her before.

From painting, Diana passed to other accomplishments. Mrs. Fleming
rendered the accompaniments to Elsie's violin pieces and Meg's songs
with a delicacy of touch that revealed the true musician.

"I wish you'd play something to me," begged Diana one day when the
girls' practising was over and their mother was rising from the piano.

"_I_, my dear child! I never play now."

"Why not?"

"I gave up my music long ago, when I got married."

"You haven't forgotten it, though."

"Well, not altogether, of course. I'm a good reader still."

"Please!" urged Diana.

And, to content her impetuous visitor, Mrs. Fleming gave in. She pulled
a volume of Chopin from the stand, and began the twelfth nocturne. It
was years since she had played it, but as she touched the keys the old
spirit crept back into her fingers, and the notes came rippling out
delicately and easily. Diana, sunk back in the recesses of the long
basket-chair, listened fascinated. She loved music when it was of a
superior quality, and she did not often get the chance of hearing
playing such as this.

"More! More!" she begged, when the nocturne came to an end.

The ice once broken, Mrs. Fleming, as much to her own astonishment as to
that of the family, actually revived her interest in the piano. She
hunted out her old pieces and began to practise them. She said it was to
amuse Diana, but it was evident that enjoyment was mixed with her
philanthropy. As a girl she had studied under a good master, and she had
much natural talent. She would improvise sometimes, and even compose
little things of her own.

"Why, my dear," said her husband, peeping into the drawing-room one
evening just at the conclusion of the "Moonlight Sonata", "this takes me
back to the time when we were engaged! I've been sitting listening in my
study."

Diana, squatting on one foot in the corner of the sofa, clapped her
hands softly. She liked the Vicar, but she thought his antiquarian
researches monopolized the conversation at meal-times. It was quite nice
to hear him express appreciation for some other line than his own. Diana
had a scheme in her mind, and, when she judged the time was ripe, she
proposed it suddenly and boldly in the face of the whole united family
of Flemings. It was nothing more or less than that Mrs. Fleming should
play a solo at the concert which was to be held at the schools on the
10th of January. In vulgar parlance, she "shot her bird sitting",
plumped the idea upon her, and dragged forth an acceptance before--as
the poor lady afterwards protested--she had time to realize what she was
undertaking.

"Certainly. Why not?" confirmed her husband. "We badly want some more
items on the programme. I shall put you down for two solos."

"But what _can_ I play?" remonstrated Mrs. Fleming.

"Oh, Mother, you know heaps of things! Don't be absurd!" reproved Meg.

"I guess we'll have a rehearsal to-night, and choose your star pieces,"
said Diana, with shining eyes.

So far, so good. Her plot had answered admirably. The family took it
almost as a matter of course that "Mother" was to perform at the
concert, though it had never occurred to any of them to ask her to do
so.

"She's a very good pianist," said Meg airily to Diana.

"Glad you think so!" rapped out Diana, with an emphasis that made Meg
stare and whisper afterwards to Elsie that she couldn't quite somehow
get at the back of "Stars and Stripes".

It was a mighty matter to select the two solos. Mrs. Fleming, flustered
and bewildered at this unexpected dive into publicity, hesitated among
many pieces. As she could not make up her own mind, Diana made it up for
her.

"We want the 'Moonlight Sonata' for one, and Chopin's 'Ballade in A
flat' for the other," she decided. "They're classical, but they're so
exquisite that I guess even the old women will enjoy them. Then for the
encores you could play----"

"Encores!" gasped Mrs. Fleming feebly.

"Why, of course there'll be encores! Schubert's 'Hedge Roses' for one,
and that nocturne of your own for the other. It'll just about take the
house!"

So Mrs. Fleming, with an extraordinary feeling that she had somehow been
whisked back to her school-days, sat practising in the drawing-room,
with Diana, curled up in the corner of the sofa for audience. It was a
dream-world for them both. Diana had been reading _Stories of the Great
Composers_, and now she knew the hearts of the musicians she could enter
more fully into the meaning of their music. She had fallen, utterly and
entirely, under the magic spell of Chopin; the lovely, liquid melodies
thrilled her like the echo of something beyond her earthly experience,
and seemed to go soaring away into regions she had not yet explored,
regions of breathless beauty, though only entered by the gates of
sorrow. She would read Alfred Noyes's poem on Chopin as she sat
listening to the haunting, bewitching rhythm of the "Ballade in A", and
the ring of the poetry merged itself into the glamour of the music, so
that ever afterwards she connected the two.

  "'Do roses in the moonlight glow
  Like this and this?' I could not see
  His eyes, and yet--they were quite wet,
  Blinded, I think! What should I be
  If in that hour I did not know
  My own diviner debt?"

or

                "Wrapped in incense gloom,
  In drifting clouds and golden light;
  Once I was shod with fire, and trod
  Beethoven's path through storm and night:
  It is too late now to resume
  My monologue with God."

"I don't wonder Chopin had his piano carried out into the fields!" she
commented. "I don't believe he could have composed in the house. You
hear the wind blowing through his pieces, and see the tassels of the
laburnum-tree he was sitting under swaying about in it."

The concert was an annual gaiety which most of the people in the
neighbourhood attended, and was generally much above the average of
village performances. North-country folk are musical, and this district
of the Pennines had produced many voices that passed on to cathedral
choirs. Instrumental music, also, was appreciated and understood, and
before the war there had been quite a good little orchestra in the
parish. When Mr. Fleming drew up his programme, he knew the audience for
whom he was catering, and did not fill it entirely with coon songs and
ragtimes. Diana, to whom the affair loomed as the main event of the
holidays, discussed at the Vicarage the eternally feminine question of
dress.

"No one ever comes very smart," Mrs. Fleming assured her.

"But one likes to see the performers in something pretty," pleaded
Diana. "It makes it so much more festive, doesn't it?"

"Mother, you intend to go in evening-dress, don't you?" said Meg.

Mrs. Fleming had intended nothing of the sort, but urged on by the
girls, she took a review of her wardrobe. She shook her head over the
result.

"I haven't anything at all except that grey silk, and it's as old as the
hills. Why, I got it for my sister's wedding, when Roger was a baby!"

"But fashions come round again," said Diana, who, with Meg and Elsie,
had been allowed to watch what came out of the big ottoman in the spare
bedroom. "Why, this dress is the very image of the picture of one in
that magazine Mother sent me from Paris! It only wants the sleeves
shortened and some lace put in, and the neck turned down to make it
lower, and then a fichu put round. Here's the very thing! I'd fix it
for you if you'd let me. I'd adore to do it."

No one knew exactly how Diana managed to work matters, but for this
occasion she took over Mrs. Fleming's toilet, and that astonished lady
resigned herself into her hands. She was a natty little person, with
exquisite taste, and by the aid of some really good lace, which the
ottoman yielded, she managed to transform the grey silk dress into a
very creditable imitation of the Parisian fashion-plate. She even dared
to venture a step further without offending.

"I often help Mother fix her hair when she's going out, and she calls me
her little _coiffeuse_. I'm crazy to try yours, if I may."

"'In for a penny, in for a pound,' I suppose, you young witch!"
acquiesced Mrs. Fleming, letting her enthusiastic guest have her way.

So on the evening of the concert Diana shut herself up in her hostess's
bedroom with a pair of crimping-irons and some curling-tongs. She
covered up the result with a light gauze veil.

"Don't let them see you till you get to the concert," she implored,
helping her friend to put on her cloak. "I want them to get a real
surprise. I guess it will make them sit up!"

The parish hall was quite full that evening, and the platform was
prettily and appropriately decorated with flags and plants in pots.
There was a sprinkling of local gentry on the front benches, and Miss
Todd, who had returned after the holidays, and was entertaining some
visitors at the Abbey, brought her whole house-party. The villagers had
turned up in full force, thoroughly prepared to enjoy themselves. The
Fleming family sat at the end of the second row, and watched as the
audience filed in.

"Where's Mother?" asked Elsie.

"She's in the performers' room, talking to Miss Watson," vouchsafed
Diana, chuckling softly to herself.

Then the concert began. There was a madrigal by the choir, and a glee
for four male voices, and a duet for soprano and mezzo, and then came
the item for which Diana was waiting:

           The Moonlight Sonata, ....... _Beethoven_.

                   MRS. CARISBROOK FLEMING.

The curtain at the back of the platform was drawn aside, and a lady
entered--a lady who was palpably nervous, but oh, so pretty! Her brown
eyes shone like two stars, and her cheeks were the colour of the knot of
carnation ribbon that fastened the lace fichu of her dress. Her lovely
bronze hair was parted on one side, and rippled lightly over her
forehead; it looked the very perfection of glossy fluffiness. She wore a
moonstone pendant set in dull silver that matched the shimmering grey of
her dress. The piano had been drawn to the front of the platform, and
she took her place. Then the magic music began. Diana knew her friend
could play well, but she had never heard her reach this pitch before.
The audience listened as if spell-bound, and, when the last note died
away, broke into a storm of applause. There was no question about their
enthusiasm, and an encore was inevitable. They stamped heartily, indeed,
for a second encore, but Mrs. Fleming refused to return to the platform,
and sent on the next performer instead. The "Ballade in A flat", in the
second part of the programme, was an almost greater success, and
produced shouts of "Brava!" from the back of the hall. Pendlemere people
could appreciate good music, and showed their approval with
north-country heartiness.

The Fleming family sat during the performance gazing as if they could
scarcely believe the evidence of their own eyes and ears. Diana had
calculated upon giving them a surprise, and she had certainly done so.
Apparently it was a very pleasant one, to judge from the expression on
their faces.

As the crowd filed out from the benches at the close of the concert,
Diana found herself walking behind Meg, who was speaking to a friend.

"That 'Moonlight Sonata' was beautiful!" Ada Davis was saying. "And Mrs.
Fleming looked so charming to-night! How nice to have such a pretty,
clever mother!"

"I'm _awfully_ proud of her!" agreed Meg, with unction.

"Humph! High time you were!" sniffed Diana behind.

At the door the Vicar was helping his wife into her cloak. He put it
round her with quite a gallant little air, and offered her his arm as
they stepped out into the starlight together.

"I hardly know you to-night, Sylvia. You excelled yourself!" he
remarked.

"'Sylvia'!" Diana triumphed inwardly. "That's the first time I've ever
heard him call her anything except 'Mother'. If _I_ get married, I'll
want my husband to call me 'Diana', even if I've a dozen children to be
'Mother' to! I guess Mrs. Fleming has hopped off the shelf to-day, and I
just hope to goodness she'll never go back."




CHAPTER XII

Diana Breaks Out


Diana went back to school in the wildest and most rampageous of spirits.
She felt that she just had to let off steam somehow. She seized Wendy's
hand, tore with her to the very top of the house and down again, then
careered along the corridor in such a mad, not to say noisy stampede,
that Miss Todd issued from her study like a lion from its lair, and
fixed the culprits with the full concentrated power of what the girls
called her "scholastic eye".

"Winifred and Diana," she remarked in calm, measured tones, "if I have
to remind you again about walking quietly in the passages, it will mean
forty lines for you both, and I should be sorry to have to give
punishments on the first day of term."

The tempestuous pair, very much sobered down, tip-toed away, and went to
unpack their possessions in their separate dormitories. Diana found
Loveday in the ivy room, and burst in upon her with as much of the
bubbling-over spirits as she dared to exhibit, hugging her till she
nearly choked her.

"I've missed you loads, Loviekins!" she assured her. "It felt queer to
be in bed, and not have you on the other side of a curtain. I used to
wake up in the night and begin to speak to you out of sheer force of
habit. I wanted my 'little elder sissie' awful bad sometimes! Did you
miss me the least tiny atom? Do you care that much for your 'pixie
girl'?"

"Of course I missed you, darling! I'm just delighted to see you again!
It's nice to be back. I haven't enjoyed the holidays _very_ much. I
never do----"

"I know," said Diana sympathetically, as Loveday hesitated. "I could
read that between the lines, in your letters. You wrote me absolutely
ripping letters! I loved them! You were a dear to write so often. It
must have taken heaps of time."

"I'd nothing very much else to do," sighed Loveday, disengaging herself
gently from Diana's arms. "Let me go, child! I haven't half finished my
unpacking, and you haven't even begun yours yet."

"_Bust_ the unpacking!" said Diana naughtily. "I don't feel inclined to
be tidy; I shall just shovel armfuls of things out, and pitch them
anyhow into the drawers. Yes, Loveday Seton, I feel like that! I'm 'fey'
to-day, as the Scotch say, and must 'dree my weird'. Don't quite know
exactly what that means; but I guess I've got a little pixie imp dancing
around inside me, and he's going to make me do something crazy. There's
no help for it! It's kismet!"

"And Miss Hampson is also kismet!" said Loveday, leaving her own box and
coming to the rescue of Diana's garments, which were being literally
pitched into the drawers with no regard at all for their condition.
"Look how you're crushing your blouses! Go and sit on the bed, and let
me do it. There! What a baby thing you are! You're more like four than
fourteen!"

"It pays," said Diana serenely, squatting cross-legged on her bed, while
Loveday's neat hands arranged her possessions. "If I were a sedate,
goody-goody, 'old-beyond-her-years', staid sort of a person, you'd never
spoil me as you do. I'll try to practise it if you like, though.
Anything to please you! How would this do?"

Diana's mobile face suddenly underwent a quick change. The corners of
her mouth were drawn down, her eyelids drooped, while her eyes were cast
upward in a sort of sanctimonious squint.

"Don't!" implored Loveday, almost hysterically. "Oh, suppose your face
were to stick like that! You'd look the most abominable little Pharisee.
I'd hate you!"

"You like your pixie-girl best? Then, that settles it! Now, if you ever
scold me again about anything, I'll put on the Pharisee face; so I warn
you. You've got to choose between them. Yes, I know I'm a handful--I
always have been--but, perhaps, it's good for you, Loveday mine:
develops your character, and makes you more patient and persevering,
and--and----"

"You're the cheekiest little imp on the face of the earth!" interrupted
Loveday. "Get up, this minute, and come and finish your own work. I've
something else to do besides unpack for you. If Miss Hampson comes and
finds my box still half full----"

"She'll say how slow you've been, and what a nice, tidy child Diana is!
Don't try to look 'proper', Loveday! It doesn't suit your style of
beauty. Yes, put my collars away, too, or I shall only crush them.
There! Very well done! First prize for order! I think you're absolutely
topping, if you ask me!"

All that evening, and all the next morning, Diana's spirits continued to
fizz. She might possibly have worked them off out-of-doors, but the
British climate was against her; once more the fells were swathed in
their familiar garments of mist, and the rain came pitter-pattering down
on the roof of Pendlemere Abbey, and falling from the eaves in a
monotonous drip, drip, drip. It was drawing afternoon, and promptly at
half-past two intermediates and juniors would be due in the studio to go
on with the various copies and models on which they were engaged. It was
now shortly after two o'clock, and the school was amusing itself for the
half-hour between meal-time and lessons. During that brief interval
Diana, so to speak, "popped her cork".

"Hallo, America! You're looking rather weedy, standing on one leg like a
marabou stork!" quizzed Sadie. "What's the matter with you?"

"Your beastly, abominable British climate!" retorted Diana. "It goes on
rain, rain, raining till I'm fed up. I want to get away somewhere, and
see something different from just school. I wasn't born for a convent!"

"I should think not!" chuckled Vi.

"But I'm in one, and I'm tired of it! I'm tired of you all! Yes, I mean
what I say!"

"Draw it mild, Stars and Stripes!" warned Sadie.

"I don't care! School's dull, and I'm bored stiff. I'll wake things up
somehow; see if I don't!"

"What'll you do, old sport?"

"Ah! _Just wait and see!_" nodded Diana, putting down the foot that had
been twisted round her leg, and stamping to get rid of the pins and
needles that followed her cramped position. "It's just possible I may
turn philanthropist, and give you all a dinky little surprise," she
added casually, as she strolled towards the door.

The studio was a large room on the upper story, with the orthodox north
windows and top-light, in the shape of a skylight. It was fitted with
desks and easels, and round its walls was a row of casts on pedestals.
The girls liked drawing afternoon well enough, but they were not in any
particular hurry to go upstairs and take out boards and pencils. It was
not until twenty-five minutes past two that Wendy, Vi, Sadie, and Peggy
came leisurely along the top landing. They opened the door of the studio
in quite an every-day manner, and walked in. Then they all four stared
and ejaculated:

"O-o-o-oh!"

"Jehosh-a-phat!"

"I say!"

"Good night!"

They might well exclaim, for a very startling and unanticipated
spectacle greeted them. The classic heads of the casts had lost their
dignity. Apollo wore a tam-o'-shanter cocked rakishly over his left ear;
Clytie had on a motor veil; Juno and Ceres were fashionably arrayed in
straw hats; a wreath of twisted paper encircled the intellectual brow of
Minerva; Psyche peered through spectacles; Perseus was decked with a
turban; and, worst of all, the beautiful upper lip of Venus sported a
moustache. Armed with a pointer stood Diana, ready, like Mrs. Jarley of
the famous waxworks, to act show-woman.

"Walk up! Walk up, ladies and gentlemen!" she began glibly. "This isn't
funny at all, it's calm and classical. Greek art up-to-date is what I
call it. If Apollo had lived in this British climate I guess he'd have
needed a tammy to keep his hair in curl; and Psyche must have been
short-sighted when she blundered about hunting for Cupid; she'd have
found him in a decent pair of spectacles, poor girl! Clytie suffered
from earache, and couldn't motor without a veil; as for Venus, it's
giving her the vote that's forced a moustache; she's sent for a
safety-razor, but it hasn't arrived yet."

More girls had come in during Diana's explanation, and they wandered
round the room in explosions of laughter.

"Why has Perseus got a turban on?" demanded Tattie.

"Because his hair grew thin on the top, and even Tatcho didn't fetch up
another crop of curls, and Andromeda so objected to seeing him bald that
there was nothing for it but to turn Moslem and wear a turban. He did it
in self-defence, because she threatened to buy him a dark wig, and he
said it would make him look like a Jew."

"That's _my_ hat!" objected Vi, pointing to the straw that decorated
Juno.

"Excuse me--hers! The lady's gone on the land, working like a nigger
digging the ground for the potato crop. You see, Jupiter hasn't got
demobilized yet, and----"

The flower of Diana's eloquence suddenly withered and dried up as if
electrocuted. In the doorway, above the heads of the giggling girls,
appeared a vision in pince-nez--an avenging vision that passed rapidly
through the several stages of amazement, consternation, and wrath.

"Di-ana _Hew_litt!" snapped Miss Hampson. "Go down and report yourself
_instantly_ to Miss Todd. This is simply disgraceful! Girls, take your
seats! Tattie and Vi, help to remove those--those----" The irate mistress
paused for a word, but, failing to find one adequate to the occasion,
began instead, her fingers trembling with indignation, to strip the
turban from the classic head of Perseus.

Dead, awful silence reigned in the room. Not a girl dared to giggle; a
few began nervously to sharpen pencils, but most sat and stared while
the casts were denuded of their trappings. Miss Hampson removed the
moustache from Venus as if she were apologizing to that deity for
sacrilege, and, with her own handkerchief, wiped away from the lovely
lip the seccotine which had attached the masculine appendage to the
Queen of Beauty. She rolled up the hats in the towel which had served as
turban, set her pupils to work at their copies, then marched sternly
downstairs to lay the full enormity of the case before the
justly-shocked ears of Miss Todd. Nobody ever heard exactly what
happened in the interview; no coaxing or persuasion would induce Diana
to disclose details even to Wendy or Loveday, but it was generally
understood in the school that Miss Todd had "spoken her mind". One
result loomed large, and that was the punishment. It was absolutely
unique. Perhaps the Principal was tired of giving poetry to learn or
lines to write, and considered that confinement to bounds was not very
good for a girl's health, so she devised something else to act as a
discipline. For a week Diana was condemned not to wear evening-dress. It
was a far greater trial than it sounds. Each night before supper the
school changed into pretty frocks, and, when the meal was over, spent a
pleasant hour together at recreation. With everybody else in festive
attire, it was terrible for Diana to be obliged to come downstairs in
her serge skirt and jersey, the one Cinderella of the party. Most
especially trying was it on Saturday, when chairs and tables were pushed
back in the dining-room, and dancing was the order of the evening. Poor
Diana, in her thick morning-shoes, stood forlornly in a corner, refusing
all offers of partners, but watching wistfully as the others whirled by.
Miss Hampson, whose wrath was of the short, explosive kind that quickly
turns to softness of heart, was understood to murmur something to Miss
Todd about the impossibility of waltzing in anything but
dancing-slippers; but the Principal's mouth was set firm, and she would
not remit the least atom of the sentence till it was paid to the
uttermost farthing.

If Diana looked wistful, she nevertheless bore her punishment with
dignity. She was a girl of spirit, and she did not mean to betray, even
by the blink of an eyelid, how much she cared. Geraldine, Hilary, and
Ida had rubbed in her ostracism, and certain impudent juniors had
enjoyed themselves with witticisms at her expense. To these she must
preserve an attitude of sang-froid. But up in the ivy room, when she
went to bed, the mask fell off. The Diana that cuddled in Loveday's arms
was a very different Diana from the don't-care young person of
downstairs. Loveday--who understood her now--consoled and kissed where a
term ago she would have scolded. There are some dispositions that can
only be managed by kisses.

"It wasn't as if I'd taken a hammer and smashed the wretched old casts!"
sobbed Diana. "I really didn't do them any damage; even the seccotine
was easily sponged off Venus. But Miss Todd talked and talked as if I'd
done something irreligious in church. I'd never do that, you know! Would
I, now? She said I had 'an irreverent mind'. I don't believe she'll ever
_quite_ forgive me. And oh, Hilary has been so nasty! Thank goodness,
dancing evening's done with! I've only Monday and Tuesday nights to go
through now, then the whole wretched week will be over. I suppose I'm to
be allowed to wear my Sunday clothes to-morrow? If I mayn't, I'll sham
ill and stop in bed. I won't go to church in my brown coat and tammy,
and have Mr. Fleming and everybody staring at me. I just _couldn't_! I'd
die!"

"It's all right about that--don't you worry! I asked Miss Hampson, and
she said: 'Certainly, Sunday clothes'. I'll speak to Hilary, and try to
get her to leave you alone. As for those kids, just leave them to me;
I'll tackle them, and tell them what I think of the way they behaved
to-night--the young wretches! I fancy I'll make them squirm!"

"You mascot! Miss Todd says I've been utterly and entirely spoilt. Do
_you_ think I have?"

Loveday took the piquant little face between her two hands and looked a
moment into the upturned grey eyes.

"Yes," she decided. "You're undoubtedly a spoilt darling--but you're a
darling all the same," she added softly under her breath.




CHAPTER XIII

Crusoe Island


When the days grew a little finer, and it was possible to venture out of
doors without being almost drowned, Miss Chadwick began to put the
"Principles of Agriculture" into practical application. All through the
winter she and her assistants--Miss Carr and Miss Ormrod--had worked in
all weathers looking after the poultry, the pony, and the new
greenhouse, but it was only at rare intervals that it had been possible
for the school to turn out and do digging in the garden. The "Land
Classes" had, however, been studying the scientific side of the matter.
They had analysed soils, estimated the rainfall, and examined the
germination of seeds; they understood such mysterious terms as bacteria,
protozoa, cotyledons, trenching and ridging, cross-fertilization and
spermatozoids, and had some elementary acquaintance with the theory of
the rotation of crops. They felt like full-fledged farmers when Miss
Chadwick wrote on the black-board such questions as:--

"How far apart should different kinds of orchard trees be planted to
ensure enough sunlight?"

"Explain a method of testing seeds."

"What effect has transplanting on a seedling?"

"Describe the difference in structure between a corn-stem and a
rose-stem. Make a cross-section drawing of each."

They tried experiments, such as planting in a box six beans with the
scarred ends down, and six with the scarred ends up, and noted the
results from day to day; they placed blotting-paper between two panes of
glass, with seeds next to the glass, put the apparatus in water, and
demonstrated the growth of roots; they started one plant in the dark,
and another in a light place, grew identical peas in moist cotton or
saw-dust, broke the seed leaves from specimen beans to observe what
happened, and compared the results of distilled water and tap water as
nourishment.

Everybody agreed, however, that it was much more interesting to put on
their land costumes and work out-of-doors. Miss Chadwick, whose methods
were on the newest lines, taught rhythmic digging, which is far less
fatiguing than anyhow exertions, and was very particular about the
position of the body and the action of the spade. Miss Todd, looking on
with huge satisfaction, felt that she was cultivating girls as well as
vegetables, and that her educational experiment promised elements of
success. Certain special pupils were allowed to help to attend to the
poultry--a coveted honour as soon as the fluffy chickens and ducklings
began to be hatched; others were being trained to understand
bee-keeping; it was rumoured in the school that Miss Todd's ambition
even soared so high as buying a cow.

"Where would she keep it, though?" asked Tattie, who was practical.

"I don't know, unless on the lawn," ventured Jess.

"Whew! It would spoil the tennis-courts."

"Well, I suppose she could hire a field. It would be ripping fun to
learn to milk."

"Don't flatter yourself you'd have the chance. The seniors get all that
kind of fun, and we poor intermediates only get the spade work. I've
never been allowed to feed the chickens once, no--not _once_--and I
think it's jolly hard luck!"

"Well, after the way you stuck your fingers into the bee-hive, I should
think Miss Ormrod would hardly trust you to feed a sparrow!"

"What nonsense! I was only investigating!"

"Oh, I dare say! It sounds very grand when you put it that way. Miss
Ormrod called you 'Meddlesome Matty', and said you deserved to be
stung!"

One great advantage of the farming operations, in the eyes of the
younger girls, was that so many materials were left lying about, and it
was quite possible to obtain a considerable amount of enjoyment from
them. A plank placed over a tree-trunk made quite a good see-saw; the
new back gate was a delightful one to swing upon; and, when Miss
Ormrod's back was turned, it was a favourite amusement to place a ladder
against the potting-shed wall, climb to the ridge of the roof, and then
slide down and give a flying jump to the ground. There was an old bucket
inside the potting-shed upon which Diana had her eye; she had schemes
that centred round that bucket. It had holes drilled in its sides, and
had been used during building operations to light a fire in. She was
determined it should be used for that purpose again.

Down by the brink of the lake was a boat-house that belonged to the
school. It was kept carefully locked, and Miss Todd had the key. Since
she had taken over the school she had allowed no one to use the boat--a
grievance at which the girls sometimes grumbled. There was a small
landing-stage at the edge of the water, and only six feet away from this
was a sort of island formed of some willow-stumps and a little soil. It
was a tiny place, hardly worthy to be called an island, and yet for
Diana it held an immense attraction. She wanted to get on to it. She
went down one day with Wendy, Peggy, and Vi, and they took the plank
which had been used for a see-saw, fixed it as a bridge from the
landing-stage to a willow-stump, and then walked across and took
possession. Their new property was only about as large as a good-sized
dining-table, but they were immensely pleased with it.

"We'll bring down the Stars and Stripes and hang them up!" exulted
Diana.

"The Union Jack, you mean!" corrected Wendy. "Can't run up even an
Allied flag on British soil without first claiming it for the King! I'd
like to have a picnic here!"

"That's exactly what's in my mind," agreed Diana, waiving the question
of the colours. "And I've got a brain-wave. We'll carry the bucket over,
light a fire, and cook something. Wouldn't it be rather ripping?"

"A1!" beamed Peggy and Vi.

"Crusoe Island", as the girls named their willow-clump, might certainly
claim the doubtful distinction of being the smallest British possession
in the world, but it was an important one in the eyes of its owners.
They duly brought down the Union Jack and the American flag, and--as a
concession to Diana--planted them side by side on its scanty soil. They
decided not to tell seniors or juniors anything at all about it. Of
course, in a vague way, the whole school knew of its existence, but
nobody had troubled before to land on its few yards of surface. It was
well hidden by the boat-house, so that any operations there were not
visible from the garden or orchard. The rest of the intermediates,
admitted with many cautions of silence into the secret, approved
whole-heartedly; the form squatted in a circle on their territory,
linked little fingers, and pledged themselves into a sort of Crusoe
Society. Everybody felt that the first thing to be done was to hold an
inauguration feast. They borrowed the bucket, filled it with coal and
coke from the greenhouse, and carried it successfully over the plank to
the island.

"So far so good!" purred Diana. "We've got our fire!"

"But not our feast!" qualified Wendy.

"We shall have to be jolly careful to dodge those juniors," advised
Jess. "If they see us carrying out cups they'll be on the scent
directly."

"We mustn't risk it. Besides, Barker would be sure to catch us in the
pantry, and make a clamour if we took cups; we must manage without
things from the house."

"There's a large biscuit-tin lid in the hen-yard," suggested Sadie. "If
we washed it very well, it would do as a frying pan."

"Good biz!"

"What could we fry?"

The commissariat question was indeed the problem of problems. The
village was unfortunately out of bounds, so that, except on stated
occasions, when they were escorted by a mistress, the girls were unable
to do shopping "on their own". There are ways, however, of crawling
through even the most barbed-wire fence of rules.

"Toddlekins never told us we weren't to ask anybody else to do shopping
for us," said Wendy demurely. "When you've not been told not to do
anything, you're not disobedient if you don't do it--oh! I'm getting
rather in a muddle, but you know what I mean."

They did, and they grinned approval.

"There's a little boy working on the next farm," continued Wendy. "I've
smiled and waved to him over the hedge sometimes. I believe he'd do
_anything_ for me. If you can stump up some cash, I'll get him to run an
errand for us. He's picking stones out of the field at this present
moment--at least, to be absolutely truthful, he was, ten minutes ago,
and I don't suppose he's stopped. If I go to the orchard fence I can
call to him."

The circle looked at Wendy with admiration. They had not before realized
the riches of her resourcefulness. Each promised to contribute sixpence,
and told her where to find their purses, so that they need not arouse
suspicion by visiting their dormitories in a body.

"We'll be lighting the fire while you get the prog," they assured her.

So Wendy departed on her foraging expedition, collected the necessary
funds after much hunting in various drawers and coat pockets, hurried to
the orchard, and climbed the fence. Freddie Entwistle was still steadily
engaged in the rural occupation of ridding his father's field of
superfluous stones, but he kept an eye on the horizon, and at the sight
of Wendy's beckoning finger he flung duty to the winds.

"D'you want me?" he grinned, as he came panting across the newly
ploughed earth.

"Yes," said his siren sweetly. "I want you badly. Will you go to the
village and buy something for me?"

"I don't mind. What shall I get?"

"Half a pound of biscuits and something to fry."

"Bacon?" suggested her swain laconically.

"N-n-no. We had bacon for breakfast."

"Kippers or ham?"

"I don't think kippers; but really it must be anything you can get.
Here's the money. If there's any change, take it out in sweets."

"Right you are! I'll be as sharp as I can."

"It's something to have a knight-errant who's prepared to relieve a
maiden in distress," reflected Wendy, seating herself on the fence to
await the return of her chivalrous squire.

He came back in course of time with his pockets bulging with parcels,
evidently very proud of himself for having executed his lady's commands.
Her thanks and a commission of sweets left him radiant. He returned to
his stone-picking, living in a dream.

The party on the island received Wendy with enthusiasm. The fire was
burning beautifully in the bucket, the tin had been scoured with sand
and well washed, large ivy leaves had been picked to serve as plates,
and the company had their penknives ready.

"It's sausages!" exclaimed Wendy, opening one of the parcels; "and he's
actually bought some lard to fry them in. What a brain--and only twelve!
That boy'll be a general some day, if he doesn't die of over-cleverness.
Biscuits to eat with them, my children, and some chocs. for dessert. I
beg to propose that we accord a hearty vote of thanks to Freddie
Entwistle."

  "For he's a jolly good fellow!
  For he's a jolly good fellow!"

began Jess; but Diana promptly squashed her.

"Stop that noise! D'you want to give the whole show away, and have
Lennie, and Nora, and Betty, and all the rest of the kids swarming down
upon us? Anybody who can't keep quiet will be made to walk the plank.
Yes, and splash into the river at the other end of it! We wouldn't pick
you out either; we'd let you drown!"

"Then I'd sing 'For he's a jolly good fellow' as my 'dying swan song',"
protested Jess. "The kids are far enough away. No one can hear us."

She took the hint, all the same, and did not allow her enjoyment to
bubble over into music. Instead, she helped Wendy to prick the sausages
with a penknife and place them on the temporary frying-pan. The
biscuit-tin lid just fitted nicely over the bucket. In a few minutes
there was a grand sound of fizzling, and a most delicious scent began to
waft itself over the waters of the lake. The best of a bucket-fire is
that everybody can sit round it in a circle and superintend the cooking
operations. Eight penknives prodded the sausages so often that it was a
wonder they were not all chopped to pieces before they were done. At
last the connoisseurs declared they were brown enough, and they were
carefully and mathematically halved and served on biscuits.

"Delicious!" decreed Tattie, critically.

"Couldn't have been better if Toddlekins had reared the piglets on our
own farm," chimed in Peggy.

"Diana, you haven't taken a bite yet," commented Wendy.

"I'm not sure that I want any. I think I'll only have a biscuit, after
all."

"Not want any? Not want the lovely sausages that I risked so much to
get? Diana Hewlitt, what's the matter with you?"

"Oh, nothing--only----"

"Only nothing, I should say! Eat up that piece of sausage double quick,
if you value my friendship."

"Suppose you eat it for me? That would be sentiment."

"No, it wouldn't; you must eat it yourself. There'll be a shindy if you
don't. Our first feast! It's a sort of ceremonial!"

"Not 'the cup of brotherhood' but 'the sausage of sisterhood'!" hinnied
Jess.

Diana looked doubtfully at the two inches of brown, porky substance on
her ivy-leaf plate, and sighed.

"I feel like the elephant at the Zoo when they offered him his hundredth
bun: It may kill me, but it's a beautiful death," she demurred. "Well,
if you're all nuts on my having some, I guess there's nothing else for
it. Here goes! What a life!"

"The Sisterhood of the Sausage," murmured Jess fatuously.

"Don't make such a fuss; you know you're enjoying it, old sport," said
Wendy. "It isn't every day in your life you can come and have a blow-out
on Crusoe Island."

       *     *     *     *     *

On Thursday morning Diana, who had been restless and fidgety in the
night, awoke with a rash all over her face and chest. Loveday, much
alarmed, would not allow her to get up till the authorities had seen
her, and fetched Miss Todd. The Principal, dismayed at the prospect of
infection in the school, mentally ran over the gamut of possible
diseases from scarlatina to chicken-pox, ordered Diana to stop in bed,
and sent at once to Glenbury for the doctor.

Now it happened that Dr. Hunter was himself in bed, suffering from a
severe attack of influenza, and, as it was extremely difficult for him,
at a few hours' notice, to secure the services of a really competent
medical man as locum tenens, he had been obliged to put up with a Hindoo
doctor who was sent by the London agent in answer to his urgent
telegram. It was a case of "any port in a storm", and though Dr.
Jinaradasa's qualifications might be such as only just to satisfy the
board of the Royal College of Surgeons, it was better to send him to
look after the patients than to leave them utterly unattended.
Therefore, when the neat little two-seater car drew up at Pendlemere
Abbey it was not the bluff, rosy-cheeked Dr. Hunter who stepped out of
it, but a foreign-looking gentleman with a very dark complexion. He
explained his presence to Miss Todd, who gasped for a second, but
recovered herself, received him gratefully, and conducted him upstairs
to view his patient. Diana, I regret to say, behaved like the spoilt
child she really was. She buried her head under the bedclothes, and at
first utterly refused to submit to any examination. Miss Todd coaxed,
wheedled, stormed, and finally pulled the clothes away by force and
displayed the rash to the dark, lustreless eyes of Dr. Jinaradasa. He
asked a few questions--which Diana answered sulkily--took her
temperature, felt her pulse, and retired downstairs to talk over the
case with Miss Todd, leaving a very cross and indignant patient behind
him. Ten minutes afterwards the door of the ivy room swung gently open,
and Wendy's interested and sympathetic face made its appearance.

"Di!" she whispered impressively; "I'm coming to see you, even if it's
smallpox you've got. I'm supposed to be practising, but I just did a
bolt. Well, old sport, you do look an object, I must say!"

Diana hitched herself higher in bed.

"You needn't be afraid. I'm not infectious," she remarked.

"They say you've got measles," ventured Wendy.

"Measles!" snorted Diana scornfully. "That's all they know about it.
I've told them till I'm tired that it's nettle-rash. I've had it before.
I always _do_ get the wretched thing when I eat sausages. They sort of
poison me. It'll go away all right if they only let me alone. What did
Miss Todd want bringing that black doctor up to see me? I had nearly
forty fits when he came marching into my room."

"Well, he says you've got measles at any rate, and Toddlekins is in no
end of a state. Thinks it's going to spread all through the school.
D'you know she's making arrangements to send you to the Fever Hospital?
They're to come and fetch you away in the ambulance."

"_What!_ The idiots! I tell you I _haven't_ got measles. I won't go! Do
you think I'm going to let myself be bundled off to the Fever Hospital
just because an ignoramus of a Hindoo doctor doesn't know his business
sufficiently to tell nettle-rash when he sees it? Rather not! I'd show
fight first!"

"They'll roll you in blankets and carry you downstairs!" thrilled Wendy.

"They'll do nothing of the sort--I'll take good care of that. I wouldn't
be easy to carry if I kicked, even inside blankets. I never heard of
such an outrageous thing in all my life. I've some bounce left in me
yet, and I'll use it--see if I don't! Measles, indeed! I wonder he
didn't say it was hydrophobia."

"Well, whatever it is, you're to be taken to the Fever Hospital; they've
ordered the ambulance. I'm awfully sorry, old sport! It's hard luck on
you. I must scoot now, and go back to my practising, or I shall have
Bunty on my track. Bye-bye!"

Wendy vanished, leaving Diana alone and most upset. She considered that
she was being treated abominably. She longed to telegraph to her
parents, but she knew that was impossible.

"Whatever happens, I'm not going to that wretched Fever Hospital," she
said to herself. "I'm sure Cousin Cora wouldn't like me to be taken
there. Why shouldn't I go to Petteridge? They're all well again from the
'flu'. What a brain-wave! I declare I will, and tell Cousin Cora all
about it!"

Diana was nothing if not impetuous. She jumped up immediately, and began
a hasty toilet. She was just three-quarters through with it when she
heard footsteps on the stairs. She immediately whisked her nightdress on
over her clothes, and popped into bed just three seconds before Miss
Todd entered the room. The excitement of such a rush made her face more
flushed than ever. Miss Todd came and looked at her critically.

"Yes, the rash is coming out very nicely," she observed.

"It's nettle-rash, not measles!" affirmed Diana defiantly.

"That's for the doctor to decide, not you. I'm afraid you must have
caught it the day you went in the omnibus to Glenbury. It takes nearly
a fortnight to incubate."

Diana shivered with anxiety lest Miss Todd should wish to inspect the
progress of the rash on her chest as well as on her face, and thus
discover that she was half clothed beneath her nightdress, but
fortunately the head mistress did not descend so far in her
investigations. Instead, she turned to Diana's drawers, and began
filling a hand-bag with various necessaries. She did not mention the
Fever Hospital, probably judging it better not to prepare the patient
beforehand, but to wait until the ambulance arrived. Diana, of course,
knew why she was collecting the garments, but feigned to ignore the
matter, and made no comment. She wished Miss Todd would be quick and go.
She was so terribly afraid that the ambulance might drive up before she
had the chance to make her escape. Flight seemed certainly preferable to
a struggle.

The mistress at last found a sufficiency of nightdresses and other
garments, and, telling Diana to keep herself covered up and warm, took
her departure.

The moment she was safely out of the way the invalid sprang up and
resumed her interrupted toilet. Diana had suffered from nettle-rash
several times before, and the treatment had not included stopping in bed
or even staying indoors. Her complaint was really more in the nature of
dyspepsia. She felt as if fresh air would do her good. She did not dare
to walk downstairs in case she might meet anybody, so she decided to
adopt the method she had found effective last autumn, and climb out
through the window and down the ivy. Lessons were in progress, so nobody
would be in the garden to watch her, except Miss Carr and Miss Ormrod,
who would probably be engaged with the horse or the hens. She swung
herself out, therefore, and let herself down by the thick stems. Then
she dodged round the house to the bicycle-shed. She did not yet possess
a machine of her own, but Wendy's stood handy, and she knew her chum
well enough to borrow it. She wheeled it through the back gate,
fortunately without meeting Miss Carr, and then set off at top-speed for
Petteridge Court.

Mrs. Burritt was naturally much surprised to see her young cousin turn
up in so unexpected a fashion, and with a rash on her face, but she did
the most sensible thing in the circumstances: she put Diana to bed, and
sent to Dunswick for a doctor. He arrived during the course of the
afternoon, and, after a careful examination of his patient, pronounced
her complaint to be nettle-rash.

"There's not a doubt about it!" he declared. "You need not be in the
least afraid that it's measles."

Armed with a medical certificate to that effect, Mrs. Burritt motored
over to Pendlemere Abbey to patch up peace with Miss Todd. Partly for
reasons of health, and partly to let the storm blow over, she kept
Diana at Petteridge until the rash had entirely disappeared and the girl
seemed in her absolutely normal condition. Mrs. Burritt took her back on
the understanding that bygones should be bygones, and a fresh start
should be made without any reference to former delinquencies.

Miss Todd received Diana quite amiably, but insisted upon her having a
carbolic bath, and herself washed her hair with strong disinfectant
soap. The clothes she had worn disappeared mysteriously for some days,
and were then returned from the stoving department of the Glenbury
Sanitation Office. Diana made no comments at head-quarters, but laughed
to herself.

"I'm sure Toddlekins believes I've had measles," she confided to Wendy.

"Of course she does. She said she hadn't the least doubt about it, and
that you hadn't eaten anything which could have caused you to have
nettle-rash."

"What would she say if she knew about the sausages?" queried Diana.




CHAPTER XIV

Spooks


March had come, and even in the northern mountainous region of
the Pennines, where snow lingers long after it has melted in more
favoured districts, winter had begun to make way for spring. The
snowdrops--January flowers in Wales or Cornwall, fair maids of February
in most counties--were late bloomers at Pendlemere, and were never in
their prime till St. Patrick's Day. They made up for their tardy arrival
by their luxuriance. They grew almost wild in the orchard, and spread
like a white carpet over the grass, tossing fairy bells in the wind.
Diana, promoted to help Miss Carr in the spraying of apple-trees, paused
in her work to look round and revel in nature's re-awakening. She was a
sun lover, and the long months of perpetual mist and rain had tried her
very much. She had, to be sure, kept up her spirits in spite of weather;
still, the sight of fleecy, white clouds scudding across a blue sky, and
the sound of the missel-thrush tuning up on the bare branch of the
plum-tree were particularly cheering. Hedge-sparrows twittered among the
shrubs, and rooks were busy flying with large twigs in their bills to
repair their nests in the elms near the church. In the March sunshine
the lake glittered like gold.

"I wonder if it looked just like this when the old monks lived here,"
said Diana. "Did they see exactly what we do now?"

"Pretty much the same, I expect," answered Miss Carr rather
abstractedly. "The lake and the fells would be there, and probably most
of the farms, though the buildings would be different in those days. The
lay brethren would attend to the land just as we do. I dare say they dug
in this very orchard, and grew herbs in the same place where we're going
to plant our potatoes."

"It's a pity we can't call up a vision of them!"

"No, thank you!" said Miss Carr, who was a practical person, and not
given to romance. "I've not the slightest desire to see spooks. I'm
quite content with modern life, and don't want fourteenth-century ghosts
gliding about the place. Get on with your work, Diana! I'm more
concerned with apple-trees than with the old monks."

When Diana got an idea into her head, however, it was apt to stick. She
had a lively imagination, and she liked to picture what the Abbey had
once been. She read the account of it in the local guidebook and in
Chadwick's _Northern Antiquities_, which she borrowed from the library,
and she further devoured Scott's _The Monastery_. Steeped in this
mediaeval atmosphere, she began to tell the girls such vivid stories of
the doings of the brethren that they almost believed her. She invented
several fictitious characters: Brother Amos, Brother Lawrence, Brother
John, and Prior Andrew, and gave a most circumstantial account of their
adventures.

"How do you know what they used to do?" asked Jess, much impressed.

"I guess I sort of feel it," said Diana. "It's almost like remembering."

"Some people think we come back to earth and live again. Were you one of
the old monks, Di?"

"She must have been an unholy one, if she was!" interrupted Sadie.
"Anybody less like a monk than 'Stars and Stripes' I couldn't think of!"

"There were all sorts, of course. I've told you Brother Lawrence was up
to tricks sometimes, and got the discipline. The Prior used to be down
on him, just as Toddlekins is down on us. He was more sinner than saint.
That's why he can't rest quietly."

"Doesn't he rest?" Jess's voice held a note of uneasiness.

"No, I don't think he does. I've a kind of feeling that he haunts the
place, coming back to find out what it's like now."

"An earth-bound spirit!" gasped Jess.

"Yes, he's got some sins to expiate, you see."

The conversation was growing creepy. Sadie, Tattie, Jess, and Peggy, who
with Diana were squatting near the schoolroom fire in the gloaming,
moved a little nearer together. There is comfort in physical contact.
The fact that Brother Lawrence was entirely an invention of Diana's did
not relieve the tenseness of the situation; she had talked about him so
often that she seemed to have conjured him up. They could almost see his
white habit gliding along the corridor, and his unsaintly eyes gleaming
from under his cowl. They began to wish he had behaved better during his
lifetime, or at any rate that he had not chosen to revisit the scenes of
his old sins.

"If I were really to see him I'd have forty fits!" shivered Peggy, who
was a superstitious little soul who threw spilt salt over her left
shoulder, and curtsied religiously to the new moon.

"It isn't everybody can see ghosts," declared Diana. "You've got to have
the psychic faculty. Some people can feel they're there, even when they
can't see them."

"Oh, that would be _far_ worse! It would be awful to know something was
in the room, and not be able to see it!" exploded Jess. "Tattie, may I
come and sleep in your bed to-night?"

"There's not much room, but you can if you like," conceded Tattie; "so
long as Geraldine doesn't find out."

"I'll creep in when she's asleep."

It was all very well for Diana to people the corridor with imaginary
monks; she knew they were images of her own creation; the more
weak-minded of her form mates, however, were frankly frightened. Nothing
spreads more readily than a ghost scare. Sadie, Jess, and Peggie were
bolting squealing along the passage one evening, when they almost
collided with Geraldine. She seized Jess by the arm, and pulled her into
the radius of the lamplight, nodding to the other two to follow.

"I want a word with you," she said. "It's high time you stopped this
ridiculous nonsense. I don't know who started it, but it's getting the
limit. Oh, yes! I know you go creeping into Tattie's bed when you think
I'm asleep, and you daren't walk upstairs alone. I'm not as blind or
deaf as you seem to suppose. You're putting silly ideas into juniors'
heads. Whoever heard of the Abbey being haunted? Such stuff! You'll be
afraid of your own shadows next. Do try to be more strong-minded! I
really shouldn't have expected----"

Geraldine stopped, because something like a whirlwind suddenly descended
the stairs and stampeded towards them. It resolved itself into
Diana--Diana with scarlet cheeks, shining eyes, and face simply bubbling
over with excitement.

"Hallo! I say!" she jodelled, "What _do_ you think?" Then she saw
Geraldine, and halted dead.

"Come here!" commanded the head girl. "I want to talk to you too about
this absurd spook scare. It's mostly among you intermediates, and the
sooner you get it out of your silly heads the better. Pity you can't
find something more sensible to talk about. Why don't you read, and fill
up your empty brains? There are heaps of good books in the library, if
you'd only get them out. You spend all your spare time gossiping."

"We _do_ read!" retorted Diana, taking up the cudgels for the maligned
intermediates. "I've just read _The Monastery_, and that's all about a
ghost called 'The White Lady of Avenel'. It's _grand_ where she rides
the sacristan's mule down the river and sings:

  'Merrily swim we; the moon shines bright.
  Good luck to your fishing! Whom watch ye to-night?'

There are heaps and loads of ghost tales in the guide book and in
Chadwick's _Northern Antiquities_, and those are all books Miss Todd
_told_ me I might read. She said they were 'educational'."

"She didn't mean you to take the ghosts seriously, though, any more than
you'd believe in the gods of Greece because you were learning classical
literature. Why, you'll tell me next that you expect to see the
fairies."

"I'm not sure that I don't!"

"Then you're a bigger goose than I thought you. Really, at fourteen! I'm
astonished at all of you. You don't see _me_ running squealing away from
supposed ghosts. Don't let me catch you being such little idiots again."

Having finished her harangue, and having, as she thought, thoroughly
squashed the folly of the intermediates, Geraldine proceeded on her way,
happily oblivious of the faces they were pulling behind her back.

"I'd like to see _her_ squeal and run," grunted Jess.

[Illustration: ITS COWL FELL BACK, AND DISCLOSED A WELL-KNOWN AND
DECIDEDLY MIRTHFUL COUNTENANCE]

"So should I," agreed Sadie. "She's always _very_ superior. By the by,
Stars and Stripes, what were you just going to tell us?"

"Nothing particular."

Diana was looking preoccupied, as if her thoughts were far away.

"I'm sure it was," urged Sadie. "Don't be mean! Go on!"

"I've changed my mind. No, I'm _not_ going to tell you. It's no use
bothering me, for I just shan't."

"I think everybody's horrid to-night," said Sadie, turning away much
offended.

It was on the very next evening that Ida Beckford, going to her bedroom
in the gloaming, caught a glimpse of a white-robed figure with a cowl
over its head gliding along the passage and up the stairs. Ida was not
so strong-minded as Geraldine. She turned the colour of pale putty, and
went straight downstairs again to relate her psychic experience to her
fellow seniors. She did not meet with the sympathy she expected.

"Some silly trick of those intermediates," sniffed Hilary.

"I'll be down on them if they go shamming spooks," threatened Geraldine.

"If it happens again we'll set a watch and catch it," declared Stuart
loftily.

Ida cheered up at this mundane view of the matter, and recovered her
colour; but she abandoned the blotter she was going to fetch, and stayed
in her form-room instead of walking upstairs again. The news began to
creep about the school, however, that the Abbey was being haunted by a
spiritual visitor. Many of the girls saw it glide along the landing in
the dusk, and disappear up a certain narrow flight of stairs. Now herein
lay the mystery. The stairs went up ten steps in full view of the
passage, then they turned a sharp corner, rounded a yard of landing, and
with four more steps ended in a locked attic door. Several of the most
venturesome members of the school had tried to follow the figure, but
when they came round the corner, to their immense surprise it had
utterly disappeared. And there was absolutely no place in which it could
possibly have concealed itself.

"Has it crept through the keyhole?" quavered Peggy.

"Or just vanished into thin air?" speculated Magsie.

"The door's really locked!" declared Vi, rattling the handle again to
make sure.

"We certainly _saw_ it go up, but it's not here now!"

"Flesh and blood can't disappear in a second!"

"It's most uncanny!"

"The old Cistercians wore white habits."

"I say, I don't like this!"

Brother Lawrence, as the girls began to call the apparition, showed
himself frequently, but always with the same elusiveness. The phenomenon
was invariably as before: his white monastic robes would glimmer
through the darkness, glide up the stairway, and then seemingly melt
into nothing. Geraldine herself pursuing hotly on the scent, found that
she was utterly baffled.

A head girl, especially a prefect with a scorn for superstition, does
not like to admit herself baffled. Geraldine thought the matter over,
took Loveday into her confidence, and went to Miss Todd. As the result
of her interview she resolved to set what she called "a very neat little
spook-trap". She and Loveday said nothing about it to the rest of the
school. They merely bided their time.

Brother Lawrence did not always show up when anybody was on the watch
for him; he seemed to prefer displaying his supernatural powers to the
unwary. For two whole days he did not put in an appearance; whether he
was haunting elsewhere or expiating his sins in purgatory was a point
for discussion. On the third evening, however, Tattie, Jess, and Magsie
had screwed their courage to sticking-point, and strolled upstairs in
the twilight, half hoping and half fearing to catch a glimpse of the now
almost familiar apparition. They kept in the shadow of the big cupboard,
and held each others' hands without speaking. A full moon was shining
through the landing window, and lit up the narrow staircase with a
silvery, ghostly gleam. Suddenly from the darkness of a doorway emerged
the white robes, and passed rapidly upwards in the moonlight. Still
clutching hands for moral support, the three girls tore after it.
Surely this time they could manage to overtake it? But no; it had turned
the corner before they reached the lowest stair, and by the time they
had dashed up the ten steps it had made its usual disappearance. They
halted on the yard of landing, breathing hard; then their hearts seemed
to turn somersaults, for the attic door suddenly opened. It was no ghost
who peered forth at them, but Geraldine and Loveday. The former had a
candle in her hand; she struck a match and lighted it calmly.

"You needn't look so scared!" she said to the panting trio. "I'm just
going to show you your precious spook. Stand back a little, will you? I
assure you it won't bite you!"

She descended to the landing, turned round towards the four steps that
led to the attic door, then, to the immense amazement of the girls,
raised up the steps like the lid of a chest. There was a good-sized
cavity below, and in this place of concealment crouched a white-clad
figure. Geraldine took it by the arm and hauled it unceremoniously
forth. It issued chuckling, and, as its cowl fell back, disclosed a
well-known and decidedly mirthful countenance.

"Stars and Stripes!" ejaculated Jess.

"The game's up!" proclaimed Diana coolly. "You two"--nodding at the
seniors--"have been too many for me."

"I always thought you were at the bottom of all this, Diana Hewlitt!"
said Geraldine. "I was quite determined I'd catch you. Take those
things off at once. What are they? Sheets? Fold them up properly; don't
trail them on the floor. Do you know that if anybody in the school had
had a weak heart you might have killed her by playing such a trick?"

"I knew you were all too strong-minded," twinkled Diana. "Of course,
nobody believed in Brother Lawrence, any more than they believed in the
fairies or the gods of Greece. I guess it's rather nice sometimes to
make a sort of practical demonstration of one's reading. It shows one
appreciates the books and takes an intelligent interest. There are heaps
of good books in the library. I'm going to borrow _Customs and
Superstitions of the Celts_."

"You may borrow what you like," said Geraldine grimly; "but if we've any
more of this business Miss Todd will settle it herself; so I tell you."

"People who provide entertainment are rarely thanked," sighed Diana, as
she folded the sheets. "I ought to receive a stipend for keeping the
school amused."

"You'll receive something you don't bargain for, if you don't take
care," warned Geraldine. "Go downstairs, all of you!"

That Brother Lawrence was identical with Diana did not very much
surprise the school, but everybody went crazy over the discovery of the
secret hiding-place under the stairs. Even Miss Todd had not known of
its existence. Diana confessed that she had found it out quite by
accident, had rushed downstairs to communicate the thrilling news, but
had changed her mind as its obvious advantages flashed across her. She
had not been able to resist making use of it to play a ghost trick. The
little chamber which she had so unexpectedly brought to light was only
just big enough to crouch in, and had probably been made in the
troublous times of the Stuarts as a place of temporary concealment when
the Abbey was searched by soldiers. Unfortunately it was quite empty.

"When I first opened it I expected to find a hoard of spade-guineas or
silver punch-bowls," said Diana ruefully to Loveday--the two girls were
discussing the great discovery as they went to bed. "I nearly howled
when I found nothing but dust."

"I wonder," answered Loveday, "if this is what that gentleman found--the
one, I mean, who came to see Father when I had measles. You know I've
always been hunting about for hiding-places."

"Yes, I know."

"I thought somehow it would be rather better than this, though. It
hardly seemed worth while his troubling to come and call; though, of
course, it's interesting. Mr. Fleming will be very thrilled."

"I'd have been a great deal more thrilled if there'd been anything worth
having inside. As I told you before, I expected spade-guineas. It's one
of the disappointments of my life!" declared Diana, getting into bed.




CHAPTER XV

Joy-riding


The post at Pendlemere Abbey was distributed after breakfast, and the
girls devoured their correspondence in the short interval before lessons
began. One morning in April the usual weekly letter with the Paris
postmark arrived addressed to "Miss Hewlitt", and, five minutes after
receiving it, Diana came tearing down the corridor in search of Loveday.
She looked the very incarnation of joy--her face was aglow, and her eyes
shining.

"Such news!" she gasped. "What d'you think? I'll give you three guesses.
Father and Mother are coming over to England for Easter. I haven't seen
them since last September, and I'm simply off my head. Isn't it ripping?
And that's not all, by any means. Come up to the ivy room, Loveday mine.
I want to tell you all about it without those kids hanging about
listening to every word one says. Come now!"

Linking her arm in Loveday's, Diana dragged her friend upstairs, away
from the eyes and ears of inquisitive juniors, who were veritable little
pitchers where their elders' affairs were concerned. It was only when
they were in the safety of their own sanctum that she fully unbosomed
herself.

"Somebody else is coming to England. It's my brother Giles. He's been
made London correspondent of the _Louisville Herald_. He wanted most
frightfully to join the army, but they wouldn't accept him because of
his eyes. He'll be just standing on his head with joy at getting to
Europe after all. Did I tell you he was in a newspaper office? He's
crossing next week, and he's to go and see Father and Mother in Paris
first, then come back with them to England, and have a holiday before he
begins his new work. Dad's going to hire a car and take us a joy-ride,
and Lenox is to get leave and join us. You know Lenox isn't demobilized
yet. He's in a camp in Wales. But he expects they'll give him about five
days. Think of seeing Britain in a car, with Father and Mother and Giles
and Lenox! I want to shout!"

"You little lucker!" sympathized Loveday.

"But that isn't all yet. I haven't finished telling you," triumphed
Diana, laying a fluffy head on her room-mate's shoulder, and poking a
caressing finger into Loveday's dimples. "Mother said in her letter that
she guessed I'd enjoy the tour so much more if I had a girl companion
with me, and would I like to ask one of my school friends? You bet I
would! Ra--ther! Do you know whom I'm going to ask?"

"Wendy?"

"Wendy! No! I'm very fond of her, but she's not _the_ one for a tour
like this. Besides, I know she's going to the seaside with her own home
folks. There's only one person from Pendlemere I want, and that's
Loveday. Will you come? I'd just adore to have you!"

"O-o-o-oh! If your mother really asks me."

"Of course she does! She says she's writing about it to Miss Todd."

Such a dazzling prospect as a joy-ride through England was hardly to be
refused. In due course Loveday's aunt gave her permission, and the
invitation was accepted. It was arranged for the motor tour to begin on
Easter Tuesday, so as to allow Diana and her family to have a few quiet
days together first. They were to spend them at Windermere, then call
with the car at Liverpool for Loveday, and also to pick up Lenox, who
would join them there from the American camp in Wales.

Loveday went about the school feeling as if her reason were rocking. She
had never imagined that anything so nice could happen to her. Since the
loss of her parents life had not been too bright. Sometimes she almost
dreaded the holidays at her aunt's. She was shy and sensitive, and the
impression that she was not altogether welcome there was a bitter one.
It is very hard for a girl when she has no home of her own, and no one
whose special prerogative it is to love and encourage her. Though her
uncle and aunt saw that she had everything needful in the way of
education and clothing, they never petted her, and she had grown up
with the starved feeling of the child who lacks kisses. She had too
much self-respect to parade her woes at school, and perhaps her fellow
seniors mistook her shyness for pride; they were nice to her, but she
had not a real confidante among any of them. It was Diana--Diana whom
she had at first resented as an intruder in the ivy room--who had broken
down the wall of her reserve and found the road to her heart.

The remainder of the term passed quickly; the spring days were so full
with lessons and land-work that time at the Abbey literally raced along.
Nevertheless, with characteristic impatience, Diana crossed off the
calendar each evening, and counted the lessening dates in huge
satisfaction. Then came the joyful afternoon when trunks were brought
down from the box-room, and the school began its congenial task of
packing. The accustomed term-end routine was gone through, and next
morning three tired mistresses saw twenty excited pupils safely into
their respective railway carriages.

"Only a week and we meet again," said Loveday to Diana, whose train
started first.

"Just seven days," returned that damsel, leaning dangerously out of the
compartment window. "Guess I'm about living for that tour. If we don't
have the time of our lives, I'm much mistaken. Ta-ta till next Tuesday."

Diana enjoyed the quiet week at Windermere with father, mother, and
brother, and though the little circle was not quite complete--for there
was a brother of seventeen at school in America--it was delightful to
be among her own family again. Mr. Hewlitt was very tired after his long
spell of arduous work in Paris, and was glad to rest his brains, so they
spent most of the time boating on the lake, or strolling in the woods,
getting new-made-over in the fresh, bracing country air. The car they
had hired was to meet them at Lancaster. They went thus far south by
train, then motored to Liverpool. Loveday, ready with suit-case packed,
was eagerly expecting them. From the window of her aunt's drawing-room
she watched the big six-seater car arrive at the door. Giles--a
masculine edition of Diana, in spectacles--was driving. Lenox--a beaming
khaki-clad figure with twinkle-some brown eyes--sat by his side. Mr. and
Mrs. Hewlitt and Diana were in the rear seat. A goodly pile of boxes and
baskets was strapped on to the luggage-carrier behind. A change of
places was effected, resulting in the two girls sitting with Giles in
the front. Loveday's suit-case was stowed away, her aunt waved good-bye,
the electric-starter was applied, and the car moved off on its eventful
journey south.

It was a delightful way of travelling, to whiz along by road instead of
by rail. The country was just in the blush of spring, the woods were
bursting into tender leaf, plum blossom made fairy lace-work in wayside
orchards, and wallflowers and cowslips bloomed in cottage gardens.
Giles, who drove the car, had planned out their tour carefully. He was
determined to see rural England to best advantage, and, instead of
keeping always to the main roads, he intended to take by-ways, so as to
pass through typical country villages. Once free from the suburbs of
Liverpool, they avoided large towns as far as possible, as they made
their way through Cheshire to the Midlands. Their first object was that
Mecca of all American pilgrims--the Shakespeare country.

"In five days we haven't time to look at everything as we go along, so I
guess we'd better just sprint till we get to Kenilworth, and start our
sight-seeing there," decreed Giles.

He made an excellent chauffeur, and fortunately encountered no police
traps, though he certainly exceeded the speed limit when he saw a clear
road ahead. A lunch-basket with thermos flasks was packed in the car,
and the party picnicked for their mid-day meal in a wood where primroses
were opening their little pale-yellow flowers, and king-cups blazed in a
marshy ditch. The air was fresh with spring, and cuckoos were calling
from the fields by a river.

"When I was a small girl," said Loveday, "I thought there was only one
cuckoo in the world. People used to say: 'Oh, have you heard the cuckoo
yet?' so, of course, I thought there was only one. Nobody said: 'Have
you seen the swallow yet?' when swallows returned. I was fearfully
puzzled one day when I heard _two_ cuckoos both cuckooing at once."

They reached Kenilworth just at sunset, when a crimson sky was flaming
behind the old castle, and glowing on the windows of the picturesque
cottages that faced the ancient ruin from the other side of the village
green. Its grey walls, magnificent even in their decay, seemed teeming
with historic memories, and, in the glamour of the sunset, they could
almost, in imagination, restore the half-legendary splendour of its
later days, and picture Queen Elizabeth arriving there on her famous
visit to the Earl of Leicester. It was too late to do any exploring that
evening, so, after a halt to admire the beauty of the scene, they went
on to their hotel, promising themselves to make it the first object of
their sight-seeing to-morrow.

"It seems so extraordinary," said Mr. Hewlitt at dinner, "that every
little bit of ground we're passing over now has a history that dates
right back to the Middle Ages. It's a wonderful corner of England, and
so unspoilt. Half of the houses look as if they'd stepped straight out
of an artist's canvas."

For the next few days the party lived with guidebooks in their hands.
They thoroughly explored Kenilworth Castle, tried to call up a vision of
the pageant that was presented before Queen Elizabeth there, and
deplored the tragic fate of poor Amy Robsart. Then the car splashed
through the ford at the foot of the wood, and carried them along the
Warwick Road, past Blacklow Hill, where Piers Gaveston was executed, and
where, it is said, his restless spirit still rides at drear midnight, to
Guy's Cliff, with its old Saxon mill and romantic view of the Avon.
Then on to Warwick, to look at the treasures of a castle fortunately
untouched by the ravages of war, and the beautiful Beauchamp Chapel,
with its tomb of the "King Maker". They could have stayed a long time in
ancient, picturesque Warwick, admiring the quaint, old houses and the
smooth stretches of the river, but the attractions of Stratford lay only
eight miles away, and they had booked their rooms in advance at the
hotel there. None of them ever forgot their first entry into
Shakespeare's town. It was the season of his anniversary, and in his
honour flags decorated the black-and-white houses, and dainty little
maidens, with May garlands of flowers, came tripping down the
sixteenth-century streets. Our pilgrims did their devoirs in orthodox
fashion, beginning with Shakespeare's birthplace and its museum of
relics, going on to the Grammar School where he learned his "little
Latin and less Greek", to the remains of his house "New Place", and his
tomb and monument in the glorious old church. They could hardly tear
themselves away from Anne Hathaway's thatched, half-timber cottage at
Shottery, with its carved, four-post Elizabethan bedstead, its garden
full of rustic flowers, and its ingle-nook where perhaps Shakespeare sat
to woo.

"If we could only take it just as it is, and carry it out to America,"
sighed Diana.

"But it would be nothing without its surroundings," said Loveday. "It's
because Shakespeare seems associated with every corner of Stratford that
the whole place is so fascinating. Wherever you go you feel as if you
were following him round. I'd like to spend a month here, and do each
separate spot leisurely and quietly."

If the whole of the projected tour was to be carried out, and the
Shakespeare villages inspected, not to speak of Edgehill, Evesham,
Broadway, and Gloucester, which they had also set their hearts on
seeing, it was impossible to do more than rush through the various
sights, so their boxes were once more strapped on to the
luggage-carrier, and the car set off on its further travels.

They did not escape the usual accidents that delay motorists: a tyre
exploded one afternoon with a terrific bang, and the ladies of the party
had to sit for an hour by the roadside, while the men-folk fixed on the
Stepney wheel. Giles's love for by-roads landed him sometimes in
difficulties. He whisked them once down a charming primrose-starred
lane, only to find that it ended in a ford. As you cannot run a car
through even the shallowest river without stopping the engine, it was
evidently a case of "thus far and no farther", and there was nothing for
it but a return to the highway. There was no room to turn in the narrow
lane, so the car had to back the whole distance to the road--a most
difficult performance between high banks and round sharp corners, and
one which required all Giles's skill as a chauffeur. Another time,
trying a short cut across some fields, the car ran into soft earth and
refused to stir. Her occupants got down and tried with their united
efforts to push her out of her "slough of despond", but with no effect.
Giles kept starting the engine, but the wheels, instead of gripping,
simply turned round and round, and sank deeper into the soil. They were
obliged to go to a farm for help, and have planks fixed under the wheels
before the heavy car could move on to terra firma and proceed with its
journey. These little accidents, however, all added a spice of adventure
and fun to the tour; the young folks, at any rate, did not wish
everything to be too plain sailing; they thoroughly enjoyed the romantic
side of the trip, and liked to get off the beaten track into the wilds
of the country. They had brought all sorts of wonderful contrivances for
cooking the mid-day lunch, which they always ate out-of-doors. There was
an apparatus with a spirit-lamp for making coffee, which whistled like a
canary when the beverage was brewed; there was a marvellous double
frying-pan, heated merely by strips of newspaper being lighted
underneath it, which cooked eggs and sausages with surprising speed; and
there was a neat canteen-basket with cups, plates, spoons, forks, and
knives all ready to hand. In their enthusiasm the boys would have liked
to sleep in the car had that been possible, and Lenox often regretted
wistfully that they had not brought tents with them to pitch for the
night.

"No, thanks," said Mr. Hewlitt. "You youngsters may enjoy that sort of
thing; but I consider this British climate is too damp for camping out,
and I much prefer a comfortable bed at a decent hotel."

"Besides which, the hotels are so delightfully old-world and quaint, I
shouldn't like to miss them," added Mrs. Hewlitt.

"Rather _too_ old-world sometimes," shivered her daughter.

Diana had had an unpleasant experience the night before. Generally she
and Loveday slept together, but on this occasion they had been given
separate rooms. Diana, who had a tiresome trick of waking, furiously
hungry, in the small hours of the morning, put a couple of biscuits
under her pillow before she got into bed, so as to be prepared for any
emergencies of appetite. She woke suddenly in the night, with the
horrible sensation that a hand was groping under her pillow. She
switched on the electric light by her bedside, but nothing was to be
seen. Thinking she must have been dreaming, she switched off the light
and lay down again. Hardly was she settled, and sinking off to sleep,
when once more came a most unmistakable movement under her pillow.
Thoroughly scared, she switched on the light, only to find nothing. When
this happened a third time she no longer dared remain in the dark, so
lighted a candle which fortunately stood on the mantelpiece, and placed
it on a table not far from her bed. She could not see everything in the
room, and lay watching with wide-open eyes. For a few minutes all was
absolutely still; then came a slight noise, and along the rail at the
foot of the bed ran something with whiskers, either a young rat or the
very biggest mouse she had ever seen.

"Sh-sh-sh-oo-oo!" cried Diana, sitting erect in bed with round
frightened eyes. The intruder, equally terrified, took the hint to quit,
and scuttled noisily away. The idea that it might return to seek her
biscuits was too much for Diana.

"Even if I eat them it'll come back to see if they're there," she
thought. "I'd have a fit if I felt it under my pillow again. I can't
sleep another wink in here, that's certain. I'd as soon have spooks as
rats or mice. I'm going to Loveday."

So, though the time was about 1 a.m., she jumped up, seized the candle,
and managed to find her way along the passage to her friend's room.
Loveday, much astonished to be thus awakened, took her into her bed, and
they laughed over the little adventure.

"Oh, yes, it's all very fine to laugh," said Diana. "But if _you_ were
all alone you wouldn't like it yourself. Nothing will induce me to sleep
by myself again in a strange hotel; so I warn you. You'll be saddled
with your pixie girl for the rest of the tour. She's a scared baby at
nights, and she doesn't mind confessing it. Rats--ugh! The very name of
them makes me creep."




CHAPTER XVI

A Family Crest


After the joys of Stratford-on-Avon came the delights of the rest of the
fascinating Shakespeare villages. "Piping Pebworth", "Dancing Marston",
"Drunken Bidford", "Haunted Hillborough", "Hungry Grafton", "Papist
Wixford", and "Beggarly Broom" were visited and rejoiced over in turn;
then the car wended its way from Warwickshire to sample the glories of
Gloucestershire. Here, too, our pilgrims found plenty to arouse their
enthusiasm: the richness of the landscape, with orchards just breaking
into bloom; the slow winding rivers, with their willowy, reedy banks;
the beautiful half-timbered manors and farms and the thatched cottages
set in a tangle of greenery, made an ideal picture of English country
life. They saw it at the cream of the year, in all the glory of spring
tints and blossoms, and even if showers came on they put up the hood of
the car and whisked along wet roads, admiring the freshness of the
rain-washed leaves and the effects of gathering storm-clouds over
distant hills. They were a full day's journey beyond Stratford when
suddenly there happened that most common misfortune to motorists,
"something wrong with the car". Giles just managed to run her into the
nearest village, then, stopping at the inn, he sent for the services of
the blacksmith, who was somewhat of a mechanic, and with his aid set to
work on repairs. Leaving Giles, with his coat off and his sleeves rolled
up, crawling under the car and getting exceedingly oily and dusty in the
process, the rest of the party set off to explore the neighbourhood on
foot. The village was so charming that they could really hardly grumble
at being held up there. Each cottage seemed a picture, with its thatched
or red-tiled roof, black-and-white walls, creeper-covered porch, and gay
little garden. So luxuriant were the flowers that they even strayed
through the railings and made bright borders among the grass at the edge
of the road; forget-me-nots were mixed up with dandelions, and
wallflowers bloomed side by side with dead-nettles.

At the end of the village, on a rise overlooking the river, stood the
parish church, a grey, old Early-English building whose priceless
architecture had mercifully not been tampered with by the ruthless hand
of the so-called restorer. With a little difficulty Lenox found the
cottage of the caretaker, whose wife presently came up clanking the big
keys and unlocked the west door for them. The interior was most
beautiful: the graceful sandstone pillars, the interlacing arches, the
delicate tracery of the windows with their old stained glass, the black
oak roof, the carved choir stalls, the ancient rood-screen, the blazoned
shields and faded banners, the Lancastrian tombs and the Elizabethan
brasses, all combined to give that atmosphere which Milton expressed in
his _Il Penseroso_; and as the afternoon sunlight flooded through the
old stained glass, and cast blue and crimson gleams on the tiled floor
of the chancel, the glorious building seemed like the prayers of many
generations crystallized into stone.

Their guide, a young woman in a sun-bonnet, took them round to show them
the various points of interest. It was when they had duly examined the
banners and the Norman font, the carving on the miserere seats and the
motto on the base of the lectern, and had listened rather wearily to the
sing-song description of them poured out, like a lesson learned by rote,
from the lips of their conductress, that in the side chapel they came
face to face with an ancient tomb. It was an unusually beautiful one,
carved in marble, probably by some Italian master-craftsman of the late
fifteenth century. A knight clad in full armour lay stretched out in his
last sleep; his clasped hands rested over the good sword whose handle
formed a cross upon his breast; the attitude of the inclined head and
the sculpture of the strong, lined, noble face in its utter repose were
magnificent, and recalled the marvellous art that created the busts of
the emperors in the days of Rome's zenith. Round the base of the tomb
were small figures in the costume of the period, somewhat defaced and
worn, with finely-carved pilasters between the panels. At the end was a
coat of arms.

Lenox walked round with the others, admiring the beauty of the
sculpture, though rather bored by the eloquence of their guide. At sight
of the coat of arms, however, he stopped and whistled.

"By all that's wonderful, that's our family crest!" he exclaimed.

Here was an excitement! At once the whole party began to examine the
ancient, worn escutcheon, on which was depicted a chained eagle with a
crown on its head, three arrows, and the motto _Manu et corde_ (with
hand and heart).

"It's _exactly_ the same!" declared Lenox. "Dad has a copy of the crest
in an old book that his grandfather brought out from England more than a
hundred years ago."

"It's the arms of the de Cliffords," said their guide, shaken out of her
sing-song recitation into first-hand information. "You'll find the same
crest on those monuments over there in the nave."

"Dad always said we were descended from an old family," rejoined Lenox,
immensely thrilled.

That their young cousin should have discovered the tombs of his
ancestors in the village church was certainly a matter of great interest
to the Hewlitts. They besieged their guide with questions. She could not
really tell them very much, except that from mediaeval times the
Cliffords had owned the soil, and that the Manor House was now in the
possession of Mrs. Elliot, a daughter of old Squire Clifford who had
died many years ago.

"It was before I was born, but I've heard my father speak of him," she
added.

"Where is the Manor House?" asked Lenox eagerly.

"Two miles beyond the village. It's a beautiful old place too, with a
moat round it, and big stone gates."

"Is it possible to look over it?"

The guide shook her head emphatically.

"No. Mrs. Elliot won't have anyone coming. She's an old lady and very
infirm, and she can't bear to see strangers about the place. At one time
she'd let people look round with a guide, but she found them so
bothersome she stopped it. One day some Americans came and peeped
through the windows when she was having her lunch, and wouldn't go
away."

"I'm sorry they were Americans," put in Mrs. Hewlitt. "My countrymen
don't often so forget their manners, I'm glad to say."

"Well, at any rate," smiled the guide, "both English and Americans made
themselves nuisances, and she wouldn't let any more tourists come near.
She has the great gates locked, and whoever wants to go in, no matter on
what errand, must ring the lodge-keeper's bell, and it's only her own
visitors, or the tradespeople with meat and groceries and such like as
are admitted. They say she's gone almost queer in her head about it."

"What a pity!" sighed Diana.

"Still, you can hardly blame her," added Mrs. Hewlitt. "It must be very
trying to live in a show place. I'm afraid, Lenox, you'll have to give
up the idea of going over it. Is anything to be seen from the road?"

"Nothing of the house; it's all hidden by the trees. You can only see
the great gates."

"It would hardly be worth a four-mile walk, just for the gates," decided
Mrs. Hewlitt. "If the car's not ready yet we'll just take a conveyance
and drive to Ratcliffe this afternoon."

The car repair proved a tougher job than either Giles or the blacksmith
had anticipated, and, as it apparently could not be finished for many
hours, the Hewlitts arranged to make an excursion in a wagonette, and,
as the inn seemed comfortable, to return to the village, spend the night
there, and proceed on their way the next morning. Though her mother had
dismissed all question of visiting the old Manor House, Diana still
harped on the subject. She and Lenox talked it over in private after
dinner. They were sitting in the porch of the hotel, watching the lights
begin to gleam in the windows down the village street. Mr. and Mrs.
Hewlitt were writing letters; Giles and Loveday had disappeared into the
garden to try to hear a nightingale reputed to sing there.

"Len," said Diana, "you oughtn't to leave this place without seeing your
ancestral home. Think of having an ancient ancestral family home! It's
an immense idea! Aren't you just crazy to go and look at it?"

Lenox rolled his cigarette carefully, and lighted it before replying.

"So crazy that I mean to go," he admitted at last. "Don't say anything
about it to the others, but I'm planning to get up early, climb over the
Manor House wall, and take a peep at the outside of the old place at any
rate before anybody's about. That much won't do the old lady's nerves
any harm. Besides, who's to find out?"

"What a ripping notion!" Diana drew her breath admiringly. "Oh, Len, I
_must_ go too! I simply _must_! I'd give everything in the world to see
your family manor. That woman said it has a moat. I've never seen a real
moated British manor."

"If you could be up by five?" suggested Lenox.

"Couldn't I? Just you wait and see! I'll be all dressed and ready and
standing in the hall by five o'clock. Oh, what _topping_ fun! Don't let
us tell a soul about it. We'll just keep it to ourselves."

"_Ra_--ther! I'm not going prating about my plans, I can tell you."

Diana was almost sorry that her mouse scare had made her decide to sleep
with Loveday. She did not want to be questioned beforehand about her
expedition. Fortunately her room-mate was very sleepy next morning, and
slumbered tranquilly on while the stealthy process of early dressing
went forward. She did not lift an eyelid when Diana opened the door and
crept downstairs. The big clock on the landing had not yet struck five,
but Lenox was already waiting in the hall. He grinned as Diana joined
him.

"You _are_ a sport!" he whispered.

They let themselves out softly, and in another minute were walking down
the village street. The clocks were at "summer time", an hour forward,
so it was really only four o'clock. The sun had not risen yet, though it
was quite light already. The air felt deliciously fresh, birds were
singing, and cattle lowing. Here and there a cottage door opened, and a
labourer came out, who looked at them with speculative curiosity as they
passed by. They were soon through the village and along the road that
led in the direction of the Manor. On either side lay pastures with
clumps of yellow cowslips, the faint fragrance of which was wafted on
the pleasant air. Diana could not resist scaling a fence and going to
gather some, though she got her shoes soaked with the morning dew. Down
a hill, along the river side, and up through a long avenue of elms ran
the road, till at last a high oak fence took the place of the hedge;
this in its turn gave way to a wall, and presently to the left loomed a
pair of great ornamental iron gates, with a lodge at the side.

An archway across, surmounted by a stone escutcheon, bore the Clifford
crest, so there was no doubt that they had reached their destination.
The gates were padlocked together, and the blinds were drawn in the
lodge; evidently the keeper was not an early bird.

"How are we going to get in?" asked Diana.

"Not here, certainly. We'll go back to that oak paling, and climb over.
Don't you feel as if we were poachers?"

"Yes, or burglars! I guess we've got to burgle quietly. Hope the old
lady hasn't set man-traps in her park."

"Or doesn't leave savage bloodhounds to roam at large and guard the
premises. Well, we shall have to take our chance. It's rather like
storming a fortress--isn't it?"

"I call it precious!" chuckled Diana.

The fence did not look too easy to scale. It was of solid oak pales set
upright, and was about six feet in height. Its straight surface did not
offer any foothold. For some distance they wandered along, rather
discouraged, but at last an overhanging tree seemed to promise hope.
Lenox lifted up Diana till she could catch hold of a branch, then, with
considerable boosting and scrambling, she swung herself over. Lenox
dropped after her directly, and the adventurous pair stood within the
park.

So far, so good. They were certainly trespassing, but they considered
that their errand justified the deed. Lenox had brought his hand camera,
and hoped to get a snap-shot of the old place to take back to America to
show his father. He had ascertained that no picture post cards of it
were obtainable in the village. They could see the twisted chimneys
rising over the top of a thick grove of trees and shrubs, so they turned
their steps in that direction. Over some grassy park-like land they
tramped, where rabbits were still scuttling about, and a few tame deer
were grazing; then through a thicket of trees and under a belt of
ornamental shrubs. All at once, as they scrambled from the shade of some
rhododendrons, they caught their first view of the Manor. It was a
glorious old mansion, built partly in half-timber and partly in grey
stone, with an embattled tower for entrance, and a stone bridge crossing
the moat that encircled the walls. The morning sun shone direct on its
mullioned, diamond-paned windows, its twisted chimney stalks, ivy-clad
walls, and smooth, green stretch of water. Nothing could have been more
charming for a photograph, and, to make the picture absolutely perfect,
a pair of stately swans came sailing along the moat. Lenox pulled his
camera from its case, ventured forth from the cover of the bushes, and
began to focus. Diana followed closely at his elbow. They were brimful
of excitement. Here they were actually facing the "ancestral home" of
the Clifford family.

"Don't you wish you lived here?" sighed Diana.

"Rather! But no such luck!"

"If the old lady has no children perhaps you'll turn out to be the
heir," said Diana wistfully.

"She has nephews," said Lenox, dashing her hopes. "Besides, we must be a
very far-off branch of the family tree. It's a hundred years since we
settled in America. Now don't nudge me. I've just got the thing
focused--swans and all."

Lenox pressed the button, and turned the film on to No. 2, then looked
about him.

"I'm going to take the whole half-dozen," he announced. "Let's move on
and get a different view."

There was not a soul to be seen. With the exception of the swans, the
inhabitants of the Manor did not seem to be early risers. Lenox and
Diana grew bolder, and ventured nearer. By degrees they got right to the
edge of the moat. The view here was beautiful, for it took in the bridge
and the embattled tower, with the coat of arms over the doorway. It was
exactly what they wanted to carry home to America. Lenox snapped it with
huge satisfaction, including the swans, which luckily swam into the
scene at the psychological moment.

"I'd give worlds to be able to go inside and explore," said Diana. "I
wish I could make myself invisible. D'you think we dare just toddle
across the bridge, and perhaps peep in through a window? There's nobody
watching. O-o-o-oh!"

She might well exclaim, for, in direct contradiction to her words, the
door at that moment opened, and an elderly lady made her appearance. She
walked slowly with the aid of a cane, but it was evident that she had
seen the intruders on her property, and was coming to tackle them.
Swift and hasty flight seemed the only way out of the difficulty.

"Quick, Lenox! Run!" gasped Diana.

She turned, as she spoke, to make a dash for the cover of the shrubs,
but in her hurry and agitation she tripped on her dangling shoe lace,
missed her footing, slipped, tumbled down the bank, and fell backwards
with a splash into the moat.

It was not very deep, and Lenox hauled her out in a minute. There she
stood upon the bank a dripping object, her nice dress all coated with
duckweed and green slime. Her hat was floating away in the direction of
the swans. The lady had crossed the bridge, and with the help of her
cane walked painfully down the bank. Lenox and Diana felt like a pair of
naughty school children caught stealing apples. The situation was most
ignominious. Their faces would have made a study for a comic artist,
especially Diana's, with smears of duckweed on her cheeks, and her moist
hair hanging over her shoulders. They wondered what Mrs. Elliot was
going to say to them.

She came slowly up, blinking her eyes rather nervously, looked Diana
over from dripping head to muddy shoes, then made the obvious comment:

"You're very wet!"

"Ye-e-es!" shivered Diana, with chattering teeth.

"You'd better come indoors and have your clothes dried."

The relief of receiving such a charitable reception, instead of the
stern rebuke they felt they deserved, was intense. Lenox suddenly burst
into a flood of gentlemanly apologies. He explained rapidly that his
name was Clifford, that he had seen his father's coat of arms in the
church, and had been tempted to trespass in order to secure some
photographs of the house that was probably the old home of their family.
Mrs. Elliot listened till he had finished.

"I'd have given you permission if you had asked," she replied calmly.
"Now it's time that your sister--cousin, is she?--took off those wet
clothes, or she'll catch cold."

Diana marvelled at Mrs. Elliot's goodness. She was taken indoors, and
lent some garments while her own were dried. The household was an
earlier one than they had supposed, and in answer to the mistress's bell
came servants who were too well trained to express surprise in their
faces at the sight of a dripping visitor. An elderly maid showed Diana
to a bedroom, rubbed her hair for her with a towel, helped her into a
pink silk kimono dressing-gown, and brought her a cup of hot tea. These
precautions against cold having been taken, Mrs. Elliot most kindly
volunteered to show the young people over the house. It was a funny
little procession: the elderly lady with her cane; Lenox, in his khaki,
still blurting out apologies; and Diana trailing the pink kimono, which
was much too long, and shuffling in bronze-beaded shoes that were two
sizes too large. The glories of the old Manor left them gasping: the
big banqueting hall with its armour and tapestries, the panelled oak
boudoir, the library with its family portraits, the wide staircase, the
drawing-room with its cabinets and priceless china, the state bedroom
with the carved four-post bed where Queen Anne had slept, the courtyard
and dove-cote where pigeons were strutting and preening their feathers,
and the little chapel with its coats of arms in the stained glass, and
chained Bible. Through a window they could see the garden, with clipped
yew hedges and smooth lawn, and a peacock spreading its gorgeous tail to
the morning sun.

"If your great-grandfather went to America a hundred years ago you are
probably descended from either Guy, Charles, or Humphrey Clifford," said
Mrs. Elliot, showing Lenox a family genealogical tree that hung in the
hall.

"I know my great-grandfather's name was Humphrey," answered Lenox, "and
the dates would seem to correspond."

Diana's clothes were dried at last, and brushed. Even her hat, by the
aid of a fishing-rod, had been recovered from the moat. Though rather
crushed and spoilt they were quite wearable. She felt herself again when
she had put them on. Mrs. Elliot sent a servant to conduct the young
people to the lodge, and order the gate to be unlocked for their exit.
She received their renewed apologies and thanks in the same calm manner
in which she had greeted them.

"I hope the photos will come out well," were her last words, as she
stood at the door watching them walk across the bridge.

When Lenox and Diana returned to the inn, and burst upon the rest of the
party, who were having breakfast, their extraordinary story was at first
scarcely believed.

"Bunkum, my boy!" said Giles, shaking his head.

But the two witnesses gave such a circumstantial account of their
adventure that incredulity turned to amazement, and then amusement.

"You cheeky young cubs!" declared Mr. Hewlitt. "I think Mrs. Elliot was
far too good to you."

"You got more than you deserved; but I'm grateful to her for drying you,
Diana," commented Mrs. Hewlitt.

"I wish we'd been with you," said Giles. "You've had all the luck."

As the car was now repaired, the party once more packed up their
baggage, and set forth for the short remainder of their tour. Lenox's
leave was nearly over; Giles would be due in London next week; and Mr.
Hewlitt's business in Paris was not yet concluded. After another day's
enjoyment they parted at Cheltenham, and sent the girls back to school
by train.

"We shan't forget you, dear," said Mrs. Hewlitt to Loveday, as she saw
them off. "You must come and see us again some time--perhaps in
America. Take care of my little Diana for me--won't you?"

"I will--I will, indeed! Oh, I don't know how to thank you! It's been
just the absolute time of my life!" said Loveday, leaning out of the
carriage window as she waved good-bye.




CHAPTER XVII

The Green-eyed Monster


With the summer term came a period of great outdoor activity at
Pendlemere. Miss Chadwick, Miss Carr, and Miss Ormrod were tremendously
busy on the land, and gave the school a thorough initiation into the
principles of gardening. The girls studied birds, noted what insects
they ate, and how useful they were in a garden; they learned the
life-histories of certain insects, and the causes of some plant
diseases; they organized an amateur weather bureau, and kept charts of
the progress of their crops. Everybody agreed that the new regime was
much more interesting than that of the old days when the gardening had
all been done for them, and they had only lounged about the lawn and
played tennis. Each flower seemed twice as beautiful when they had
helped to grow it, and the vegetables of their own cultivation were
voted prize-winners.

Diana, in consideration of her great love for horses, was allowed to
give some assistance in Baron's toilet, and even sometimes to drive him,
a privilege (dependent on good behaviour) which made her supremely
happy.

On the whole, though Miss Todd was undoubtedly rather strict, the girls
decided that the school was jollier than in Mrs. Gifford's days. They
did not forget their former Principal, who wrote to them sometimes from
her new home and told them about her life in Burma, but they had
accepted the changed conditions, and had grown to like them. The outdoor
department seemed to bring a much wider current of life into Pendlemere.
Miss Chadwick and her two assistants were thoroughly modern, and would
discuss all sorts of up-to-date problems, so that the school kept in
touch with the outside world instead of living in the narrow rut of its
own little round of lessons and amusements. This term four elder
students had come, principally to study gardening under Miss Chadwick.
They were girls of eighteen and nineteen, who, instead of being placed
among the school, took somewhat the position of the old-fashioned
"parlour boarder" of sixty years ago, and were on terms of intimacy with
the mistresses. Naturally they were the envy and admiration of those
less fortunate beings who were still only ordinary pupils. They were
good-natured to the schoolgirls, but held themselves a little aloof.
Sometimes, in a rather superior manner, they would condescend to be
friendly. Each had her own train of worshippers. The prettiest and most
attractive of the four was Adeline Hoyle, a tall, fine-looking girl with
dark eyes, a very fair skin, and thick coils of brown hair twisted into
a classic knot. There was a calm dignity about her and a charm of
manner that was exceedingly taking. It bowled over Diana's heart
entirely. She took a sudden and most violent affection for Adeline. She
would hang about to try to get a word with her, flush crimson at the
slightest notice from her idol, and was ready to perform anything in the
way of odd jobs. She even took up sewing--a much neglected part of her
education--in order to embroider a handkerchief-case as a birthday
offering. It is an exhilarating, but rather wearing process to be
violently in love, especially when you are decidedly doubtful as to
whether the loved object in the least appreciates your attentions.
Adeline would accept Diana's sweets or flowers with a kind "Thank you",
and then pat her on the shoulder and tell her to run away. She would
sometimes allow her to link arms in the garden, but it was suffered with
an air of amused tolerance. It was obvious that she very much preferred
the society of Hilary, who was nearer her own age, and that she regarded
intermediates as mere children. Diana, who was eccentric in her likes
and dislikes, but very keen when she took a fancy to anybody, went
through all the stages of longing, hope, elation, despair, and jealousy.
When she saw Hilary received into supreme favour, the green-eyed monster
swooped down and took possession of her. Loveday, who had watched the
progress of the affair with some distress, offered what consolation she
could in the sanctuary of the ivy room.

"Adeline's really very good to you," she comforted.

"Yes, but she doesn't care twopence," raged Diana. "I know she's nice
and kind and all that, but she loves me with the love she'd give to a
distressed negro or a starved cat. I want her to _want_ me--and she
doesn't one little bit! She just tolerates me sometimes, and that's all.
What she can see in Hilary I can't imagine. I think Hilary's the most
detestable girl in the school. I always have disliked her. I _hate_ her
now!"

"Some people say that hating anybody sends out 'thought-forms' like
hideous daggers into the invisible world, and they do dreadful harm, and
in the end they come back to their owners like curses. Can't you manage
to send out some prettier thoughts?"

"No, Loveday Seton; I can't, and won't, and shan't!" said Diana
emphatically, screwing up mouth and eyes into one of her ugliest faces.
"I'm not going to pretend I like Hilary when I don't--that would be a
fiblet and worse than red daggers. Yes, you can call me naughty if you
like. I've got to the stage when I don't care."

Knowing by experience that Diana generally received suggestions in this
way, but sometimes ruminated over her remarks afterwards, Loveday
shelved the question of thought-forms and their possible ill effects,
and petted her spoilt room-mate instead till she cajoled her into a
better temper. The green-eyed monster still reigned, however, and Diana
sat at tea-time flashing, if not red daggers, very obvious untoward
glances, as she caught a smile of comprehension pass between Adeline and
Hilary. Nobody had time to take much notice of her heroics.

Everyone was too busy discussing school affairs. The very latest news
was that the boat-house was at last to be unlocked, the boat thoroughly
overhauled and painted, and that mistresses and students would go rowing
on the lake. A rumour even began to circulate that certain favoured
members of the school might be taken as passengers.

"We used when Mrs. Gifford was here," said Wendy. "She often got Mr.
Thwaites from the village to come and row us. It was top-hole. And once
he let Tattie and me try to row, but I 'caught a crab' and dropped the
oar. I'd soon learn though, if I'd another chance."

"We ought to have two or three boats," decided Sadie.

"One for each form," amended Vi.

"You bet it's only seniors who'll have any luck," groused Diana, who was
still in the depths of despondency.

"There's no knowing," said Jess hopefully.

Though they might not be certain of sharing in the pleasure of
navigating the lake, there was at least an element of anticipation in
the matter. It was just possible that some fine day Miss Todd might say
to one of them: "Put on your jersey and you may go for a row". They felt
it was one of those sporting chances that sometimes turn up in a life.
They hung about the boat-house wistfully when Mr. Appleton from Glenbury
did his task of overhauling, and if he went away for a few minutes they
took advantage of his absence to scramble in and sit inside the boat and
imagine how delightful it would feel to be really on the water. They
began to practise boat-songs, just to be ready for any emergency, and
would sit on the landing-place singing "Row, brothers, row!" or "My
barque is on the shore".

It was very exciting when repairs got to the painting stage, especially
when Diana did not notice, and took a leap inside, with equal disaster
to Mr. Appleton's nice coat of paint and her own serge skirt. Great was
the day when the _Peveril_ at last was dry, and Mr. Appleton launched
her himself on the lake, and took Miss Todd, Miss Beverley, and Miss
Chadwick for a trial trip. The school, watching enviously from the bank,
decided that nothing but a steamer, or a small fleet of rowboats could
satisfy its demands. They considered rowing ought to be a part of every
girl's education.

As Diana had prophesied, the intermediates came in for no luck. Miss
Chadwick and her assistants, with the four gardening students,
monopolized the _Peveril_. They took Miss Todd, Miss Beverley, and Miss
Hampson out for airings on the lake; occasionally a senior was invited,
and once the four youngest girls in the school were given a brief treat.
All the rest had just to look on and long. Diana, indeed, extorted a
sort of half promise from Adeline that some time, when it was
convenient, and if she was not too busy, and if nobody else wanted the
boat, she would let her realize her ambition, but so far this promise
had remained an empty one, a vague invitation that meant nothing. Diana,
catching Adeline in the garden one afternoon, made a desperate effort to
obtain its fulfilment.

[Illustration: DIANA CALLED AND SHOUTED TO THEM. THEY TOOK NO NOTICE]

"Just for ten minutes," she pleaded.

"I'm so busy," evaded Adeline. "I've got seedlings to plant out, and
really haven't time to take people on the lake. What a bother you are,
Diana!"

"You said you would some time."

"Well, so I will; but the time isn't to-day. I've other things to do."

"May I help you to plant the seedlings?"

"No indeed! They need very delicate handling, and I'm responsible to
Miss Chadwick for them. Why don't you go and help Miss Carr?"

With a decidedly snubbed feeling Diana strolled away, not to help Miss
Carr, for it was recreation hour, and she felt at liberty to employ her
leisure as she liked, but to find Wendy or some other congenial spirit.
Wendy, Sadie, and Vi, however, had gone to the village with Miss Ormrod,
and Tattie, Jess, Magsie, and Peggy occupied the tennis-court. Diana was
the only one of the intermediates left out. She felt exceedingly
aggrieved. She stood for a while watching the set; but looking on at
tennis is never very amusing, so she wended her solitary way into the
house to fetch a book. Down the corridor bustled Miss Hampson in a
hurry.

"Diana! I was just wanting somebody, and you'll do. Will you go and tell
Adeline that Miss Todd wishes to speak to her as soon as she's finished
in the greenhouse?"

Miss Hampson, with her arms full of exercise books to correct,
disappeared into the senior room, and Diana departed on her errand.
Adeline was not in the greenhouse. She had not even begun to transplant
the seedlings, though the pots and the soil were ready. Diana waited a
few minutes to see if she would come, then went in quest of her. Bobbing
briskly down the shrubbery path were two heads, a dark one with hair in
a classic knot, and a fair one with a pig-tail. They could just be
distinguished above the line of the laurels. Diana put her hands to her
mouth and called:

"Ad--el--ine!"

The heads turned for a moment to look, then scuttled on with the utmost
rapidity. Diana, following, caught a glimpse of two figures whisking
past the boat-house to the landing-place. She stopped dead.

"So it's Hilary Adeline's taking with her. And they're going in the
boat. Well, of all mean things this is the limit! Adeline hadn't time to
take people on the lake, and wanted to plant seedlings. That's why she
was so anxious to send me off to help Miss Carr. If she won't listen
when I call to her _I_'m not going to bother to give her Miss Hampson's
message. I don't suppose Miss Todd wants her about anything important.
I'm fed up!"

A very disconsolate and indignant Diana once more walked up the garden;
the green-eyed monster was sitting on her back and digging in his
disagreeable talons pretty deeply; he was anything but a bright
companion. She wandered aimlessly round the orchard, and finally came
across Miss Carr and Loveday carrying out food to the chickens. They
were chatting as she met them, and the words drifted to her between the
apple-trees.

"So Mr. Appleton said it really wasn't safe at all, and Miss Todd had
better let nobody take her out till he could come up. He'd try to come
this evening, but he wasn't sure if he'd manage it because--why, Diana,
what's the matter?"

"Is it the boat you're talking about?" demanded a breathless, excited
little figure.

"Yes--but why? Diana! What is it? Di--an--a!"

Loveday spoke to the winds, for already her room-mate was half-way down
the orchard. Diana's feet were trying to keep pace with her whirling
brain. The boat was unsafe! That, no doubt, was the message that Miss
Todd had intended for Adeline. If she had not already started it might
be possible to stop her, or at any rate to call her back. She raced
along the shrubbery and down the bank to the landing-place. But Adeline
and Hilary had wasted no time, and were already quite a considerable
way out on the lake. Diana called and shouted to them. They turned their
heads to look, evidently laughed, and took no notice. It was plain that
they thought Diana wished them to return and take her for a row, and
that they had no intention of any such philanthropic course of action.
On the landing-place Diana raged. If the _Peveril_ were really unsafe
every stroke of the oar was taking Adeline and Hilary into greater
danger. How could she possibly make them understand? The more she
called, the more they would row away.

Then a very desperate idea occurred to her, so desperate that only a
harum-scarum like Diana would have thought of it. She would swim out
towards them, and when they saw her in the water they would probably
turn and come back. She pulled off her skirt and her shoes. Now Diana
was not a very expert swimmer; it was indeed two years since she had had
any practice, and that had been in the sea, which is easier than fresh
water. She never thought of these particulars, however, but, putting her
hands together, dived off the landing-place just as Loveday turned the
corner of the boat-house. It was very cold, indeed, in the water, far
colder than she had expected; it made her gasp for breath, and sent a
numbness into her limbs. She struggled on, however, with brave strokes.

"Di--ana!" screamed Loveday's agitated voice behind her.

The girls in the boat were not even looking. How fearfully cold it was!
It was difficult to hold up her head properly and see where she was
going. She had thought swimming was so easy. A few more strokes and
something seemed to be twining round her. She had dashed into some
waterweeds, and their clammy stems clutched her like dead fingers. She
made a desperate effort to free herself; down went her head, and next
moment she was gulping, struggling, and shrieking for help. There was a
splash behind from the landing-place as Loveday plunged to the rescue;
the occupants of the boat also, at last looking and realizing the
seriousness of the situation, began to row in her direction as fast as
they could pull. They were some distance off, however, and Loveday won
the race. She caught Diana just as she was sinking, and held her up
until the boat arrived.

A very draggled, agitated pair of girls made their way up the shrubbery
walk to the house, leaving a wet trail to mark their path. Adeline tied
up the _Peveril_ before she followed them.

"I'm sure nobody can blame _us_," she remarked to Hilary.

Loveday and Diana, warmed, dried, and clad in fresh garments, scolded by
Miss Todd, and cosseted by Miss Carr, the heroines of a real adventure,
and for the moment the centre of interest in the school, discussed the
event in private.

"I've explained, but Adeline doesn't see it," said Diana. "She says the
boat wasn't as bad as all that, and they were in no real danger, and
that I did a very silly, idiotic, foolhardy thing. She doesn't
understand I was trying to save her life. But I _was_!"

"I know," nodded Loveday. "I don't think somehow, though, that Adeline's
the kind of girl whom you could ever make understand. Why do you lavish
all this love on her, Di? She's not worth it."

Diana was plaiting her skirt into little gathers. She looked at her
fingers and not at Loveday.

"I _did_ like her so! But it's all ended now--drowned in the water, I
think. She doesn't care twopence about me. Well! If _she_ doesn't, no
more do _I_! She may go to Hong-Kong as far as I'm concerned."

Loveday glanced anxiously at her friend. There was a suspicious tremble
in the usually cheerful voice. Were those drops shining on the long
eyelashes?

"It takes a good deal of riddling before we sort out the wheat and the
chaff in our friendships," ventured Loveday.

"_You're_ 'honest grain', at any rate!" said Diana, winking rapidly, as
she rose and ended the conversation.




CHAPTER XVIII

Diana's Foundling


There was very little doubt in the minds of Miss Todd and of other
mistresses at Pendlemere Abbey that Diana was a spoilt child. Her
parents, far away in Paris, made up for their enforced absence by
sending her a larger assortment of presents than usually falls to the
lot of a schoolgirl. She had practically everything that she could want,
and a great many things beside. There was one subject, however, upon
which she had coaxed her father for a long time. In every letter she had
written lately she had assured him that life was not liveable in the
summer term without a pony. Diana had a passion for horses. She had
ridden much in America, and her ideal of happiness was to be on
ponyback. She was occasionally allowed to mount Baron, but, as Miss Todd
would not permit her to take him into the lanes alone, she had to
confine her gallops to the paddock, which she considered very poor
sport. She thought the matter over till she evolved an idea; then she
confided it to Miss Carr. Miss Carr was also an enthusiast about horses,
and was secretly longing to ride Baron. Diana's scheme was that she
should ask her father to allow her to hire a pony for the rest of the
term, have it stabled at the farm near, and go with Miss Carr for rides.
When she made up her mind to a thing she was apt to press the subject
hotly. A series of such very urgent letters went to Paris that Mr.
Hewlitt yielded, and wrote to Miss Todd asking her to be so kind as to
arrange the matter. Very fortunately for Diana the idea appealed to Miss
Todd; she wished to encourage riding amongst her girls, and was quite
willing to allow the experiment to be tried. She commissioned Mr.
Greenhalgh, a neighbouring farmer, to procure a suitable mount for a
young lady of fourteen, and to take charge of it in his stable. Diana
had to wait a week, in great impatience, while he made enquiries and
interviewed horse-dealers; then one red-letter afternoon she was taken
by Miss Todd to the farm, and introduced to the prettiest possible
little white pony. "Lady" was getting on in years, but still had some
spirit left in her, and she was accustomed to the saddle. Her owner,
considering that she needed a rest, was glad to hire her out for such
light work. Diana flung her arms round the pony's neck, and at once
began the process of making love to her, cementing the new friendship
with several lumps of sugar which she had brought in her pocket.

Then began a series of perfectly delightful rides. Miss Carr and Diana
would start out after tea, and explore all the bridle-roads in the
neighbourhood. Sometimes they would go up on the moors, and enjoy a
canter over the soft grass, or ride alongside the beautiful little lakes
that lay like gems among the hills. Diana did not much mind where they
went, so long as she could be upon Lady's back. Her new possession
naturally aroused wild longing in the breasts of a considerable number
of her schoolfellows. If it had been possible Miss Todd would have
arranged for a riding-master to bring horses to Pendlemere and give
lessons to some of the girls, but matters had not yet adjusted
themselves sufficiently after the war for such an ambitious scheme as
that, so she did the next best thing, hired a second pony, and sent
certain girls, whose parents wished them to learn riding, out in relays.
These elect few were regarded as favourites of fortune, but they were
obliged to take their luck in turns. They could only have one ride a
week each, and that was not nearly enough to content them. They wanted
at least two.

"If Miss Todd could hire another pony," sighed Wendy, "that would mean
we each got in a second lesson a week."

"Mr. Greenhalgh has tried, and says he can't hear of one anywhere,"
lamented Tattie. "Horses are scarce since the war, and ponies seem
particularly wanted in the summer. It's very difficult to get
riding-ponies."

"Glad I secured Lady," chuckled Diana.

"I think it's very mean of you to keep Lady all to yourself," retorted
Sadie, airing a grievance. "Why can't you let her be the second school
pony, and take your turn with the rest of us? It would be far fairer."

"Give up Lady? Well, I like that! Coolest idea I've ever heard! Why, I
thought of the whole thing, and wrote to Dad, and she was hired
specially for me. _Your_ riding lessons were only a copy of my idea. Get
a third pony if you can, but I guess I'm not going to give up Lady to
anybody. Why should I? Dad said she was to be mine."

"It's not sporty of you, though," grumbled Sadie. "You know perfectly
well we _can't_ get a third pony, and everybody in the school is saying
how hard it is for you to monopolize one entirely to yourself. There are
six other girls who'd be glad to learn riding if they could get a
mount."

"Then let them write home to their fathers to send them ponies."

"As if they could! But their fathers would let them take lessons if
there were a school pony for them. I know that for a fact."

"Well, they shan't have mine, at any rate," rapped out Diana defiantly.
"You just needn't think it, so there!"

One afternoon it was Wendy's turn for the school pony. She and Diana and
Miss Carr rode away together down the road to Chapelrigg. It was a
gloriously fine day. Wild roses starred the hedgerows, and the beautiful
blue speedwell bordered the lanes. Larks were singing, and, though the
cuckoo had changed his tune, blackbirds still fluted in the coppices.

They had come out on an errand--not a particularly romantic one, as it
happened, only to pay a bill for Miss Todd at a farm-house a few miles
away. If the errand was prosaic the farm and its surroundings looked
attractive; it stood on a hill with a beautiful group of birch-trees
behind it, and a small stream came rippling down at the bottom of the
garden. The path from the high road was blocked by a cart left standing
with a load of straw, so it would be impossible to ride the horses up to
the door. The three riders dismounted, and Miss Carr, tying Baron to the
fence, said she would walk up the lane and pay the bill while the girls
waited for her in the road. Allowing Lady and Topsy to crop the grass in
the hedge bottom, Diana and Wendy sat on the bank lazily enjoying
themselves. It was very pleasant that afternoon to be alive. In that
northern district although summer came late she made up for it by the
extreme beauty with which she clothed the landscape; the view from the
hill-side was like one of Turner's pictures.

As the girls sat chatting, watching the ponies, and idly plucking
flowers, they heard footsteps coming along the road, and presently a
woman carrying a baby appeared round the corner. She was young and dark
and gipsy-looking, and wore large ear-rings and a red cotton
handkerchief knotted loosely round her brown throat. She stopped at the
sight of Diana and Wendy and the ponies, and seemed to consider a
moment. Then she walked boldly up to them, looked keenly in their faces,
and evidently chose Diana.

"Could you do me a kindness, miss?" she asked. "I've to go up to the
farm for a basket. I don't want to carry the baby with me; she's so
heavy. If I leave her here on the grass would you keep an eye on her
till I come back? I shan't be gone five minutes."

Now Diana was fond of babies, and the little dark-eyed specimen, wrapped
up in the plaid shawl, was pretty and attractive and fairly clean. For
answer she held out her arms, received baby, shawl, and feeding-bottle
on to her knee, and constituted herself temporary nurse.

"She'll be good till I come back," said the woman, turning up the lane
that led to the farm.

The small person with the brown eyes was probably accustomed to be
handed about. She did not jib at strangers, as might have been expected,
but accepted the situation quite amiably. She gurgled in response to
Diana's advances, and allowed herself to be amused. Perhaps the vicinity
of horses was familiar to her, and she felt at home. Diana, hugging her
on her knee, freed her from the folds of the shawl and allowed her to
kick happily. She was certainly a fascinating little mortal.

In the course of about ten minutes Miss Carr, who had been having a
chat at the farm about gardening prospects, returned leisurely down the
lane, and was electrified to find Diana sitting by the roadside nursing
a baby.

"I didn't see any gipsy woman come up to the farm," she said, in answer
to the girls' explanations. "You'd better go, Wendy, and see if you can
find her, and tell her to come at once and fetch her baby."

So Wendy went up the lane to the farm, and asked at the front door and
the back door, and looked round the stack-yard and the buildings, but
there was never a trace of the gipsy girl. A little boy playing by the
pond, however, declared that he had seen a woman crossing the field and
climbing over the fence on to the road. Wendy returned with this report.
Miss Carr looked annoyed.

"We must go along the road, then, and follow her. We can't wait here
till she chooses to come back."

So Diana carried the baby, and Wendy led Lady and Topsy, and Miss Carr,
with an anxious wrinkle between her eyebrows, followed with Baron in the
direction that the small boy had pointed out. They walked a mile, and
enquired at cottages and from passers-by, and from men working in the
fields, but nobody had seen the gipsy woman. Then they went back to the
trysting-place to see if she had returned, but she was not there. They
asked again at the farm, and went back to the cottages, and Miss Carr
begged to leave the baby there, because its mother would be sure to
enquire for it and find it. The occupants of the cottages, however,
shook their heads, and were not at all prepared to accept the
responsibility. Neither were the people at the farm. They utterly
refused to take it in. Then Diana realized that it is one thing to offer
to nurse a baby, and quite another to get rid of it again. What were
they to do?

"We can't dump the poor mite down by the roadside and leave it," said
Miss Carr distractedly. "Whatever _can_ have become of its mother?"

No answer was forthcoming to her question, and matters were urgent. She
decided that the only thing to be done was to take the baby with them to
Pendlemere, leaving messages at the farm and the cottages for the mother
to follow on and claim it. Naturally it made a great sensation in the
school when Diana arrived holding her foundling in her arms. Miss Carr
explained at full length to Miss Todd, who was utterly aghast, but
consented to take in the small stranger till it was claimed. Miss
Chadwick, who had studied hygiene at the Agricultural College, and had
once assisted at a creche, constituted herself head nurse, mixed a
bottle, and left Miss Ormrod to feed the fowls while she sat in a
rocking-chair and soothed the foundling to sleep.

"Surely the mother'll turn up before dark," she said.

But nobody turned up, and Miss Chadwick, who had had to guess at the
baby's age and requirements, and had mixed too strong a bottle, spent a
wakeful night patting her small guest on the back and endeavouring to
still her wails. Next morning Miss Todd reported the matter at the
police station, enquiries were made, and it was ascertained that a girl
answering to the description given had been in the company of a band of
hawkers, but had disappeared and left no trace of her whereabouts. The
baby was not hers, but belonged to a woman who had just been arrested on
a serious charge and taken to Glenbury jail; the hawkers with whom she
had associated disclaimed all responsibility for the child.

"The only thing to be done is to send it to the Union," said the police
sergeant.

But by that time the school in general, and Diana in particular, had
fallen in love with the poor little baby. They raged at the idea of
sending it to the workhouse. They had borrowed clothes for it; and,
nicely bathed and dressed and recovered from its fit of indigestion, it
looked a sweet thing, and was ready to make friends with anybody and
everybody.

"Bless her, she _shan't_ go the workhouse!" declared Diana, kissing the
small fist that clung round her finger.

There was a wild idea among the girls that the foundling might be kept
as a "school baby".

"We're taught gardening, and poultry-keeping, and bee-keeping," said
Wendy quite seriously, "so why not the care of children? We could learn
to bathe her, and mix her bottle, and do heaps of things for her."

Miss Todd, however, thought otherwise. Theoretical hygiene of infants
was all very well as part of the curriculum, but the practical side of
it was disturbing to the school. Miss Chadwick had other duties besides
that of nursing a baby. Rows of plants needed attention, and young
chickens claimed her care.

"If the mother gets a heavy sentence," said Miss Todd, "I think the
child would be received into a 'Home for Destitute Children'. In the
meantime----"

"_Not_ the workhouse!" pleaded Diana. "Isn't there anybody in the
village who'd take her in?"

"Mrs. Jones would have her, but she would charge twelve and sixpence a
week; nobody will take in a baby for less now."

"What's that in dollars? About three, isn't it? Dad will fix that up
easily. I'll write to him to-night. It's as good as settled."

"Diana," said Miss Todd emphatically, "I shall _not_ allow you to write
to your father and ask him for anything more. If you care to give up
your pocket-money for the baby's sake that's another matter; but you're
getting into a bad habit of expecting your father to pay for every whim
that comes into your head. It's cheap charity to suggest something
that's to cost _you_ nothing. You want to have all the credit of the
generosity at your father's expense."

Diana flushed up to her hair, and down over her neck.

"Do you think me a slacker?" she asked.

"Yes; in this respect I certainly do. If you were prepared to deny
yourself anything it would be different, but you're not. You like to
call the child _your_ foundling, but personally you've done nothing for
her. It's Miss Chadwick who's had the wakeful nights."

Diana did not urge in self-defence that she would willingly have taken
the baby to bed with her if she had been allowed; she knew it was
useless to offer arguments or excuses. She was busy thinking. Miss
Todd's reproaches stung her like a whip. She would let the school see
that she was not the pampered, spoilt darling that they imagined. On
that score she was determined. Sacrifices! She was quite prepared to
make sacrifices if they were necessary. Nobody should again have the
chance of telling her that she did her generosity at other people's
expense. An idea swept through her mind, and she set her teeth.

"Does it cost more than twelve and six a week to keep Lady?" she asked.

"Considerably more; though I don't suppose you've ever concerned
yourself about the cost," returned Miss Todd sarcastically.

"Might I hand Lady over to the school for the rest of the term, then,
and pay for the baby instead? I'd square it up with Father. He wouldn't
mind about the riding when I explained."

Miss Todd looked Diana squarely in the face. Pupil and mistress met each
other's eyes. The Principal's voice softened when she spoke.

"Yes; if you like to do this, Diana, I could arrange it. We want another
school pony. You could take your turn with Lady once a week, the same as
the other girls. By the end of the term we should know whether the
'Home' would receive the baby. Meantime, Mrs. Jones would take good care
of her."

"Then I guess it's fixed," said Diana rather hoarsely.




CHAPTER XIX

Ambitions


The poor little foundling, pending her mother's trial at the Assizes,
was boarded out in the village with Mrs. Jones, and Diana had permission
to see her twice a week. Miss Todd communicated with the "Home for
Destitute Children", and received the reply that, should the mother be
convicted, as seemed only too probable, they would be ready to receive
the baby, and would apply to the judge for an order for entire charge,
so that it should not be claimed and taken away to a possibly criminal
life when the mother's term of penal servitude was over.

For the present, therefore, there was nothing more to be done except
take an interest in their protegee. Diana set to work to make her a
dress--a really heroic effort, for she hated sewing--and sat stitching
at it on those afternoons when the other girls were riding Lady. It was
typical of Diana that she would not discuss her arrangement about the
pony with anybody, not even Wendy.

"I've done it for reasons of my own, and that's enough!" she said rather
crossly. "You've no need to thank me--it wasn't particularly to please
_you_! I suppose I can do as I like!"

"Of course you _can_, but you needn't flare up so!" retorted Sadie.
"_Most_ people would _expect_ to be thanked. What a queer girl you are,
Diana!"

At which remark Diana grunted and turned away.

It is a funny thing that a burst of self-sacrifice often leaves us in a
bad temper. Diana was no model heroine, only a very ordinary and rather
spoilt girl. The reaction after giving up her pony had sent her spirits
down to zero, and if all her doings are to be faithfully chronicled, it
must be confessed that for a day or two she did not display herself at
her best. She was snappy even with Loveday, and matters came to an open
quarrel with Hilary, who, as prefect, was inclined to be dictatorial. A
war of words followed; Hilary threatened to appeal to Miss Todd, and
Diana, defeated but unrepentant, retired vowing vengeance.

"I'll pay you out some day; see if I don't!" she declared hotly.

"You're not worth noticing!" retorted Hilary, shrugging her shoulders.

Diana retired to the ivy room, had a thoroughly good cry, and came down
with red eyes, but feeling better. She did not speak to Hilary again,
however, for days.

Meantime, examinations were drawing near. Although Miss Todd conducted
her school on absolutely modern lines, she still clung to examinations
as being some test of a girl's attainments. The seniors in especial were
anxious to distinguish themselves. It was their last chance before they
left, and all, with the exception of Stuart and Ida, who were to remain
as gardening students, were leaving at the end of the term. The breaking
up of her school-days meant an anxious time for Loveday. When they were
alone in the ivy room she sometimes confided her troubles to Diana.

"I don't know what I'm to do next. Uncle Fred has told me plainly that
the little sum of money my father left has been nearly all spent on my
education, and that he himself can't do anything for me. I'd like to go
and take a proper training for something--kindergarten, or horticulture,
or domestic economy. But how can I when there's nothing to do it on? I
suppose it'll end in my going out as a nursery governess."

"Oh, Loveday!"

"Well, what else can I do? I daresay I'd love the children, and be quite
happy in a way, but the worst of it is, it's such a blind alley, and
leads to nothing. It's all very well to be a nursery governess when
you're eighteen, but I'd like to be something better at thirty-six. If
you want to get anything decent in the way of a post you have to train."

Diana, to whom all these ideas were fresh and bewildering, was trying to
adjust her brains to the new problems. She wrenched her mind from the
near present, and took a mental review of Loveday's far future.

"But aren't you going to get married?" was the result of her
cogitations.

Loveday, busy plying her hair-brush, shook her long flaxen mane
dolefully.

"I don't say I wouldn't _like_ to. But I don't think it's at all likely.
I'm not an attractive kind of girl; I know that well enough. I'm so shy.
I never know what to say to people when they begin to talk to me. They
must think me a silly goose. You should see my cousin Dorothy; she's
always the very life and soul of a party. If I were like _that_ now! I
don't suppose anybody'll ever trouble to look at me twice. I'm sure
Auntie thinks so. No; I expect I've just got to make up my mind to be a
nursery governess for the rest of my days."

Diana, still in a state of mental bewilderment, looked at pretty Loveday
sitting on the bed brushing out her silky fair hair, and her memory
switched itself back suddenly to the last evening of their motor trip.
She had been sitting in the lounge of the hotel, and through the open
door could see Giles standing in the hall. Loveday had come running
downstairs. Diana would never forget the look that for an instant
flashed across Giles's face. It contained something that she had not yet
altogether grasped or realized.

"I wouldn't make up my mind too soon if I were you," she said slowly.
"You might change it some day."

Whatever the future might hold in store, the present was the most
immediate concern. Loveday wished to take back a good report to her
uncle and aunt, and studied hard so as to obtain a fair place in the
examination lists. She had just a faint hope that if they thought she
showed any intellectual promise they might consider it worth while to
have her trained. They had never made much of her attainments, but if
she could come out third or fourth in the school she felt they would be
pleased. It would be impossible to overstep Geraldine or Hilary, but her
work was tolerably on a level with Ida's and Stuart's, and certainly
above Nesta's.

It was just at this crisis that Miss Todd offered a prize for the best
essay on "The Reconstruction of England after the Great War, and its
Special Application to Women's Labour and Social Problems".

It was rather an ambitious topic for girls to tackle, but the seniors
attacked it with the crude courage of seventeen. It is often easier at
that age to state our opinions than later, when our minds wobble with
first-hand experience of the world. At any rate, it gives a force and
style to an essay to be absolutely sure that what you write in it is the
final thing to be said on the subject. The girls scribbled away, tore up
many sheets, showed bits to admiring friends, and felt themselves
budding authoresses. Public opinion, surging round the school, had
already fixed the laurel wreath on the head of Hilary. Hilary exhibited
decided literary ability; she had quite a clever knack of writing, and
had composed several short stories. When she read these aloud--in
bed--her thrilled listeners decided that they were worthy of appearing
in print.

"Why don't you send them to a magazine?" urged Peggy, who slept in
Dormitory 4.

"Perhaps I may some day--but please don't tell anybody a word about it,"
said Hilary, putting the cherished stories away again inside her
dispatch-case.

In the ivy room Loveday also wrote and burnt, and wrote and tore up, and
wrote again. Composition was her strong point, and though she knew she
could never rival Hilary in mathematics or languages, she might possibly
match her in the matter of an essay. In imagination Loveday took home
the prize and showed it to her uncle and aunt, who were so overcome with
amazement that they at once decided to send her to college on the
strength of it.

On Wednesday afternoon the school had planned a mountain walk; but the
weather, with its usual northern perversity, turned on the water-tap,
and sent down deluges of rain. July can be quite as wet as February, and
through the steaming window-panes the disappointed girls watched little
rivers racing down the walks, and black clouds driving over the fells.
The pent-up energy that wanted to spend itself in walking must find some
other vent. The seniors, with one accord, retired to their form-room to
copy out their essays. Miss Chadwick charitably conducted the juniors,
clad in mackintoshes and goloshes down to the stable, and let them climb
the ladder on to the hay in the loft, where she sat and told them
stories. She did not invite the intermediates, so they were left to
their own devices.

Diana, suffering from a cold, annoyed with the weather, and cross that
she was not allowed to go out into the rain, raged up and down the room,
and finally, for lack of any other form of physical exercise, organized
a jumping competition.

The girls scrambled over the desks and took leaps on to the floor. They
squealed as they did so, and every now and then broke into hallos or
bursts of song. It was certainly not a quiet occupation. In the midst of
the riot the door opened, and Hilary, in a towering temper, made her
appearance.

"I never heard such a disgraceful noise in my life!" she stormed. "It
sounds like a menagerie or an infants' tea-party. Great girls of your
age to be jumping about like babies. You ought to be ashamed of
yourselves! Here are we all trying to copy our essays; and how d'you
think we're going to write with that racket going on over our heads? If
you don't stop I shall fetch Miss Todd. She'll hear it for herself very
soon, if you don't take care, and then there'll be squalls. She's
working in her study."

There was truth in Hilary's remarks. Though they would not acknowledge
there was anything derogatory to the dignity of intermediates in
indulging in the pastime of jumping, they knew full well that should the
noise penetrate to the precincts of the study Miss Todd would issue
forth like a dragon. But Diana was cross, and not disposed to take
reproof lightly. She pulled one of her most impossible faces, and
stormed back at Hilary.

"You seniors want to have the school all to yourselves! It's a holiday
afternoon; and why shouldn't we do as we like? We've just as good a
right to amuse ourselves in our own way as you have. I don't see why you
should tyrannize over us. You're always interfering! What business is it
of yours what we do?"

"Very much my business, Diana Hewlitt, considering I'm prefect," said
Hilary grimly. "If I've any more cheek from you you'll march down and
report yourself in the study. This noise must stop. I give you warning
that if it begins again I shall go straight to Miss Todd."

"You'll be a sneak then," retorted Diana. "I've a great many scores to
settle with _you_, Hilary. You'll have a very unpleasant surprise before
long, so look out!"

Hilary did not deign to answer, but stalked away in majestic silence,
leaving gloom behind her. The girls knew perfectly well that even for a
holiday afternoon they had exceeded the noise limit. Visions of a
surprise visit from Miss Todd kept them silent. Tattie brought out her
sewing, and Peggy her painting. Sadie went down to the library for a
book. Wendy and Jess began a game of halma. Even Diana, after staring
disconsolately out of the window, settled to read _Ivanhoe_. Downstairs
the seniors, in peace and quiet, finished copying out their essays.

"They look so neat now they're done," rejoiced Geraldine. "Shall you
keep your old copy?"

"What's the use?" said Hilary. "Mine's all alterations and corrections.
I shall just tear it up."

"Well, so shall I."

Most of the others followed suit, and made a bonfire in the empty grate
with the originals of their essays. The fair copies they placed inside
their desks. Hilary put hers away with the short stories she had
written, and, happening to be in a rather communicative mood, she
confided the secret of these literary efforts to Stuart. Stuart was much
impressed.

"Why don't you try to publish them?" she asked.

"Well, I would if I could," admitted Hilary.

"I saw a little bit in the end of the _Blue Magazine_ saying that the
editor would be glad to consider contributions."

"Oh, did you? Where is it?"

"I'll find it for you."

Stuart hunted up the magazine, found the paragraph in question, and
tendered good advice.

"I'd certainly send them if I were you. Why shouldn't you try as well as
anybody else? They might be accepted. Just think of having a story in a
magazine! I'd die of swelled head if it were mine."

"I suppose there's no harm in trying," fluttered Hilary. "It would be a
joke to see one's own story in print."

"Send some of them off to-day."

"Shall I?"

"Why not?"

"I don't know which to choose."

"Oh, any of them!"

Thus urged, Hilary drew three of her manuscripts at a venture, put them
inside a long envelope, wrote a short note offering them to the editor,
enclosed it, fastened, addressed, and stamped her letter, and placed it
in the post-box in the hall.

"What fun if you have some luck!" said Stuart.

"I drew a tiny little swastika inside the envelope, and I made three
crosses over it with my right forefinger," confessed Hilary, "but I
don't suppose it's any use; they'll probably come packing back."

"Well, if they do you must send them to some other magazine," said
Stuart hopefully.

Diana felt a little cheered up after reading three chapters of
_Ivanhoe_, but she was still angry with Hilary. She felt that she would
like to play a trick upon her. It would really serve her right for being
so generally disagreeable. There was no need at all for prefects to take
advantage of their office and ride roughshod over the intermediates. How
could she possibly pay her out and settle the score between them? She
pondered for a while, then had a sudden brain-wave and chuckled. First,
she ascertained that the senior room was empty, then she paid a
surreptitious visit to the pantry and purloined a pepper-pot. Hiding
this for safety in her pocket she went back to the senior room, opened
Hilary's desk, and put a plentiful sprinkling of pepper inside.

"It'll make Hilary just sneeze her head off to-morrow!" triumphed Diana.
"She'll think she's got a touch of 'flu', and she'll be in _such_ a
scare! I'd give worlds to see the fun. Only, of course, I daren't show
myself, or she'll find out. No, that would never do."

Putting the pepper-pot back in her pocket, she was in the act of leaving
the room, when in the dusk she collided with Geraldine. The astonishment
was mutual.

"What are you doing here, Diana?" asked the head prefect sharply.

"Oh, nothing in particular. I was just taking a roam round the school,
that's all."

"You've no business to roam into the senior room. Keep to your own
quarters. We can't have juniors coming in here!"

"I'm not a junior!"

"Well, intermediates are quite as bad, if not worse!"

Diana beat a retreat, for the supper-bell was ringing. She marched into
the dining-room with a defiant twinkle in her eyes, and meeting Wendy,
could not refrain from whispering:

"Done 'em brown for once! Hilary'll get the surprise of her life
to-morrow."

"Sh! Sh!" warned Wendy too late.

Geraldine, who was exactly behind, and who had evidently overheard,
glared at the couple, but forbore to speak. Indeed there was not time
for her to do so, for the girls were taking their seats, and Miss Todd
was waiting to say grace. It is undignified for a head prefect to take
too much notice of the chance remarks of intermediates, so Geraldine let
the matter pass, and, whatever her private thoughts might be, did not
revive the subject after supper.




CHAPTER XX

A Tangled Plot


Loveday and Diana went to bed that evening just as usual. They performed
their customary hair-brush drill, twisted Diana's light-brown locks in
curl-rags, and plaited Loveday's flaxen mane in two long braids, folded
their clothes neatly, read their Bible portions, said their prayers, and
blew out the candle. Then they lay chatting quietly till Miss Beverley
came on her nightly round of dormitory inspection.

"Only a few weeks more and we shall be saying good-bye to the ivy room,"
said Loveday. "I shall be back in Liverpool; and where will you be,
Diana?"

"Crossing the Atlantic, I hope. Dad's had our names down for passages
for ever so long, and they told him our turn might come early in August.
We're crazy to get home again."

"I don't wonder! But _how_ I'll miss you! I shall want heaps of
letters."

"Rather! And so shall I. I'll want to know what you're doing."

"Answering advertisements about posts as nursery governess," said
Loveday bitterly. "No luck ever comes to me. I had a sort of wild idea
that if I won the prize for that essay Uncle Fred might think it worth
while sending me somewhere to train; but I _know_ I shan't get it now.
Hilary read us bits out of hers, and it's just splendid--far better than
mine. I'm not in the innings."

"Oh, Loveday, what a shame! The prize means so much more to you than to
Hilary."

"I know it does. She'll win the maths prize too, and the Latin one."

"It doesn't seem fair she should get everything. I wonder if she'd hold
back her essay so as to give you a chance?"

"Not she!"

"But if----"

At that identical moment Miss Beverley opened the door, and, candle in
hand, looked round the room to see that all was left tidy. Her
inspection was swift; she said "Good night, girls!" shut the door, and
went downstairs to drink cocoa in Miss Todd's study. After her evening
round the silence rule was a point of honour in the dormitories. Loveday
and Diana turned over and went to sleep.

Some time in the middle of the night Diana woke with a start, just in
time to see Loveday in a blue dressing-gown, with their bedroom candle
in her hand, disappearing through the door. Where could Loveday be
going? Had she heard burglars? Was she ill? Why had she not roused her
room-mate? Could she by any chance be walking in her sleep?

All these questions raced through Diana's brain, and, as the quickest
way to solve them, she jumped up, fumbled in the dark for her bedroom
slippers and dressing-gown, and hurried after Loveday. She could see by
the glimmer of light that the candle was going downstairs. She followed,
flopping along in her woollen slippers, for she had not had time to draw
them on properly. She nearly lost one on the landing, and had to stop.
When she reached the hall the light had gone into the seniors' room.
Diana walked softly, and peeped cautiously in. She had rather an idea of
saying "Boo!" suddenly, and giving Loveday a scare, but she wanted to
reconnoitre first. Her friend's back was turned towards her; she was
bending over a desk, not her own desk, but Hilary's. She quickly drew
out a roll of manuscript, tore it across and across, carried it to the
fire-place, put it inside the grate, and applied the candle. Diana,
standing in the dark outside the doorway, watched her in utter
amazement. So many questions began to rush into her mind that the hall
did not seem the best place to answer them. She fled upstairs again,
jumped into bed, and lay thinking. In a minute or two Loveday came
quietly back, blew out the candle at the door, and, treading softly,
also went to bed. Diana did not speak, or betray by any movement that
she was awake. It was an hour, however, before sleep came to her. She
was on the early practising list, so she went downstairs next morning
before her room-mate was stirring.

Breakfast passed over as usual; the post-bag came in; Miss Todd sorted
and distributed the contents, and the girls retired to read their
letters. At ten minutes to nine something happened. Hilary, with wide
open eyes and flushed cheeks, came running along the hall.

"Somebody's gone and taken my essay out of my desk!" she declared
excitedly.

Her fellow-seniors wrenched their thoughts from home news.

"Impossible!" said Geraldine.

"You've misplaced it!" said Stuart.

"No, I haven't! I know just where I put it yesterday."

"Go and look again!"

"I've turned the whole desk out, I tell you, and it simply isn't there!"

"Where is it, then?"

"That's what I want to know!"

"Has anyone taken it for a joke?"

"I expect so, but I'll reckon with whoever has!"

"It's probably one of those intermediates," suggested Stuart.

"Anybody who's got it must just turn it up at once!" said Geraldine
grimly. "We can't allow this sort of thing to happen. I'll ask who's
taken it."

The head prefect made an instant tour of the school, proclaiming the
loss, and demanding instant restoration. The school, as one girl,
utterly denied the accusation.

"But look here!" persisted Geraldine. "_Some__body_ must have taken it.
It couldn't walk out of Hilary's desk by itself! She _knows_ she left it
there yesterday. If anybody's hiding it for a joke, please give it back
at once. If it's not brought back by nine o'clock I shall tell Miss
Todd. Yes, I'm in earnest! Dead earnest!"

Seniors, intermediates, and juniors, very much astonished, retired to
their form rooms and talked the matter over; but nobody produced the
missing manuscript. During the course of the morning Miss Todd entered
the intermediate room.

"A disagreeable thing has happened, girls," she said. "Somebody has
taken Hilary's essay from her desk. If it was done as a joke, I consider
it a very sorry joke! Does anyone in this room know anything about the
matter? If so, she must speak out at once and tell me."

Miss Todd looked searchingly at the faces before her, and waited for an
answer; but nobody spoke. There was a flush of annoyance on her cheeks,
and that firm set about the mouth which generally indicated a danger
signal.

"I intend to get to the bottom of it. It can't possibly be overlooked,"
she remarked, as she left the room to go and catechize the juniors.

For the rest of the morning lessons went on as usual. Immediately after
dinner, however, Diana received a message to report herself in the
study. She went slowly. She was still thinking; she had been doing
nothing else but think since that midnight excursion down the stairs. It
was rather a white-faced, anxious-eyed little Diana who entered the
study. Miss Todd was sitting at her desk, and Hilary and Geraldine stood
near her. They looked half resentful and half nervous.

"Diana," began Miss Todd, "I've sent for you because I believe you're
the only girl who can throw any light on this most distressing business.
I'm going to ask you a straight question. Have you taken Hilary's
manuscript? I expect a straight answer."

"No," breathed Diana, looking down on the floor.

"Look me in the face, Diana. Do you know where it is? Or anything at all
about it?"

Diana's eyes raised themselves to the level of the Principal's knee, and
then fell to the floor. She did not answer.

"Geraldine tells me that she saw you at Hilary's desk yesterday
evening."

No answer.

"You are known to have threatened to play a trick on Hilary!"

Still no answer.

"Very well, Diana. Until you condescend to explain, I can't allow you to
mix with the rest of the school. We have rules here, and I intend they
shall be obeyed. I make no exception for any pupil. You're inclined to
think you have licence to do as you like, and play any pranks you choose
here. I'm going to teach you a lesson for once. You'll stay in the attic
until you choose to answer my question. I've dealt with obstinate girls
before. Come along with me!"

Miss Todd rose, and, taking a key from her desk, led the way to the
attic at the top of the little narrow staircase. The room was very
simply furnished, and was always kept in readiness as a hospital in case
any girl should be suddenly taken ill. It was not a particularly
cheerful apartment; it had a skylight window, there were no pictures on
the walls, and the floor was of scrubbed boards. It looked, as it was
intended to be, arranged with the main object of being easily
disinfected if necessary. Miss Todd ushered in Diana, and pointed to a
chair.

"You may sit there and think it over," she remarked. Then she shut the
door, and locked it on the outside.

Left alone, Diana took a seat on one of the small iron bedsteads. Her
face was a mixture of bewilderment and consternation.

"Diana Hewlitt, it seems to me you've got yourself into _some_ fix," she
said to herself. "What's puzzling me is that I can't believe the
evidence of my own eyes. Did I _dream_ I saw Loveday go downstairs and
take a roll of papers out of Hilary's desk? Goodness, I was only too
horribly awake! The queerness of the thing bothers me. It doesn't fit
in, somehow. Loveday! Loveday's the last person in the world, as I
should have thought, to do a trick like that. I can't understand it.
It's the sort of stupid thing that girls do in books. I never believed
they did it in real life. Well, one thing's certain. I'm not going to
tell about her--not if Miss Todd keeps me shut up here till I'm a
hundred. Loveday shielded me when I ran away to say good-bye to Lenox,
and I vowed I'd do the same for her if ever I got the chance. Well, I've
got it now, and no mistake. Only--Loveday! Loveday! I don't understand!
You've toppled down somehow off a pedestal. I feel as if something I
liked had got broken."

It was anything but a cheerful afternoon for Diana. The only literature
in the room was a catalogue of the Stores and some reports of charitable
institutions. She read the cost of tins of sardines, pots of jam, table
linen, household china and hardware, and tried to take some faint
interest in the annual statements of the "District Nursing Association"
and "The Society for Providing Surgical Appliances for the Sick Poor".
To amuse herself she was reduced to choosing a word at random and seeing
how many other words she could make out of it, but as she had no pencil
in her pocket to write them down, it was rather difficult to keep count,
and the occupation soon palled. Shortly after four o'clock she heard a
scrimmage on the little landing outside the door. A deep-toned voice,
that sounded like Miss Beverley's, said, "Come away this minute!" and a
high-pitched, excited voice--undoubtedly Loveday's--protested, "If you'd
_only_ let me speak to her, I'm certain----"

Then a sound followed like somebody sliding down three steps at once,
and Loveday's voice, with words indistinguishable, but tone still highly
indignant, grew fainter and farther away till it ceased altogether.
Diana smiled rather bitterly.

"It's not much use her coming and talking to me," she thought. "If she
wants to tell anybody, she can tell Miss Todd. She needn't think I'll
give her away. Don't suppose she knows, though, what I saw last night.
It's a queer world! I'll be glad when I'm back in America. If Dad gets
those passages he'll come and cart me off, Miss Todd or no Miss Todd.
I'd like to see his face if he found me locked up in an attic."

Diana's tea was brought to her at five o'clock, and an hour later she
was visited by the Principal, who again urged confession.

"What's the use of keeping this up?" asked the mistress impatiently.
"You'll have to make a clean breast of it some time, so you may just as
well do it at once. It's perfectly evident that you know where the essay
is. You don't even deny that. What have you done with it?"

And again Diana stood with the same unyielding look on her face, and
stared at the floor, and did not answer a word.

There is nothing so irritating as a person who utterly refuses to speak.
Miss Todd glared at her, then turned towards the door.

"Very well; you may spend the night here. I'm not going to waste any
more time on you now. Perhaps by to-morrow morning you'll be in a
different frame of mind. I intend to know the truth of this; so it's
merely a matter of waiting. You can leave here the moment you decide to
confess; so you're punishing yourself by staying."

Once more the key turned in the lock, and Diana was a prisoner. At eight
o'clock Miss Beverley, in strict silence, brought in a tray with supper,
placed it on the table, departed, and secured the defences. After that
nobody else even came up the stairs.

"They might some of them have managed to push a note under the door,"
sighed Diana. "I guess I'd have got a message in somehow if it had been
Wendy shut up here. What a set of thick-heads they are! There isn't one
of them ever has a decent brain-wave. Wonder how long I'll have to stick
in this attic? I've not lost my bounce yet. But I guess, all the same,
I'll go to bed now."

Miss Beverley, with the supper tray, had also brought Diana's night-gear
in a small bundle. As there was no candle in the attic, it seemed wise
to disrobe while there was still light enough to see by. The little bed
was rather hard, the pillow was a lumpy one, and the spring mattress
squeaked when she moved. Diana watched the room grow gradually darker
and darker till stars appeared through the skylight. It was a very long
time before she slept. The early sunshine, however, woke her in the
small hours of the morning. There was no blind to the window, and the
room faced east. Diana sat up in bed. Her eyes fell on the pictureless
walls. Perhaps the very fact of their bareness made her look at them
more particularly. She did not admire the pattern of the paper. In
places it had been badly fitted together, especially in that corner.
Why, the magenta roses actually overlapped! They did it in a sort of
curve, almost as if they were outlining the top of a door. _Was_ it by
any chance a door?

At this stage of her inspection she sprang out of bed, went over to the
corner, and ran her hand along the portion in question. It certainly
felt as if the edge of a door were beneath. She rapped, and there was a
hollow sound, very different from that given forth from the wall when
she tried it a few yards farther on.

"I'm going to solve the problem for myself," she decided.

There was a knife left on the supper-tray. She thrust it through the
paper, and began to cut round the seeming door. And most undoubtedly it
was a door, though only a small one, with a curved top that came to the
height of her shoulder.

"It must lead somewhere!" she thought excitedly. "Suppose I could get
out on to the leads, climb down the ivy, and go off to Petteridge.
Cousin Coralie wouldn't let me be brought back here to be shut up in an
attic, I know!"

She worked away laboriously, tearing at the paper to free the door. It
flashed across her mind that Miss Todd might have something to say
about the disfigurement of the wall, but as she had gone so far, that
did not deter her.

"Might as well finish it now," she smiled.

More hacking and tearing, then a gigantic shove, and the door suddenly
opened inwards. She was looking into another attic, a larger and much
darker room, lighted only by a tiny little skylight in the corner. It
seemed full of furniture--chairs and tables piled together, and
something that looked like a small grand piano. They were so thickly
coated with dust that it was difficult in the dim light to distinguish
more than upturned legs and general outlines. There did not appear to be
the least possibility of escape in this direction. The skylight was more
inaccessible than the one in her own attic. She sighed, went back,
washed her dusty hands, and got into bed again.

"I guess there'll be a fine old shindy when Miss Todd sees what I've
done," she soliloquized.

Miss Todd, who was thoroughly out of patience with Diana, did not hurry
to send her breakfast up early that morning. She decided that the
prisoner might very well wait until the school had finished its meal.
She even distributed the post first, and began to read her own letters.
She intended to carry the tray upstairs herself, and have another talk
with Diana. It was an unpleasant duty, and could be deferred for a few
minutes. Meantime the school also read its letters. There were two for
Hilary. One in the well-known home writing, and the other a long
envelope addressed in a strange hand. She opened this first. It
contained three manuscripts, and a printed notice to the effect that the
editor of the _Blue Magazine_ much regretted his inability, owing to
lack of space, to make use of the enclosed, for the kind offer of which
he was much obliged.

"My stories packed back by return of post. How disgusting!" groused
Hilary. "He might have taken one of them. Are they all here, by the by?
Yes; 'The Flower of the Forest', 'The Airman's Vengeance', and--Good
Heavens! What's this? Why--why, it's actually my essay on
'Reconstruction'!"

Hilary was so utterly dismayed that at first she could only stare aghast
at her recovered manuscript; then she tore straight off to Miss Todd.

"I must have put it in in mistake for my other story," she explained. "I
can't imagine how I could; but evidently I _did_! I'm too sorry for
words. _Poor_ Diana!"

Everybody said "Poor Diana!" when the news--as news will--spread like
wildfire over the school. Miss Todd ordered some fresh tea to be made,
and an egg boiled for the breakfast-tray. She was a just woman, and
ready to make damages good. She even asked Miss Hampson to get out the
last jar of blackberry jelly; there was still one left in the
store-room. Diana, in the attic, having dressed hours ago, sat hungrily
by the table, listening for footsteps, and wondering if starvation were
to be part of her punishment. She glanced guiltily at the torn
wall-paper as the key turned in the lock. Miss Todd, however, was so
full of the good news that she hardly looked at the attic wall.

"Why did you say, Diana, that you knew something about the essay?" she
asked.

"I never said anything at all," replied Diana, which, of course, was
literally true.

It was nice to eat a dainty breakfast at leisure and not hurry down to
lessons. She felt herself the heroine of the school that morning as she
strolled into the French class just when the disagreeable grammar part
of the lesson was over. Later on in the day there were confidences in
the ivy room.

"I knew you hadn't done it, darling!" declared Loveday. "It wasn't like
you one little bit. I had a regular squabble with Miss Beverley. I tried
to come and talk to you through the door, and she came and dragged me
away. Why didn't you tell Miss Todd you'd never even seen the wretched
essay?"

"Sissie," whispered Diana, "will _you_ tell _me_ what you were doing at
Hilary's desk in the middle of the night?"

"Why--why, surely you never thought----"

"Yes, I did; and that's why I held my tongue," said Diana, burying her
hot face on Loveday's shoulder. "Forgive me, please, for having thought
it."

"It never struck me that anybody should think that," said Loveday, still
amazed at the idea. "And how did you know about it? Did you follow me?
Well, I'll tell you what I was doing. We seniors have a secret--not a
very desperate one; it's only a little literary society. We make up
stories for it, and fasten them together into a sort of magazine.
Geraldine is president, and Hilary is the secretary. It was the night
for giving in the stories, and I put mine with the others inside
Hilary's desk. Geraldine and I haven't been quite hitting it lately; so
I'd made a girl in my story exactly like her, only nastier, and written
a lot of very sarcastic things. I thought they were awfully clever. Then
when I got into bed I was sorry. It seemed a mean sort of thing to do. I
made up my mind I'd go down first thing in the morning and tear up the
story. But I'm such a sleepy-head in the mornings, and you know how
early Geraldine generally gets up. I was afraid she'd come down first,
and probably rummage the stories out of Hilary's desk and read mine. The
more I thought about it the more ashamed I was of what I'd written. I
couldn't go to sleep. I felt I shouldn't be easy till it was burnt; so
at last I got up, and lighted the candle, and went downstairs and did
the deed. That's how you saw me at Hilary's desk. By the by, Geraldine
said she caught _you_ there before supper. What were _you_ doing?"

"Putting pepper among her books to pay her out and make her sneeze,"
confessed Diana.

"Why, she did say her desk smelled somehow of pepper!" exclaimed
Loveday. "We were all so excited, though, about the essay being missing
that we didn't take much notice of it. The whole affair's been a sort of
'Comedy of Errors'."

One substantial result remained from Diana's confinement to the attic,
and that was the discovery of the door into the room beyond. Miss Todd
explored, and carried some of the dusty chairs out into the light of
day. She was enough of a connoisseur to see at a glance that they were
Chippendale, and extremely valuable. She had the rest of the furniture
moved out and cleaned, then sent for a dealer in antiques to ask his
opinion about it. He said it made his mouth water.

"A set of ten Chippendale singles with two armchairs will fetch almost
anything you like nowadays," he added.

"The question is, to whom do they legally belong?" said Miss Todd. "I'm
only the tenant here. I must tell my landlord."

The owner of the Abbey, who had bought the property many years before
from Mr. Seton, was a man with a fine sense of honour. Though, legally,
the furniture in the forgotten attic might have been transferred to him
with the house, he did not consider himself morally entitled to it.

"It certainly belongs to the heirs-at-law of the late Mr. Seton," he
declared.

There was only one heir, or rather heiress-at-law, and that was Loveday.
It was decided, therefore, to sell the furniture for her benefit. The
collection included objects of great rarity, among them a genuine
spinet and a beautifully inlaid bureau. At the present boom for antiques
they would realize a very substantial sum, quite a windfall, indeed, for
Loveday.

"Will it be enough to send me to a horticultural college?" she asked
Miss Todd.

"Ample, my dear. It ought to bring you sufficient for a thoroughly good
training in any career you want to take up."

This was news indeed--so splendid that it seemed almost too good to be
true. Hilary's essay, which, as everybody expected, easily won the
prize, had indirectly made Loveday's fortune after all.

"I bless the day when I was a prisoner in the attic," rejoiced Diana.
"If I hadn't knocked that door in, the furniture might still have been
lying there in the dust."

"I wonder if _this_ was the discovery that gentleman wanted to tell
Father about," surmised Loveday.

Surprise came on surprise, for the very morning after this happy
solution of Loveday's future, Diana received a telegram from Paris. Mr.
Hewlitt had succeeded in getting three passages (thrown up at the last
by a family who were taken ill with "flu" and unable to travel); he and
Mrs. Hewlitt were crossing the channel post-haste, and Diana must start
from school and meet them in Liverpool. Loveday helped her to pack her
boxes. It was an excited, fluttered, tearful little Diana who clung to
her at the last.

"Sissie! I can't say 'Good-bye!' It's not 'good-bye' to _you_--only 'au
revoir'."

"We'll meet again some day, darling!"

"We'll just jolly well have to, or I'll know the reason why! If you
don't come out to see us in America I shall come over here and fetch
you. Write very often, and let me know how the baby goes on, and if it
has been taken into the Home. I haven't quite finished its frock. Will
you do it? Oh, thanks! I'm leaving the Abbey in as big a hurry as I came
here. Dad always uses his 'lightning methods'. But I shan't forget any
of you, ever--not you, Wendy, or Jess, or Vi. Write to me, won't you? As
for you, Loveday mine, I haven't words left. Let me give you one more
good hug! Yes, Miss Todd, I'm really coming. No, I don't want to miss my
train. Good-bye, everybody and everything! Good-bye! Good-bye!"





End of Project Gutenberg's A harum-scarum schoolgirl, by Angela Brazil

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A HARUM-SCARUM SCHOOLGIRL ***

***** This file should be named 24645.txt or 24645.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/4/24645/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Casey Peel and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
