The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Daughter of a Magnate, by Frank H.
Spearman


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Daughter of a Magnate


Author: Frank H. Spearman



Release Date: February 26, 2008  [eBook #24696]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DAUGHTER OF A MAGNATE***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustration.
      See 24696-h.htm or 24696-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/6/9/24696/24696-h/24696-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/4/6/9/24696/24696-h.zip)





THE DAUGHTER OF A MAGNATE

by

FRANK H. SPEARMAN

Author of
  Whispering Smith,
  Doctor Bryson, Etc.







[Frontispiece: Gertrude used her glass constantly.]



Grosset & Dunlap
Publishers : : New York

Copyright, 1903, by
Charles Scribner's Sons

Published, October, 1903




To

WESLEY HAMILTON PECK, M.D.




CONTENTS


CHAP.

     I. A JUNE WATER
    II. AN ERROR AT HEADQUARTERS
   III. INTO THE MOUNTAINS
    IV. AS THE DESPATCHER SAW
     V. AN EMERGENCY CALL
    VI. THE CAT AND THE RAT
   VII. TIME BEING MONEY
  VIII. SPLITTING THE PAW
    IX. A TRUCE
     X. AND A SHOCK
    XI. IN THE LALLA ROOKH
   XII. A SLIP ON A SPECIAL
  XIII. BACK TO THE MOUNTAINS
   XIV. GLEN TARN
    XV. NOVEMBER
   XVI. NIGHT
  XVII. STORM
 XVIII. DAYBREAK
   XIX. SUSPENSE
    XX. DEEPENING WATERS
   XXI. PILOT
  XXII. THE SOUTH ARETE
 XXIII. BUSINESS




The Daughter of a Magnate


CHAPTER I

A JUNE WATER

The train, a special, made up of a private car and a diner, was running
on a slow order and crawled between the bluffs at a snail's pace.

Ahead, the sun was sinking into the foothills and wherever the eye
could reach to the horizon barren wastes lay riotously green under the
golden blaze.  The river, swollen everywhere out of its banks, spread
in a broad and placid flood of yellow over the bottoms, and a hundred
shallow lakes studded with willowed islands marked its wandering course
to the south and east.  The clear, far air of the mountains, the glory
of the gold on the June hills and the illimitable stretch of waters
below, spellbound the group on the observation platform.

"It's a pity, too," declared Conductor O'Brien, who was acting as
mountain Baedeker, "that we're held back this way when we're covering
the prettiest stretch on the road for running.  It is right along here
where you are riding that the speed records of the world have been
made.  Fourteen and six-tenths miles were done in nine and a half
minutes just west of that curve about six months ago--of course it was
down hill."

Several of the party were listening.  "Do you use speed recorders out
here?" asked Allen Harrison.

"How's that?"

"Do you use speed recorders?"

"Only on our slow trains," replied O'Brien.  "To put speed recorders on
Paddy McGraw or Jimmie the Wind would be like timing a teal duck with
an eight-day clock.  Sir?" he asked, turning to another questioner
while the laugh lingered on his side.  "No; those are not really
mountains at all.  Those are the foothills of the Sleepy Cat
range--west of the Spider Water.  We get into that range about two
hundred miles from here--well, I say they are west of the Spider, but
for ten days it's been hard to say exactly where the Spider is.  The
Spider is making us all the trouble with high water just now--and we're
coming out into the valley in about a minute," he added as the car gave
an embarrassing lurch.  "The track is certainly soft, but if you'll
stay right where you are, on this side, ladies, you'll get the view of
your lives when we leave the bluffs.  The valley is about nine miles
broad and it's pretty much all under water."

Beyond the curve they were taking lay a long tangent stretching like a
steel wand across a sea of yellow, and as their engine felt its way
very gingerly out upon it there rose from the slow-moving trucks of
their car the softened resonance that tells of a sounding-board of
waters.

Soon they were drawn among wooded knolls between which hurried little
rivers tossed out of the Spider flood into dry waterways and brawling
with surprised stones and foaming noisily at stubborn root and
impassive culvert.  Through the trees the travellers caught passing
glimpses of shaded eddies and a wilderness of placid pools.  "And
this," murmured Gertrude Brock to her sister Marie, "this is the
Spider!"  O'Brien, talking to the men at her elbow, overheard.
"Hardly, Miss Brock; not yet.  You haven't seen the river yet.  This is
only the backwater."

They were rising the grade to the bridge approach, and when they
emerged a few moments later from the woods the conductor said, "There!"

The panorama of the valley lay before them.  High above their level and
a mile away, the long thread-like spans of Hailey's great bridge
stretched from pier to pier.  To the right of the higher ground a fan
of sidetracks spread, with lines of flat cars and gondolas loaded with
stone, brush, piling and timbers, and in the foreground two hulking
pile-drivers, their leads, like rabbits' ears laid sleekly back,
squatted mysteriously.  Switch engines puffed impatiently up and down
the ladder track shifting stuff to the distant spurs.  At the river
front an army of men moved like loaded ants over the dikes.  Beyond
them the eye could mark the boiling yellow of the Spider, its winding
channel marked through the waste of waters by whirling driftwood,
bobbing wreckage and plunging trees--sweepings of a thousand angry
miles.  "There's the Spider," repeated the West End conductor,
pointing, "out there in the middle where you see things moving right
along.  That's the Spider, on a twenty-year rampage."  The train,
moving slowly, stopped.  "I guess we've got as close to it as we're
going to, for a while.  I'll take a look forward."

It was the time of the June water in the mountains.  A year earlier the
rise had taken the Peace River bridge and with the second heavy year of
snow railroad men looked for new trouble.  June is not a month for
despair, because the mountain men have never yet scheduled despair as a
West End liability.  But it is a month that puts wrinkles in the right
of way clear across the desert and sows gray hairs in the roadmasters'
records from McCloud to Bear Dance.  That June the mountain streams
roared, the foothills floated, the plains puffed into sponge, and in
the thick of it all the Spider Water took a man-slaughtering streak and
started over the Bad Lands across lots.  The big river forced Bucks'
hand once more, and to protect the main line Glover, third of the
mountain roadbuilders, was ordered off the high-line construction and
back to the hills where Brodie and Hailey slept, to watch the Spider.

The special halted on a tongue of high ground flanking the bridge and
extending upstream to where the river was gnawing at the long dike that
held it off the approach.  The delay was tedious.  Doctor Lanning and
Allen Harrison went forward to smoke.  Gertrude Brock took refuge in a
book and Mrs. Whitney, her aunt, annoyed her with stories.  Marie Brock
and Louise Donner placed their chairs where they could watch the
sorting and unloading of never-ending strings of flat cars, the
spasmodic activity in the lines of laborers, the hurrying of the
foremen and the movement of the rapidly shifting fringe of men on the
danger line at the dike.

The clouds which had opened for the dying splendor of the day closed
and a shower swept over the valley; the conductor came back in his
raincoat--his party were at dinner.  "_Are_ we to be detained much
longer?" asked Mrs. Whitney.

"For a little while, I'm afraid," replied the trainman diplomatically.
"I've been away over there on the dike to see if I could get permission
to cross, but I didn't succeed."

"Oh, conductor!" remonstrated Louise Donner.

"And we don't get to Medicine Bend to-night," said Doctor Lanning.

"What we need is a man of influence," suggested Harrison.  "We ought
never to have let your 'pa' go," he added, turning to Gertrude Brock,
beside whom he sat.

"Can't we really get ahead?"  Gertrude lifted her brows reproachfully
as she addressed the conductor.  "It's becoming very tiresome."

O'Brien shook his head.

"Why not see someone in authority?" she persisted.

"I have seen the man in authority, and nearly fell into the river doing
it; then he turned me down."

"Did you tell him who we were?" demanded Mrs. Whitney.

"I made all sorts of pleas."

"Does he know that Mr. Bucks _promised_ we should be In Medicine Bend
to-night?" asked pretty little Marie Brock.

"He wouldn't in the least mind that."

Mrs. Whitney bridled.  "Pray who is he?"

"The construction engineer of the mountain division is the man in
charge of the bridge just at present."

"It would be a very simple matter to get orders over his head,"
suggested Harrison.

"Not very."

"Mr. Bucks?"

"Hardly.  No orders would take us over that bridge to-night without
Glover's permission."

"What an autocrat!" sighed Mrs. Whitney.  "No matter; I don't care to
go over it, anyway."

"But I do," protested Gertrude.  "I don't feel like staying in this
water all night, if you please."

"I'm afraid that's what we'll have to do for a few hours.  I told Mr.
Glover he would be in trouble if I didn't get my people to Medicine
Bend to-night."

"Tell him again," laughed Doctor Lanning.

Conductor O'Brien looked embarrassed.  "You'd like to ask particular
leave of Mr. Glover for us, I know," suggested Miss Donner.

"Well, hardly--the second time--not of Mr. Glover."  A sheet of rain
drenched the plate-glass windows.  "But I'm going to watch things and
we'll get out just as soon as possible.  I know Mr. Glover pretty well.
He is all right, but he's been down here now a week without getting out
of his clothes and the river rising on him every hour.  They've got
every grain bag between Salt Lake and Chicago and they're filling them
with sand and dumping them in where the river is cutting."

"Any danger of the bridge going?" asked the doctor.

"None in the world, but there's a lot of danger that the river will go.
That would leave the bridge hanging over dry land.  The fight is to
hold the main channel where it belongs.  They're getting rock over the
bridge from across the river and strengthening the approach for fear
the dike should give way.  The track is busy every minute, so I
couldn't make much impression on Mr. Glover."

There was light talk of a deputation to the dike, followed by the
resignation of travellers, cards afterward, and ping-pong.  With the
deepening of the night the rain fell harder, and the wind rising in
gusts drove it against the glass.  When the women retired to their
compartments the train had been set over above the bridge where the
wind, now hard from the southeast, sung steadily around the car.

Gertrude Brock could not sleep.  After being long awake she turned on
the light and looked at her watch; it was one o'clock.  The wind made
her restless and the air in the stateroom had become oppressive.  She
dressed and opened her door.  The lights were very low and the car was
silent; all were asleep.

At the rear end she raised a window-shade.  The night was lighted by
strange waves of lightning, and thunder rumbled in the distance
unceasingly.  Where she sat she could see the sidings filled with cars,
and when a sharper flash lighted the backwater of the lakes, vague
outlines of far-off bluffs beetled into the sky.

She drew the shade, for the continuous lightning added to her disquiet.
As she did so the rain drove harshly against the car and she retreated
to the other side.  Feeling presently the coolness of the air she
walked to her stateroom for her Newmarket coat, and wrapping it about
her, sunk into a chair and closed her eyes.  She had hardly fallen
asleep when a crash of thunder split the night and woke her.  As it
rolled angrily away she quickly raised the window-curtain.

The heavens were frenzied.  She looked toward the river.  Electrical
flashes charging from end to end of the angry sky lighted the bridge,
reflected the black face of the river and paled flickering lights and
flaming torches where, on vanishing stretches of dike, an army of dim
figures, moving unceasingly, lent awe to the spectacle.

She could see smoke from the hurrying switch engines whirled viciously
up into the sweeping night and above her head the wind screamed.  A
gale from the southwest was hurling the Spider against the revetment
that held the eastern shore and the day and the night gangs together
were reinforcing it.  Where the dike gave under the terrific pounding,
or where swiftly boiling pools sucked under the heavy piling, Glover's
men were sinking fresh relays of mattresses and loading them with stone.

At moments laden flat cars were pushed to the brink of the flood, and
men with picks and bars rose spirit-like out of black shadows to
scramble up their sides and dump rubble on the sunken brush.  Other men
toiling in unending procession wheeled and slung sandbags upon the
revetment; others stirred crackling watchfires that leaped high into
the rain, and over all played the incessant lightning and the angry
thunder and the flying night.

She shut from her eyes the strangely moving sight, returned to her
compartment, closed her door and lay down.  It was quieter within the
little room and the fury of the storm was less appalling.

Half dreaming as she lay, mountains shrouded in a deathly lightning
loomed wavering before her, and one, most terrible of all, she strove
unwillingly to climb.  Up she struggled, clinging and slipping, a
cramping fear over all her senses, her ankles clutched in icy fetters,
until from above, an apparition, strange and threatening, pushed her,
screaming, and she swooned into an awful gulf.

"Gertrude!  Gertrude!  Wake up!" cried a frightened voice.

The car was rocking in the wind, and as Gertrude opened her door Louise
Donner stumbled terrified into her arms.  "Did you hear that awful,
awful crash?  I'm sure the car has been struck."

"No, no, Louise."

"It surely has been.  Oh, let us waken the men at once, Gertrude; we
shall be killed!"

The two clung to one another.  "I'm afraid to stay alone, Gertrude,"
sobbed her companion.

"Stay with me, Louise.  Come."  While they spoke the wind died and for
a moment the lightning ceased, but the calm, like the storm, was
terrifying.  As they stood breathless a report like the ripping of a
battery burst over their heads, a blast shook the heavy car and howled
shrilly away.

Sleep was out of the question.  Gertrude looked at her watch.  It was
four o'clock.  The two dressed and sat together till daylight.  When
morning broke, dark and gray, the storm had passed and out of the
leaden sky a drizzle of rain was falling.  Beside the car men were
moving.  The forward door was open and the conductor in his stormcoat
walked in.

"Everything is all right this morning, ladies," he smiled.

"All right?  I should think everything all wrong," exclaimed Louise.
"We have been frightened to death."

"They've got the cutting stopped," continued O'Brien, smiling.  "Mr.
Glover has left the dike.  He just told me the river had fallen six
inches since two o'clock.  We'll be out of here now as quick as we can
get an engine: they've been switching with ours.  There was
considerable wind in the night----"

"Considerable _wind_!"

"You didn't notice it, did you?  Glover loaded the bridge with freight
trains about twelve o'clock and I'm thinking it's lucky, for when the
wind went into the northeast about four o'clock I thought it would take
my head off.  It snapped like dynamite clear across the valley."

"Oh, we heard!"

"When the wind jumped, a crew was dumping stone into the river.  The
men were ordered off the flat cars but there were so many they didn't
all get the word at once, and while the foreman was chasing them down
he was blown clean into the river."

"Drowned?"

"No, he was not.  He crawled out away down by the bridge, though a man
couldn't have done it once in a thousand times.  It was old Bill
Dancing--he's got more lives than a cat.  Do you remember where we
first pulled up the train in the afternoon?  A string of ten box cars
stood there last night and when the wind shifted it blew the whole
bunch off the track."

"Oh, do let us get away from here," urged Gertrude.  "I feel as if
something worse would happen if we stayed.  I'm sorry we ever left
McCloud yesterday."

The men came from their compartments and there was more talk of the
storm.  Clem and his helpers were starting breakfast in the dining-car
and the doctor and Harrison wanted to walk down to see where the river
had cut into the dike.  Mrs. Whitney had not appeared and they asked
the young ladies to go with them.  Gertrude objected.  A foggy haze
hung over the valley.

"Come along," urged Harrison; "the air will give you an appetite."

After some remonstrating she put on her heavy coat, and carrying
umbrellas the four started under the conductor's guidance across to the
dike.  They picked their steps along curving tracks, between material
piles and through the debris of the night.  On the dike they spent some
time looking at the gaps and listening to explanations of how the river
worked to undermine and how it had been checked.  Watchers hooded in
yellow stickers patrolled the narrow jetties or, motionless, studied
the eddies boiling at their feet.

Returning, the party walked around the edge of the camp where cooks
were busy about steaming kettles.  Under long, open tents wearied men
lying on scattered hay slept after the hardship of the night.  In the
drizzling haze half a dozen men, assistants to the engineer--rough
looking but strong-featured and quick-eyed--sat with buckets of
steaming coffee about a huge campfire.  Four men bearing a litter came
down the path.  Doctor Lanning halted them.  A laborer had been pinched
during the night between loads of piling projecting over the ends of
flat cars and they told the doctor his chest was hurt.  A soiled
neckcloth covered his face but his stertorous breathing could be heard,
and Gertrude Brock begged the doctor to go to the camp with the injured
man and see whether something could not be done to relieve him until
the company surgeon arrived.  The doctor, with O'Brien, turned back.
Gertrude, depressed by the incident, followed Louise and Allen Harrison
along the path which wound round a clump of willows flanking the
campfire.

On the sloping bank below the trees and a little out of the wind a man
on a mattress of willows lay stretched asleep.  He was clad in leather,
mud-stained and wrinkled, and the big brown boots that cased his feet
were strapped tightly above his knees.  An arm, outstretched, supported
his head, hidden under a soft gray hat.  Like the thick gloves that
covered his clasped hands, his hat and the handkerchief knotted about
his neck were soaked by the rain, falling quietly and trickling down
the furrows of his leather coat.  But his attitude was one of
exhaustion, and trifles of discomfort were lost in his deep respiration.

"Oh!" exclaimed Gertrude Brock under her breath, "look at that poor
fellow asleep in the rain.  Allen?"

Allen Harrison, ahead, was struggling to hold his umbrella upright
while he rolled a cigarette.  He turned as he passed the paper across
his lips.

"Throw your coat over him, Allen."

Harrison pasted the paper roll, and putting it to his mouth felt for
his matchcase.  "Throw _my_ coat over him!"

"Yes."

Allen took out a match.  "Well, I like that.  That's like you,
Gertrude.  Suppose you throw your coat over him."

Gertrude looked silently at her companion.  There is a moment when
women should be humored; not all men are fortunate enough to recognize
it.  Louise, still walking ahead, called, "Come on," but Gertrude did
not move.

"Allen, throw your coat over the poor fellow," she urged.  "You
wouldn't let your dog lie like that in the rain."

"But, Gertrude--do me the kindness"--he passed his umbrella to her that
he might better manage the lighting--"he's not my dog."

If she made answer it was only in the expression of her eyes.  She
handed the umbrella back, flung open her long coat and slipped it from
her shoulders.  With the heavy garment in her hands she stepped from
her path toward the sleeper and noticed for the first time an utterly
disreputable-looking dog lying beside him in the weeds.  The dog's long
hair was bedraggled to the color of the mud he curled in, and as he
opened his eyes without raising his head, Gertrude hesitated; but his
tail spoke a kindly greeting.  He knew no harm was meant and he watched
unconcernedly while, determined not to recede from her impulse,
Gertrude stepped hastily to the sleeper's side and dropped her coat
over his shoulders.

Louise was too far ahead to notice the incident.  After breakfast she
asked Gertrude what the matter was.

"Nothing.  Allen and I had our first quarrel this morning."

As she spoke, the train, high in the air, was creeping over the Spider
bridge.




CHAPTER II

AN ERROR AT HEADQUARTERS

When the Brock-Harrison party, familiarly known--among those with whom
they were by no means familiar--as the Steel Crowd, bought the
transcontinental lines that J. S. Bucks, the second vice-president and
general manager, had built up into a system, their first visit to the
West End was awaited with some uneasiness.  An impression prevailed that
the new owners might take decided liberties with what Conductor O'Brien
termed the "personal" of the operating department.

But week after week followed the widely heralded announcement of the
purchase without the looked-for visit from the new owners.  During the
interval West End men from the general superintendent down were
admittedly on edge--with the exception of Conductor O'Brien.  "If I go, I
go," was all he said, and in making the statement in his even,
significant way it was generally understood that the trainman that ran
the pay-cars and the swell mountain specials had in view a
superintendency on the New York Central.  On what he rested his
confidence in the opening no one certainly knew, though Pat Francis
claimed it was based wholly on a cigar in a glass case once given to the
genial conductor by Chauncey M. Depew when travelling special to the
coast under his charge.

Be that as it may, when the West End was at last electrified by the
announcement that the Brock-Harrison syndicate train had already crossed
the Missouri and might be expected any day, O'Brien with his usual luck
was detailed as one of the conductors to take charge of the visitors.

The pang in the operating department was that the long-delayed inspection
tour should have come just at a time when the water had softened things
until every train on the mountain division was run under slow-orders.

At McCloud Vice-president Bucks, a very old campaigner, had held the
party for two days to avoid the adverse conditions in the west and turned
the financiers of the party south to inspect branches while the road was
drying in the hills.  But the party of visitors contained two distinct
elements, the money-makers and the money-spenders--the generation that
made the investment and the generation that distributed the dividends.
The young people rebelled at branch line trips and insisted on heading
for sightseeing and hunting straight into the mountains.  Accordingly, at
McCloud the party split, and while Henry S. Brock and his business
associates looked over the branches, his private cars containing his
family and certain of their friends were headed for the headquarters of
the mountain division, Medicine Bend.

Medicine Bend is not quite the same town it used to be, and
disappointment must necessarily attend efforts to identify the once
familiar landmarks of the mountain division.  Improvement, implacable
priestess of American industry, has well-nigh obliterated the picturesque
features of pioneer days.  The very right of way of the earliest overland
line, abandoned for miles and miles, is seen now from the car windows
bleaching on the desert.  So once its own rails, vigorous and aggressive,
skirted grinning heaps of buffalo bones, and its own tangents were spiked
across the grave of pony rider and Indian brave--the king was: the king
is.

But the Sweetgrass winds are the same.  The same snows whiten the peaks,
the same sun dies in western glory, and the mountains still see nestling
among the tracks at the bend of the Medicine River the first headquarters
building of the mountain division, nicknamed The Wickiup.  What, in the
face of continual and unrelenting changes, could have saved the Wickiup?
Not the fact that the crazy old gables can boast the storm and stress of
the mad railroad life of another day than this--for every deserted curve
and hill of the line can do as much.  The Wickiup has a better claim to
immortality, for once its cracked and smoky walls, raised solely to house
the problems and perplexities of the operating department, sheltered a
pair of lovers, so strenuous in their perplexities that even yet in the
gleam of the long night-fires of the West End their story is told.

In that day the construction department of the mountain division was
cooped up at one end of the hall on the second floor of the building.
Bucks at that time thought twice before he indorsed one of Glover's
twenty-thousand-dollar specifications.  Now, with the department
occupying the entire third floor and pushing out of the dormer windows, a
million-dollar estimate goes through like a requisition for postage
stamps.

But in spite of his hole-in-the-wall office, Glover, the construction
engineer of that day, was a man to be reckoned with in estimates of West
End men.  They knew him for a captain long before he left his mark on the
Spider the time he held the river for a straight week at twenty-eight
feet, bitted and gagged between Hailey's piers, and forced the yellow
tramp to understand that if it had killed Hailey there were equally bad
men left on the mountain pay-roll.  Glover, it may be said, took his
final degrees in engineering in the Grand Canyon; he was a member of the
Bush party, and of the four that got back alive to Medicine one was Ab
Glover.

Glover rebuilt the whole system of snowsheds on the West End, practically
everything from the Peace to the Sierras.  Every section foreman in the
railroad Bad Lands knew Glover.  Just how he happened to lose his
position as chief engineer of the system--for he was a big man on the
East End when he first came with the road--no one certainly knew.  Some
said he spoke his mind too freely--a bad trait in a railroad man; others
said he could not hold down the job.  All they knew in the mountains was
that as a snow fighter he could wear out all the plows on the division,
and that if a branch line were needed in haste Glover would have the
rails down before an ordinary man could get his bids in.

Ordinarily these things are expected from a mountain constructionist and
elicit no comment from headquarters, but the matter at the Spider was one
that could hardly pass unnoticed.  For a year Glover had been begging for
a stenographer.  Writing, to him, was as distasteful as soda-water, and
one morning soon after his return from the valley flood a letter came
with the news that a competent stenographer had been assigned to him and
would report at once for duty at Medicine Bend.

Glover emerged from his hall-office in great spirits and showed the
letter to Callahan, the general superintendent, for congratulations.
"That is right," commented Callahan cynically.  "You saved them a hundred
thousand dollars last month--they are going to blow ten a week on you.
By the way, your stenographer is here."

"He is?"

"She is.  Your stenographer, a very dignified young lady, came in on
Number One.  You had better go and get shaved.  She has been in to
inquire for you and has gone to look up a boarding-place.  Get her
started as soon as you can--I want to see your figures on the Rat Canyon
work."

A helper now would be a boon from heaven.  "But she won't stay long after
she sees this office," Glover reflected ruefully as he returned to it.
He knew from experience that stenographers were hard to hold at Medicine
Bend.  They usually came out for their health and left at the slightest
symptoms of improvement.  He worried as to whether he might possibly have
been unlucky enough to draw another invalid.  And at the very moment he
had determined he would not lose his new assistant if good treatment
would keep her he saw a trainman far down the gloomy hall pointing a
finger in his direction--saw a young lady coming toward him and realized
he ought to have taken time that morning to get shaved.

There was nothing to do but make the best of it; dismissing his
embarrassment he rose to greet the newcomer.  His first reflection was
that he had not drawn an invalid, for he had never seen a fresher face in
his life, and her bearing had the confidence of health itself.

"I heard you had been here," he said reassuringly as the young lady
hesitated at his door.

"Pardon me?"

"I heard you had been here," he repeated with deference.

"I wish to send a despatch," she replied with an odd intonation.  Her
reply seemed so at variance with his greeting that a chill tempered his
enthusiasm.  Could they possibly have sent him a deaf stenographer?--one
worn in the exacting service at headquarters?  There was always a fly
somewhere in his ointment, and so capable and engaging a young lady
seemed really too good to be true.  He saw the message blank in her hand.
"Let me take it," he suggested, and added, raising his voice, "It shall
go at once."  The young lady gave him the message and sitting down at his
desk he pressed an electric call.  Whatever her misfortunes she enlisted
his sympathy instantly, and as no one had ever accused him of having a
weak voice he determined he would make the best of the situation.  "Be
seated, please," he said.  She looked at him curiously.  "Pray, be
seated," he repeated more firmly.

"I desire only to pay for my telegram."

"Not at all.  It isn't necessary.  Just be seated!"

In some bewilderment she sat down on the edge of the chair beside which
she stood.

"We are cramped for room at present in the construction department," he
went on, affixing his frank to the telegram.  "Here, Gloomy, rush this,
my boy," said he to the messenger, who came through a door connecting
with the operator's room.  "But we have the promise of more space soon,"
he resumed, addressing the young lady hopefully.  "I have had your desk
placed there to give you the benefit of the south light."

The stenographer studied the superintendent of construction with some
surprise.  His determination to provide for her comfort was most apparent
and his apologies for his crowded quarters were so sincere that they
could not but appeal to a stranger.  Her expression changed.  Glover felt
that he ought to ask her to take off her hat, but could not for his life.
The frankness of her eyes was rather too confusing to support very much
of at once, and he busied himself at sorting the blueprints on his table,
guiltily aware that she was alive to his unshaven condition.  He
endeavored to lead the conversation.  "We have excellent prospects of a
new headquarters building."  As he spoke he looked up.  Her eyes were
certainly extraordinary.  Could she be laughing at him?  The prospect of
a new building had been, it was true, a joke for many years and evidently
she put no more confidence in the statement than he did himself.  "Of
course, you are aware," he continued to bolster his assertion, "that the
road has been bought by an immensely rich lot of Pittsburg duffers----"

The stenographer half rose in her chair.  "Will it not be possible for me
to pay for my message at once?" she asked somewhat peremptorily.

"I have already franked it."

"But I did not----"

"Don't mention it.  All I will ask in return is that you will help me get
some letters out of the way to-day," returned Glover, laying a pencil and
note-book on the desk before her.  "The other work may go till to-morrow.
By the way, have you found a boarding-place?"

"A boarding-place?"

"I understand you were looking for one."

"I have one."

"The first letter is to Mr. Bucks--I fancy you know _his_ address--"  She
did not begin with alacrity.  Their eyes met, and in hers there was a
queerish expression.

"I'm not at all sure I ought to undertake this," she said rapidly and
with a touch of disdainful mischief.

"Give yourself no uneasiness--" he began.

"It is you I fear who are giving yourself uneasiness," she interrupted.

"No, I dictate very slowly.  Let's make a trial anyway."  To avoid
embarrassment he looked the other way when he saw she had taken up the
pencil.

"My Dear Bucks," he began.  "Your letter with programme for the Pittsburg
party is received.  Why am I to be nailed to the cross with part of the
entertaining?  There's no hunting now.  The hair is falling off grizzlies
and Goff wouldn't take his dogs out at this season for the President of
the United States.  What would you think of detailing Paddy McGraw to
give the young men a fast ride--they have heard of him.  I talked
yesterday with one of them.  He wanted to see a train robber and I
introduced him to Conductor O'Brien, but he never saw the joke, and you
know how depressing explanations are.  Don't, my dear Bucks, put me on a
private car with these people for four weeks--my brother died of
paresis----"

"Oh!"  He turned.  The stenographer's cheeks were burning; she was
astonishingly pretty.  "I'm going too fast, I'm afraid," said Glover.

"I do not think I had better attempt to continue," she answered, rising.
Her eyes fairly burned the brown mountain engineer.

"As you like," he replied, rising too, "It was hardly fair to ask you to
work to-day.  By the way, Mr. Bucks forgot to give me your name."

"Is it necessary that you should have my name?"

"Not in the least," returned Glover with insistent consideration, "any
name at all will do, so I shall know what to call you."

For an instant she seemed unable to catch her breath, and he was about to
explain that the rarefied air often affected newcomers in that way when
she answered with some intensity, "I am Miss Brock.  I never have
occasion to use any other name."

Whatever result she looked for from her spirited words, his manner lost
none of its urbanity.  "Indeed?  That's the name of our Pittsburg
magnate.  You ought to be sure of a position under _him_--you might turn
out to be a relation," he laughed, softly.

"Quite possibly."

"Do not return this afternoon," he continued as she backed away from him.
"This mountain air is exhausting at first----"

"Your letters?" she queried with an expression that approached pleasant
irony.

"They may wait."

She courtesied quaintly.  He had never seen such a woman in his life, and
as his eyes fixed on her down the dim hall he was overpowered by the
grace of her vanishing figure.

Sitting at his table he was still thinking of her when Solomon, the
messenger, came in with a telegram.  The boy sat down opposite the
engineer, while the latter read the message.

"That Miss Brock is fine, isn't she?"

Glover scowled.  "I took a despatch over to the car yesterday and she
gave me a dollar," continued Solomon.

"What car?"

"Her car.  She's in that Pittsburg party."

"The young lady that sat here a moment ago?"

"Sure; didn't you know?  There she goes now to the car again."  Glover
stepped to the east window.  A young lady was gathering up her gown to
mount the car-step and a porter was assisting her.  The daintiness of her
manner was a nightmare of conviction.  Glover turned from the window and
began tearing up papers on his table.  He tore up all the worthless
papers in sight and for months afterward missed valuable ones.  When he
had filled the waste-basket he rammed blue-prints down into it with his
foot until he succeeded in smashing it.  Then he sat down and held his
head between his hands.

She was entitled to an apology, or an attempt at one at least, and though
he would rather have faced a Sweetgrass blizzard than an interview he set
his lips and with bitterness in his heart made his preparations.  The
incident only renewed his confidence in his incredible stupidity, but
what he felt was that a girl with such eyes as hers could never be
brought to believe it genuine.

An hour afterward he knocked at the door of the long olive car that stood
east of the station.  The hand-rails were very bright and the large plate
windows shone spotless, but the brown shades inside were drawn.  Glover
touched the call-button and to the uniformed colored man who answered he
gave his card asking for Miss Brock.

An instant during which he had once waited for a dynamite blast when
unable to get safely away, came back to him.  Standing on the handsome
platform he remembered wondering at that time whether he should land in
one place or in several places.  Now, he wished himself away from that
door even if he had to crouch again on the ledge which he had found in a
deadly moment he could not escape from.  On the previous occasion the
fuse had mercifully failed to burn.  This time when he collected his
thoughts the colored man was smilingly telling him for the second time
that Miss Brock was not in.




CHAPTER III

INTO THE MOUNTAINS

"You put me in an awkward position," muttered Bucks, looking out of the
window.

"But it is grace itself compared with the position I should be in now
among the Pittsburgers," objected Glover, shifting his legs again.

"If you won't go, I must, that's all," continued the general manager.
"I can't send Tom, Dick, or Harry with these people, Ab.  Gentlemen
must be entertained as such.  On the hunting do the best you can; they
want chiefly to see the country and I can't have them put through it on
a tourist basis.  I want them to see things globe-trotters don't see
and can't see without someone like you.  You ought to do that much for
our President--Henry S. Brock is not only a national man, and a big one
in the new railroad game, but besides being the owner of this whole
system he is my best friend.  We sat at telegraph keys together a long
time before he was rated at sixty million dollars.  I care nothing for
the party except that it includes his own family and is made up of his
friends and associates and he looks to me here as I should look to him
in the East were circumstances reversed."

Bucks paused.  Glover stared a moment.  "If you put it in that way let
us drop it," said he at last.  "I will go."

"The blunder was not a life and death matter.  In the mountains where
we don't see one woman a year it might happen that any man expecting
one young lady should mistake another for her.  Miss Brock is full of
mischief, and the temptation to her to let you deceive yourself was too
great, that's all.  If I could go without sacrificing the interests of
all of us in the reorganization I shouldn't ask you to go."

"Let it pass."

The day had been planned for the little reception to the visitors.  The
arrival of two more private cars had added the directors, the hunting
party and more women to the company.  The women were to drive during
the day, and the men had arranged to inspect the roundhouse, the shops,
and the division terminals and to meet the heads of the operating
department.

In the evening the railroad men were to call on their guests at the
train.  This was what Glover had hoped he should escape until Bucks
arriving in the morning asked him not only to attend the reception but
to pilot Mr. Brock's own party through a long mountain trip.  To
consent to the former request after agreeing to the latter was of
slight consequence.

In the evening the special train twinkling across the yard looked as
pretty as a dream.  The luxury of the appointments, subdued by softened
lights, and the simple hospitality of the Pittsburgers--those people
who understand so well how to charm and bow to repel--was a new note to
the mountain men.  If self-consciousness was felt by the least of them
at the door it could hardly pass Mr. Brock within; his cordiality was
genuine.

Following Bucks came some of his mountain staff, whom he introduced to
the men whose interests they now represented.  Morris Blood, the
superintendent, was among those he brought forward, and he presented
him as a young railroad man and a rising one.  Glover followed because
he was never very far from the mountain superintendent and the general
manager when the two were in sight.

For Glover there was an uncomfortable moment prospect, and it came
almost at once.  Mr. Brock, in meeting him as the chief of construction
who was to take the party on the mountain trip, left his place and took
him with Blood black to his own car to be introduced to his sister,
Mrs. Whitney.  The younger Miss Brock, Marie, the invalid, a
sweet-faced girl, rose to meet the two men.  Mrs. Whitney introduced
them to Miss Donner.  At the table Gertrude Brock was watching a waiter
from the dining-car who was placing a coffee urn.

She turned to meet the young men that were coming forward with her
father, and Glover thought the awful moment was upon him; yet it
happened that he was never to be introduced to Gertrude Brock.

Marie was already engaging him where he stood with gentle questions,
and to catch them he had to bend above her.  When the waiter went away,
Morris Blood was helping Gertrude Brock to complete her arrangements.
Others came up; the moment passed.  But Glover was conscious all the
time of this graceful girl who was so frankly cordial to those near her
and so oblivious of him.

He heard her laughing voice in her conversation with his friends and
noted in the utterance of her sister and her aunt the same unusual
inflections that he had first heard from her in his office.  To his
surprise these Eastern women were very easy to talk to.  They asked
about the mountains, and as their train conductor had long ago hinted
when himself apologizing for mountain stories, well told but told at
second hand--Glover knew the mountains.

Discussing afterward the man that was to plan the summer trip for them,
Louise Donner wished it might have been the superintendent, because he
was a Boston Tech man.

"Oh, but I think Mr. Glover is going to be interesting," declared Mrs.
Whitney.  "He drawls and I like that sort of men; there's always
something more to what they say, after you think they're done, don't
you know?  He drank two cups of coffee, didn't he, Gertrude?  Didn't
you like him?"

"The tall one?  I didn't notice; he is amazingly homely, isn't he?"

"Don't abuse him, for he is delightful," interposed Marie.

"I accused him right soon of being a Southerner," Mrs. Whitney went on.
"He admitted he was a Missourian.  When I confessed I liked his drawl
he told me I ought to hear his brother, a lawyer, who stutters.  Mr.
Glover says he wins all his cases through sympathy.  He stumbles along
until everyone is absolutely convinced that the poor fellow would have
a perfectly splendid case if he could only stammer through it; then, of
course, he gets the verdict."

The party had not completed the first day out of Medicine Bend under
Glover's care before they realized that Mrs. Whitney was right.  Glover
could talk and he could listen.  With the men it was mining or
railroading or shooting.  If things lagged with the ladies he had
landmarks or scenery or early-day stories.  With Mrs. Whitney he could
in extremity discuss St. Louis.  Marie Brock he could please by placing
her in marvellous spots for sketching.  As for Gertrude and Louise
Donner the men of their own party left them no dull moments.

The first week took the party north into the park country.  Two days of
the time, on horses, partly, put everyone in love with the Rockies.  On
Saturday they reached the main line again, and at Sleepy Cat,
Superintendent Blood joined the party for the desert run to the Heart
Mountains.  Glover already felt the fatigue of the unusual week, nor
could any ingenuity make the desert interesting to strenuous people.
Its beauties are contemplative rather than pungent, and the travellers
were frankly advised to fall back on books and ping-pong.  Crawling
across an interminable alkali basin in the late afternoon their train
was laid out a long time by a freight wreck.

Weary of the car, Gertrude Brock, after the sun had declined, was
walking alone down the track when Glover came in sight.  She started
for the train, but Glover easily overtook her.  Since he had joined the
party they had not exchanged one word.

"I wonder whether you have ever seen anything like these, Miss Brock?"
he asked, coming up to her.  She turned; he had a handful of small,
long-stemmed flowers of an exquisite blue.

"How beautiful!" she exclaimed, moved by surprise.  "What are they?"

"Desert flowers."

"Such a blue."

"You expressed a regret this morning----"

"Oh, you heard----"

"I overheard----"

"What are they called?"

"I haven't an idea.  But once in the Sioux country--"  They were at the
car-step.  "Marie?  See here," she called to her sister within.

"Won't you take them?" asked Glover.

"No, no.  I----"

"With an apology for my----"

"Marie, dear, do look here----"

"--Stupidity the other day?"

"How shall I ever reach that step?" she exclaimed, breaking in upon her
own words and obstinately buffeting his own as she gazed with more than
necessary dismay at the high vestibule tread.

"Would you hold the flowers a moment--" he asked--her sister appeared
at the door--"so I may help you?" continued the patient railroad man.

"See, Marie, these dear flowers!"  Marie clapped her hands as she ran
forward.  He held the flowers up.  "Are they for me?" she cried.

"Will you take them?" he asked, as she bent over the guard-rail.  "Oh,
gladly."  He turned instantly, but Gertrude had gained the step.
"Thank you, thank you," exclaimed Marie.  "What is their name, Mr.
Glover?"

"I don't know any name for them except an Indian name.  The Sioux, up
in their country, call them sky-eyes."

"Sky-eyes!  _Isn't_ that dear? sky-eyes."

"You are heated," continued Marie, looking at him, "you have walked a
long way.  Where in all this desolate, desolate country could you find
flowers such as these?"

"Back a little way in a canyon."

"Are there many in a desert like this?"

"I know of none--at least within many miles--yet there may be others in
nearby hiding-places.  The desert is full of surprises."

"You are so warm, are you not coming up to sit down while I get a bowl?"

"I will go forward, thank you, and see when we are to get away.  Your
sister," he added, looking evenly at Marie as Gertrude stood beside
her, "asked this morning why there were no flowers in this country, and
while we were delayed I happened to recollect that canyon and the
sky-eyes."

"I think your stupid man the most interesting we have met since we left
home, Gertrude," remarked Marie at her embroidery after dinner.

"I told you he would be," said Mrs. Whitney, suppressing a yawn.
Gertrude was playing ping-pong with Doctor Lanning.  "But isn't he
homely?" she exclaimed, sending a cut ball into the doctor's
watch-chain.

Louise returned soon with Allen Harrison from the forward car.

"The programme for the evening is arranged," she announced, "and it's
fine.  We are to have a big campfire over near that butte--right out
under the stars.  And Mr. Blood is going to tell a story, and while
he's telling it, Mr. Glover--oh, drop your ping-pong, won't you, and
listen--has promised to make taffy and we are to pull it--won't that be
jolly? and then the coyotes are to howl."

A little later all left the car together.  Above the copper edge of the
desert ranges the moon was rising full and it brought the nearer buttes
up across the stretches of the night like sentinels.  In the sky a
multitude of stars trembled, and wind springing from the south fanned
the fire growing on the plateau just off the right of way.

The party disposed themselves in camp-chairs and on ties about the big
fire.  Near at hand, Glover, who already had a friend in Clem, the
cook, was feeding chips into a little blaze under a kettle slung with
his taffy mixture, which the women in turn inspected, asked questions
about, and commented sceptically upon.

Doctor Lanning brought his banjo, and when the party had settled low
about the fire it helped to keep alive the talk.  Every few minutes the
taffy and the coyotes were demanded in turn, and Glover was kept busy
apologizing for the absence of the wolves and the slowness of his
kettle, under which he fed the small chips regularly.

As the night air grew sharper more wraps were called for.  When Doctor
Lanning and Mrs. Whitney started after them they asked Gertrude what
they should bring her, but she said she needed nothing.

As she sat, she could see Glover, her sister Marie on a stool beside
him, watching the boiling taffy.  With one foot doubled under him for a
seat, and an elbow supported on his knee he steadied himself like a
camp cook behind his modest fire; but even as he crouched the blaze
threw him up astonishingly tall.  Heedless of the chatter around the
big fire the man whose business was to bridle rivers, fight snowslides,
raze granite hills, and dispute for their dizzy passes with the bighorn
and the bear, bent patiently above his pot of molasses, a coaxing stick
in one hand and a careful chip in the other.

"Where, pray, Mr. Glover, did you learn that?" demanded Marie Brock.
He had been explaining the chemical changes that follow each stage of
the boiling in sugar.  "I learned the taffy business from the old negro
mammy that 'raised' me down on the Mississippi, Aunt Chloe.  She taught
me everything I know--except mathematics--and mathematics I don't know
anyway."  Mrs. Whitney was distributing the wraps.  "I would have
brought your Newmarket if I could have found it, Gertrude."

"Her Newmarket!" exclaimed Allen Harrison.  "Gertrude hasn't told the
Newmarket story, eh?  She threw it over a tramp asleep in the rain down
at the Spider Water bridge."

"What?"

"--And was going to disown me because I wouldn't give up my overcoat
for a tarpaulin."

"Gertrude Brock!" exclaimed Mrs. Whitney.  "Your Newmarket!  Then you
deserve to freeze," she declared, settling under her fur cape.  "What
_will_ she do next?  Now, Mr. Blood, we are all here; what about that
story?"

Morris Blood turned.  Glover, Marie Brock watching, tested the foaming
candy.  Doctor Lanning, on a cushion, strummed his banjo.

In front of Gertrude, Harrison, inhaling a cigarette, stretched before
the fire.  Declining a stool, Gertrude was sitting on a chair of ties.
One, projecting at her side, made a rest for her elbow and she reclined
her head upon her hand as she watched the flames leap.

"The incident Miss Donner asked about occurred when I was despatching,"
began the superintendent.

"Oh, are you a despatcher, too?" asked Louise, clasping her hands upon
her knee as she leaned forward.

"They would hardly trust me with a train-sheet now; this was some time
ago."




CHAPTER IV

AS THE DESPATCHER SAW

"If you can recollect the blizzard that Roscoe Conkling went down in
one March day in the streets of New York, it will give you the date;
possibly call to your mind the storm.  I had the River Division then,
and we got through the whole winter without a single tie-up of
consequence until March.

"The morning was still as June.  When the sky went heavy at noon it
looked more like a spring shower than a snow-storm; only, I noticed
over at the government building they were flying a black flag splashed
with a red centre.  I had not seen it before for years, and I asked for
ploughs on every train out after two o'clock.

"Even then there was no wickedness abroad; it was coming fairly heavy
in big flakes, but lying quiet as apple-blossoms.  Toward four o'clock
I left the office for the roundhouse, and got just about half-way
across the yard when the wind veered like a scared semaphore.  I had
left the depot in a snow-storm; I reached the roundhouse in a blizzard.

"There was no time to wait to get back to the keys.  I telephoned
orders over from the house, and the boys burned the wires, east and
west, with warnings.  When the wind went into the north that day at
four o'clock, it was murder pure and simple, with the snow sweeping the
flat like a shroud and the thermometer water-logged at zero.

"All night it blew, with never a minute's let-up.  By ten o'clock half
our wires were down, trains were failing all over the division, and
before midnight every plough on the line was bucking snow--and the snow
was coming harder.  We had given up all idea of moving freight, and
were centring everything on the passenger trains, when a message came
from Beverly that the fast mail was off track in the cut below the
hill, and I ordered out the wrecking gang and a plough battery for the
run down.

"It was a fearful night to make up a train in a hurry--as much as a
man's life was worth to work even slow in the yard a night like that.
But what limit is set to a switchman's courage I have never known,
because I've never known one to balk at a yardmaster's order.

"I went to work clearing the line, and forgot all about everything
outside the train-sheet till a car-tink came running in with word that
a man was hurt in the yard.

"Some men get used to it; I never do.  As much as I have seen of
railroad life, the word that a man's hurt always hits me in the same
place.  Slipping into an ulster, I pulled a storm-cap over my ears and
hurried down stairs buttoning my coat.  The arc-lights, blinded in the
storm, swung wild across the long yard, and the wind sung with a scream
through the telegraph wires.  Stumbling ahead, the big car-tink, facing
the storm, led me to where between the red and the green lamps a dozen
men hovered close to the gangway of a switch engine.  The man hurt lay
under the forward truck of the tender.

"They had just got the wrecking train made up, and this man, running
forward after setting a switch, had flipped the tender of the backing
engine and slipped from the footboard.  When I bent over him, I saw he
was against it.  He knew it, too, for the minute they shut off and got
to him he kept perfectly still, asking only for a priest.

"I tried every way I could think of to get him free from the wheels.
Two of us crawled under the tender to try to figure it out.  But he lay
so jammed between the front wheel and the hind one, and tender trucks
are so small and the wheels so close together that to save our lives we
could neither pull ahead nor back the engine without further mutilating
him.

"As I talked to him I took his hand and tried to explain that to free
him we should have to jack up the truck.  He heard, he understood, but
his eyes, glittering like the eyes of a wounded animal with shock,
wandered uneasily while I spoke, and when I had done, he closed them to
grapple with the pain.  Presently a hand touched my shoulder; the
priest had come, and throwing open his coat knelt beside us.  He was a
spare old man--none too good a subject himself, I thought, for much
exposure like that--but he did not seem to mind.  He dropped on his
knees and, with both hands in the snow, put his head in behind the
wheel close to the man's face.  What they said to each other lasted
only a moment, and all the while the boys were keying like madmen at
the jacks to ease the wheel that had crushed the switchman's thigh.
When they got the truck partly free, they lifted the injured man back a
little where we could all see his face.  They were ready to do more,
but the priest, wiping the water and snow from the failing man's lips
and forehead, put up his fingers to check them.

"The wind, howling around the freight-cars strung about us, sucked the
guarded lantern flames up into blue and green flickers in the globes;
they lighted the priest's face as he took off his hat and laid it
beside him, and lighted the switchman's eyes looking steadily up from
the rail.  The snow, curling and eddying across the little blaze of
lamps, whitened everything alike, tender and wheel and rail, the
jackscrews, the bars, and the shoulders and caps of the men.  The
priest bent forward again and touched the lips and the forehead of the
switchman with his thumb: then straightening on his knees he paused a
moment, his eyes lifted up, raised his hand and slowly signing through
the blinding flakes the form of the cross, gave him the sacrament of
the dying.

"I have forgotten the man's name.  I have never seen the old priest,
before or since.  But, sometime, a painter will turn to the railroad
life.  When he does, I may see from his hand such a picture as I saw at
that moment--the night, the storm, the scant hair of the priest blown
in the gale, the men bared about him; the hush of the death moment; the
wrinkled hand raised in the last benediction."




CHAPTER V

AN EMERGENCY CALL

In the morning the Brock special bathed in sunshine lay in the Bear
Dance yard.  When it was learned at breakfast that during the night
Morris Blood had disappeared there was a protest.  He had taken a train
east, Glover told them.

"But you should not have let him run away," objected Marie Brock,
"we've barely made his acquaintance.  I was going to ask him ever so
many questions about mines this morning.  Tell him, Mr. Glover, when
you telegraph, that he has had a peremptory recall, will you?  We want
him for dinner to-morrow night; papa and Mr. Bucks are to join us, you
know."

Mr. Brock arrived the following evening but the general manager failed
them, and it was long after hope of Morris Blood had been given up that
Glover brought him in with apologies for his late arrival.

The two cars were sidetracked at Cascade, the heart of the sightseeing
country, and Glover had a trip laid out for the early morning on horses
up Cabin Creek.

When he sat down to explain to Marie where he meant to take the party
the following day Gertrude Brock had a book under the banquet lamp at
the lower end of the car.  The doctor and Harrison with Mrs. Whitney
were gathered about Louise, who among the couch pillows was reading
hands.  As Morris Blood, after some talk with Mr. Brock, approached,
Louise nodded to him.  "We shall take no apologies for spoiling our
dinner party," said she, "but you may sit down.  I haven't been able,
Mr. Blood, to get your story out of my head since you told it: none of
us have.  Do you believe in palmistry?  Now, Mr. Harrison, do sit still
till I finish your hand.  Oh, here's another engagement in it!  Why,
Allen Harrison!"

"How many is that?" asked Gertrude, looking over.

"Three; and here is further excitement for you, Mr. Harrison----"

"How soon?" demanded Allen.

"Very soon, I should think; just as soon as you get home."

"Well timed," said Marie; she and Glover had come up.  "I think that's
all, this time," concluded Louise, studying the lines carefully.  "Go
slow on mining for one year, remember."  She looked at Morris Blood.
"Am I to have the pleasure of reading your hand?"

"There isn't a bit of excitement in my hand, Miss Donner, no fortunes,
no adventures, no engagements----"

"You mean in your life.  Very good; that's just the sort of hand I love
to read.  The excitement is all ahead.  Really I should like to read
your hand."

"If you insist," he said, putting out his left hand.

"Your right, please," smiled Louise.

"I have no right," he answered.  She looked mystified, but held out her
hand smilingly for his right.

"I have no right hand," he repeated, smiling, too.

None had observed before that the superintendent never offered his hand
in greeting.  A conscious instant fell on the group.  It was barely an
instant, for Glover, who heard, turned at once from an answer to Marie
Brock and laying a hand on his companion's shoulder spoke easily to
Louise.  "He gave his right hand for me once, Miss Donner, that's the
reason he has none.  May I offer mine for him?"

He put out his own right hand as he asked, and his lightly serious
words bridged the momentary embarrassment.

"Oh, I can read either hand," laughed Louise, recovering and putting
Glover's hand aside.  "Let me have your left, Mr. Blood--your turn
presently, Mr. Glover.  Be seated.  Now this is the sort of hand I
like," she declared, leaning forward as she looked into the left--"full
of romance, Mr. Blood.  Here is an affair of the heart the very first
thing.  Now don't laugh, this is serious."  She studied the palm a
moment and glanced mischievously around her.  "If I were to disclose
all the delicate romances I find here," she declared with an air of
mystery, "they would laugh at both of us.  I'm not going to give them a
chance.  I give private readings, too, Mr. Blood, and you shall have a
private reading at the other end or the car after a while.  Now is
there another 'party'?  Oh, to be sure; come, Mr. Glover, are all
railroad men romantic?  This is growing interesting--let me see your
palm.  Oh!"

"Now what have I done?" asked Glover as Louise, studying his palm,
started.  "I have changed my name--I admit that; but I have always
denied killing anyone in the States.  Are you going to tell the real
facts?  Won't someone lend _me_ a hand for a few minutes?  Or may I
withdraw this entry before exposure?"

"Mr. Glover! of all the hands!  I'm not surprised you were chosen to
show the sights.  There's something happening in your hand every few
minutes.  Adventures, heart affairs, fortunes, perils--such a
life-line, Mr. Glover.  On my word there you are hanging by a hair--a
hair--on the verge of eternity----"

Glover laughed softly.

"Oh, come, Louise," protested Mrs. Whitney.  "Touch on lighter lines,
please."

"Lighter lines!  Why, Mr. Glover's heart-line is a perfect canyon."  The
laughter did not daunt her.  "A perfect canyon.  I've read about hands
like this, but I never saw one.  No more to-night, Mr. Glover, you are
too exciting."

"But about hanging on the verge--has it anything to do with a lynching,
do you think, Miss Donner?" asked Glover.  "The hair rope might be a
lariat----"

"Mr. Glover!"--the train conductor opened the car door.  "Is Mr. Glover
in this car?"

"Yes."

"A message."

"May I be excused for a moment?" said Glover, rising.

"What did I tell you?" exclaimed Louise, "a telegram!  Something has
happened already."




CHAPTER VI

THE CAT AND THE RAT

At five o'clock that evening, snow was falling at Medicine Bend, but
Callahan, as he studied the weather bulletins, found consolation in the
fact that it was not raining, and resting his heels on a table littered
with train-sheets he forced the draft on a shabby brier and meditated.

There were times when snow had been received with strong words at the
Wickiup: but when summer fairly opened Callahan preferred snow to rain
as strongly as he preferred genuine Lone Jack to the spurious compounds
that flooded the Western market.

The chief element of speculation in his evening reflections was as to
what was going on west of the range, for Callahan knew through cloudy
experience that what happens on one side of a mountain chain is no
evidence as to what is doing on the other--and by species of warm
weather depravity that night something was happening west of the range.

"It is curious," mused Callahan, as Morrison, the head operator, handed
him some McCloud messages--"curious, that we get nothing from Sleepy
Cat."

Sleepy Cat, it should be explained, is a new town on the West End; not
only that, but a division town, and though one may know something about
the Mountain Division he may yet be puzzled at Callahan's mention of
Sleepy Cat.  When gold was found in the Pilot range and camps grew up
and down Devil's Gap like mushrooms, a branch was run from Sleepy Cat
through the Pilot country, and the tortoise-like way station became at
once a place of importance.  It takes its name from the neighboring
mountain around the base of which winds the swift Rat River.  At Sleepy
Cat town the main line leaves the Rat, and if a tenderfoot brakeman ask
a reservation buck why the mountain is called Sleepy Cat the Indian
will answer, always the same, "It lets the Rat run away."

"Now it's possible," suggested Hughie Morrison, looking vaguely at the
stove, "that the wires are down."

"Nonsense," objected Callahan.

"It is raining at Soda Sink," persisted Morrison, mildly.

"What?" demanded the general superintendent, pulling his pipe from his
mouth.  Hughie Morrison kept cool.  His straight, black hair lay
boyishly smooth across his brow.  There was no guile in his expression
even though he had stunned Callahan, which was precisely what he had
intended.  "It is raining at Soda Sink," he repeated.

Now there is no day in the mountains that goes back of the awful
tradition concerning rain at Soda Sink.  Before Tom Porter, first
manager; before Brodie, who built the bridges; before Sikes, longest in
the cab; before Pat Francis, oldest of conductors, runs that tradition
about rain at the Sink--which is desert absolute--where it never does
rain and never should.  When it rains at Soda Sink, this say the
Medicine men, the Cat will fall on the Rat.  It is Indian talk as old
as the foothills.

Of course no railroad man ever gave much heed to Indian talk; how, for
instance, could a mountain fall on a river?  Yet so the legend ran, and
there being one superstitious man on the force at Medicine Bend one man
remembered it--Hughie Morrison.

Callahan studied the bulletin to which the operator called his
attention and resumed his pipe sceptically, but he did make a
suggestion.  "See if you can't get Sleepy Cat, Hughie, and find out
whether that is so."

Morris Blood was away with the Pittsburgers and Callahan had foolishly
consented to look after his desk for a few days.  At the moment that
Morrison took hold of the key Giddings opened the door from the
despatchers' room.  "Mr. Callahan, there's a message coming from
Francis, conductor of Number Two.  They've had a cloudburst on Dry
Dollar Creek," he said, excitedly; "twenty feet of water came down Rat
Canyon at five o'clock.  The track's under four feet in the canyon."

As a pebble striking an anthill stirs into angry life a thousand
startled workers, so a mountain washout startles a division and
concentrates upon a single point the very last reserve of its
activities and energies.

For thirty minutes the wires sung with Callahan's messages.  When his
special for a run to the Rat Canyon was ready all the extra yardmen and
both roadmasters were in the caboose; behind them fumed a second
section with orders to pick up along the way every section man as they
followed.  It was hard on eight o'clock when Callahan stepped aboard.
They double-headed for the pass, and not till they pulled up with their
pony truck facing the water at the mouth of the big canyon did they ease
their pace.

In the darkness they could only grope.  Smith Young, roadmaster of the
Pilot branch, an old mountain boy, had gone down from Sleepy Cat before
dark, and crawling over the rocks in the dusk had worked his way along
the canyon walls to the scene of the disaster.

Just below where Dry Dollar Creek breaks into the Rat the canyon is
choked on one side by a granite wall two hundred feet high.  On the
other, a sheer spur of Sleepy Cat Mountain is thrust out like a paw
against the river.  It was there that the wall of water out of Dry
Dollar had struck the track and scoured it to the bedrock.  Ties,
steel, ballast, riprap, roadbed, were gone, and where the heavy
construction had run below the paw of Sleepy Cat the river was churning
in a channel ten feet deep.

The best news Young had was that Agnew, the division engineer who
happened to be at Sleepy Cat, had made the inspection with him and had
already returned to order in men and material for daybreak.

Leaving the roadmasters to care for their incoming forces, Callahan,
with Smith Young's men for guides, took the footpath on the south side
to the head of the canyon, where, above the break, an engine was waiting
to run him to Sleepy Cat.  When he reached the station Agnew was up at
the material yard, and Callahan sat down in his shirt sleeves to take
reports on train movements.  The despatchers were annulling, holding
the freights and distributing passenger trains at eating stations.  But
an hour's work at the head-breaking problem left the division, Callahan
thought, in worse shape than when the planning began, and he got up
from the keg in a mental whirl when Duffy at Medicine Bend sent a body
blow in a long message supplementary to his first report.

"Bear Dance reports the fruit extras making a very fast run.  First
train of eighteen cars has just pulled in: there are seven more of
these fruit extras following close, should arrive at Sleepy Cat at four
A.M."

Callahan turned from the message with his hand in his hair.  Of all bad
luck this was the worst.  The California fruit trains, not due for
twenty-four hours, coming in a day ahead of time with the Mountain
Division tied up by the worst washout it had ever seen.  In a heat he
walked out of the operators' office to find Agnew; the two men met near
the water tank.

"Hello, Agnew.  This puts us against it, doesn't it?  How soon can you
give us a track?" asked Callahan, feverishly.

Agnew was the only man on the division that was always calm.  He was
thorough, practical, and after he had cut his mountain teeth in the
Peace River disaster, a hardheaded man at his work.

"It will take forty-eight hours after I get my material here----"

"Forty-eight hours!" echoed Callahan.  "Why, man, we shall have eight
trains of California fruit here by four o'clock."

"I'm on my way to order in the filling, now," said Agnew, "and I shall
push things to the limit, Mr. Callahan."

"Limit, yes, your limit--but what about my limit?  Forty-eight hours'
delay will put every car of that fruit into market rotten.  I've got to
have some kind of a track through there--any kind on earth will do--but
I've got to have it by to-morrow night."

"To-morrow night?"

"To-morrow night."

Agnew looked at him as a sympathizing man looks at a lunatic, and
calmly shook his head.  "I can't get rock here till to-morrow morning.
What is the use talking impossibilities?"

Callahan ground his heel in the ballast.  Agnew only asked him if he
realized what a hole there was to fill.  "It's no use dumping gravel in
there," he explained patiently, "the river will carry it out faster
than flat cars can carry it in."

Callahan waved his hand.  "I've got to have track there by to-morrow
night."

"I've got to dump a hundred cars of rock in there before we shall have
anything to lay track on; and I've got to pick the rock up all the way
from here to Goose River."

They walked together to the station.

When the night grew too dark for Callahan he had but one higher
thought--Bucks.  Bucks was five hundred miles away at McCloud, but he
already had the particulars and was waiting at a key ready to take up
the trouble of his favorite division.  Callahan at the wire in Sleepy
Cat told his story, and Bucks at the other end listened and asked
questions.  He listened to every detail of the disaster, to the cold
hard figures of Agnew's estimates--which nothing could alter, jot or
tittle--and to Callahan's despairing question as to how he could
possibly save the unlooked-for avalanche of fruit.

For some time after the returns were in, Bucks was silent; silent so
long that the copper-haired man twisted in his chair, looked vacantly
around the office and chewed a cigar into strings.  Then the sounder at
his hand clicked.  He recognized Bucks sending in the three words
lightly spelled on his ear and jumped from his seat.  Just three words
Bucks had sent and signed off.  What galvanized Callahan was that the
words were so simple, so all-covering, and so easy.  "Why didn't _I_
think of that?" groaned Callahan, mentally.

Then he reflected that he was nothing but a redheaded Irishman, anyway,
while Bucks was a genius.  It never showed more clearly, Callahan
thought, than when he received the three words, "Send for Glover."




CHAPTER VII

TIME BEING MONEY

Sleepy Cat town was but just rubbing its eyes next morning when the
Brock train pulled in from Cascade.  Clouds rolling loosely across the
mountains were pushing the night into the west, and in the east wind
promise of day followed, soft and cool.

On the platform in the gray light three men were climbing into the
gangway of a switch-engine, the last man so long and so loosely put
together that he was taking, as he always took when he tried to get
into small quarters, the chaffing of his companions on his size.  He
smiled languidly at Callahan's excited greeting, and as they ran down
the yard listened without comment to the story of the washout.  No
words were needed to convey to Glover or to Blood the embarrassment of
the situation.  Freight trains crowded every track in the yard, and the
block of twelve hours indicated what a two-day tie-up would mean.  In
the canyon the roadmasters were already taking measurements and section
men were lining up track that had been lifted and wrenched by the
water.  Callahan and Blood did the talking, but when they left the
flooded roadbed and Glover took a way up the canyon wall it became
apparent what the mountain engineer's long legs were for.  He led, a
quick, sure climber, and if he meant by rapidly scaling the bowlders to
shut off Callahan's talk the intent was effective.  Nothing more was
said till the three men, followed by the roadmasters, had gained a
ledge, fifty feet above the water, that commanded for a quarter of a
mile a view of the canyon.

They were standing above the mouth of Dry Dollar Creek, opposite the
point of rocks called the Cat's Paw, and Glover, pulling his hat brim
into a perspective, looked up and down the river.  The roadmasters had
taken some measurements and these they offered him, but he did no more
than listen while they read their figures as if mentally comparing them
with notes in his memory.  Once he questioned a figure, but it was not
till the roadmaster insisted he was right that Glover drew from one of
his innumerable pockets an old field-book and showed the man where he
had made his error of ten feet in the disputed measurement.

"Bucks said last night you knew all this track work," remarked Callahan.

"I helped Hailey a little here when he rebuilt three years ago.  The
track was put in then as well as it ever can be put in.  The fact
simply is this, Callahan, we shall never be safe here.  What must be
done is to tunnel Sleepy Cat, get out of the infernal canyon with the
main line and use this for the spur around the tunnel.  When your
message came last night, Morris and I took the chance to tell Mr. Brock
so, and he is here this morning to see what things look like after a
cloudburst.  A tunnel will save two miles of track and all the
double-heading."

"But, Glover, what's that got to do with this fruit?  Confound your
tunnel, what I want is a track.  By heavens, if it's going to take
three days to get one in we might as well dump a hundred cars of fruit
into the river now--and Bucks is looking to you to save them."

"Looking to me?" echoed Glover, raising his brows.  "What's the matter
with Agnew?"

"Oh, hang Agnew!"

"If you like.  But he is in charge of this division.  I can't do
anything discourteous or unprofessional, Callahan."

"You are not required to."

"It looks very much as if I am being called in to instruct Agnew how to
do his work.  He is a perfectly competent engineer."

"That point has been covered.  Bucks had a long talk with Agnew over
the wire last night.  He is needed all the time at the Blackwood bridge
and he is relieved here when you arrive.  Now what's the matter with
you?"

"Nothing whatever if that is the situation.  I'd much rather keep out
of it, but there isn't work enough here for two engineers.

"What do you mean?"

"This isn't very bad."

"Not very bad!  Well, how much time do you want to put a track in here?"

Glover's eyes were roaming up and down the canyon.  "How much can you
give me?" he asked.

"Till to-night."

Glover looked at his watch.  "Then get two hundred and fifty men in
here inside of an hour."

"We've picked up about seventy-five section men so far, but there
aren't two hundred and fifty men within a hundred miles."

Glover pointed north.  "Ed Smith's got two hundred men not over three
miles from here on the irrigation ditch."

"That only shows I've no business in this game," remarked Callahan,
looking at Morris Blood.  "This is where you take hold."

Blood nodded.  "Leave that to me.  Let's have the orders all at once,
Ab.  Say where you want headquarters."

The engineer stretched a finger toward the point of rocks across the
canyon.  "Right above the Cat's Paw."

"Tell Bill Dancing to cut in the wrecking instrument and put an
operator over there for Glover's orders," directed Blood, turning to
Smith Young.

"I'm off for something to eat," said Callahan, "and by the way, what
shall I tell Bucks about the chances?"

"Can you get Ed Smith's outfit?" asked Glover, speaking to Blood.
"Well, I know you can--Ed's a Denver man."  He meditated another
moment; "We need his whole outfit, mind you."

"I'll get it or resign.  If I succeed, when can you get a train
through?"

"By midnight."  Callahan staggered.  Glover raised his finger.  "If you
back off the ledge they will need a new general superintendent."

"By midnight?"

"I think so."

"You can't get your rock in by that time?"

"I reckon."

"Agnew says it will take a hundred cars."

"That's not far out of the way.  On flat cars you won't average much
over ten yards to the car, will you, Morris?"

Like two wary gamblers Callahan and the chief of construction on the
mountain lines coldly eyed each other, Glover standing pat and the
general superintendent disinclined through many experiences to call.

"I'm not doing the talking now," said Callahan at length with a
sidewise glance, "but if you get a hundred cars of rock into that hole
by twelve o'clock to-night--not to speak of laying steel--you can have
my job, old man."

"Then look up another right away, for I'll have the rock in the river
long before that.  Now don't rubber, but get after the men and the
drills----"

"The drills?"

"I said the whole outfit."

"Would it be proper to ask what you are going to drill?"

"Perfectly proper."  Glover pointed again to the shelving wall across
the river.  "It will save time and freight to tumble the Cat's Paw into
the river--there's ten times the rock we need right there--I can dump a
thousand yards where we need it in thirty seconds after I get my powder
in.  That will give us our foundation and your roadmasters can lay a
track over it in six hours that will carry your fruit--I wouldn't
recommend it for dining-cars, but it will do for plums and cherries.
And by the way, Morris," called Glover--Blood already twenty feet away
was scrambling down the path--"if Ed Smith's got any giant powder
borrow sticks enough to spring thirty or forty holes with, will you?
I've got plenty of black up at Pilot.  You can order it down by the
time we are ready to blast."

In another hour the canyon looked as if a hive of bees were swarming on
the Cat's Paw.  With shovels, picks, bars, hammers, and drills, hearty
in miners' boots and pied in woollen shirts the first of Ed Smith's men
were clambering into place.  The field telegraph had been set up on the
bench above the point: every few moments a new batch of irrigation men
appeared stringing up the ledge, and with the roadmasters as
lieutenants, Glover, on the apex of the low spur of the mountain,
taking reports and giving orders, surveyed his improvised army.

At the upper and lower ends of the track where the roadbed had not
completely disappeared the full force of section men, backed by the
irrigation laborers, were busy patching the holes.

At the point where the break was complete and the Rat River was
viciously licking the vertical face of the rock a crew of men, six feet
above the track level, were drilling into the first ledge a set of
six-foot holes.  On the next receding ledge, twelve feet above the old
track level, a second crew were tamping a set of holes to be sunk
twelve feet.  Above them the drills were cutting into the third ledge,
and still higher and farther back, at twenty feet, the largest of all
the crews was sinking the eighteen-foot holes to complete the fracture
of the great wall.  Above the murmuring of the steel rang continually
the calls of the foremen, and hour after hour the shock of the drills
churned up and down the narrow canyon.

During each hour Glover was over every foot of the work, and inspecting
the track building.  If a track boss couldn't understand what he wanted
the engineer could take a pick or a bar and give the man an object
lesson.  He patrolled the canyon walls, the roadmasters behind him, with
so good an eye for loose bowlders, and fragments such as could be moved
readily with a gad, that his assistants before a second round had
spotted every handy chunk of rock within fifty feet of the water.  He
put his spirit into the men and they gave their work the enthusiasm of
soldiers.  But closest of all Glover watched the preparations for the
blast on the Cat's Paw.

Morris Blood in the meantime was sweeping the division for stone,
ballast, granite, gravel, anything that would serve to dump on Glover's
rock after the blast, and the two men were conferring on the track
about the supplies when a messenger appeared with word for Glover that
Mr. Brock's party were coming down the canyon.

When Glover intercepted the visitors they had already been guided to
the granite bench where his headquarters were fixed.  With Mr. Brock
had come the young men, Miss Donner, and Mrs. Whitney.  Mrs. Whitney
signalized her arrival by sitting down on a chest of dynamite--having
intimidated the modest headquarters custodian by asking for a chair so
imperiously that he was glad to walk away at her suggestion that he
hunt one up--though there was not a chair within several miles.  It had
been no part of Glover's plan to receive his guests at that point, and
his first efforts after the greetings were to coax them away from the
interest they expressed in the equipment of an emergency headquarters,
and get them back to where the track crossed the river.  But when the
young people learned that the blue-eyed boy at the little table on the
rock could send a telegram or a cablegram for them to any part of the
world, each insisted on putting a message through for the fun of the
thing, and even Mrs. Whitney could hardly be coaxed from the
illimitable possibilities just under her.

With a feeling of relief he got them away from the giant powder which
Ed Smith's men were still bringing in, and across the river to the
ledge that commanded the whole scene, and was safely removed from its
activities.

Glover took ten minutes to point out to the president of the system the
difficulties that would always confront the operating department in the
canyon.  He charted clearly for Mr. Brock the whole situation, with the
hope that when certain very heavy estimates went before the directors
one man at least would understand the necessity for them.  Mr. Brock
was a good questioner, and his interest turned constantly from the
general observations offered by Glover to the work immediately in hand,
which the engineer had no mind to exploit.  The young people, however,
were determined to see the blast, and it was only by strongly advising
an early dinner and promising that they should have due notice of the
blast that Glover got rid of his visitors at all.

He returned with them to the caboose in which they had come down, and
when he got back to the work the big camp kettles were already slung
along the bench, and the engine bringing the car of black powder was
steaming slowing into the upper canyon.  On a flat bowlder back of the
cooks, Morris Blood, Ed Smith, and the roadmasters were sitting down to
coffee and sandwiches, and Glover joined them.  Men in relays were
eating at the camp and dynamiters were picking their way across the
face of the Cat's Paw with the giant powder.  The engineers were still
at their coffee-fire when the scream of a locomotive whistle came
through the canyon from below.  Blood looked up.  "There's one of the
fast mail engines, probably the 1026.  Who in the world has brought her
up?"

"More than likely," suggested Glover, finishing his coffee, "it's
Bucks."




CHAPTER VIII

SPLITTING THE PAW

Preceded by a track boss along the ledges where the blasting crew was
already putting down the dynamite, a man almost as large as Glover and
rigged in a storm cap and ulster made his way toward the camp
headquarters.  The mountain men sprang to their feet with a greeting
for the general manager--it was Bucks.

He took Blood's welcome with a laugh, nodded to the roadmasters, and
pulling his cap from his head, turned to grasp Glover's hand.

"I hear you're going to spoil some of our scenery, Ab.  I thought I'd
run up and see how much government land you were going to move without
a permit.  Glad you got down so promptly.  Callahan had nervous
prostration for a while last night.  I told him you'd have some sort of
a trick in your bag, but I didn't suppose you would spring the side of
a mountain on us.  Am I to have any coffee or not?  What are you
eating, dynamite?  Why, there's Ed Smith--what are you hanging back in
the dark for, Ed?  Come out here and show yourself.  It was like you to
lend us your men.  If the boys forget it, I sha'n't."

"I'd rather see you than a hundred men," declared Glover.

"Then give me something to eat," suggested Bucks.

As he spoke the snappy, sharp reports of exploding dynamite could be
heard; they were springing the drill holes.  Bucks sitting down on the
bowlder, wrapping the tails of his coat between his legs and taking
coffee from Young drank while the men talked.  From the box car below,
Ed Smith's men were packing the black powder up the trail to the Paw.
When it began going into the holes, Glover went to the ledge to oversee
the charging.

In the Pittsburg train, at Sleepy Cat, an early dinner was being served
to the canyon party.  They had come back enthusiastic.  The scenery was
declared superb, and the uncertainty of the situation most satisfying.
The riot of the mountain stream, which plunging now unbridled from wall
to wall had scoured the deep gorge for hundreds of feet, was a moving
spectacle.  The activity of the swarming laborers, preparing their one
tremendous answer to the insolence of the river, had behind it the
excitement of a game of chance.  The stake, indeed, was eight solid
trains of perishable freight, and the gambler that had staked their
value and his reputation on one throw of the dice was their own
easy-mannered guide.

They discussed his chances with the indifference of spectators.  Doctor
Lanning, the only one of the young people that had ever done anything
himself, was inclined to think Glover might win out.  Allen Harrison
was willing to wager that trains couldn't be got across a hole like
that for another twenty-four hours.

Mrs. Whitney wondered why, if Mr. Glover were really a competent man,
he could not have held his position as chief engineer of the system,
but Doctor Lanning explained that frequently Western men of real talent
were wholly lacking in ambition and preferred a free-and-easy life to
one of constant responsibility; others, again, drank--and this
suggestion opened a discussion as to whether Western men could possibly
do more drinking than Eastern men, and transact business at all.

While the discussion proceeded there came a telegram from Glover
telling Doctor Lanning that the blast would be made about seven
o'clock.  Preparations to start were completed as the company rose from
the table, and Gertrude Brock and Marie were urged to join the party.
Marie consented, but Gertrude had a new book and would not leave it,
and when the others started she joined her father and Judge Saltzer,
her father's counsellor, now with them, who were dining more leisurely
at their own table.

Bucks met the doctor and his party at the head of the canyon and took
them to the high ledge across the river, where they had been brought by
Glover in the morning.  In the canyon it was already dark.  Men were
eating around campfires, and in the narrow strip of eastern sky between
the walls the moon was rising.  Work-trains with signal lanterns were
moving above and below the break, dumping ballast behind the track
layers.  At a safe distance from the coming blast a dozen headlights
from the roundhouse were being prepared, and the car-tinks from Sleepy
Cat were rigging torches for the night.

The blasting powder in twenty-pound cans was being passed from hand to
hand to the chargers.  Score after score of the compact cans of high
explosive had been packed into the scattered holes, and as if alive to
what was coming the chill air of the canyon took on the uneasiness of an
atmosphere laden with electricity.  Men of the operating department
paced the bench impatiently, and trackmen working below in the flare of
scattered torches looked up oftener from their shovels to where a chain
of active figures moved on the face of the cliff.  Word passed again
and again that the charging was done, but the orders came steadily from
the gloom on the ledge for more powder until the last pound the
engineer called for had been buried beneath his feet in the sleeping
rock.

After a long delay a red light swung slowly to and fro on the ledge.
From the extreme end of the canyon below the Cat's Paw came the crash of
a track-torpedo, answered almost instantly by a second, above the
break.  It was the warning signal to get into the clear.  There was a
buzz of rapid movement among the laborers.  In twos and threes and
dozens, a ragged procession of lanterns and torches, they retreated,
foremen urging the laggards, until only a single man at each end of the
broken track kept within sight of the tiny red lantern on the ledge.
Again it swung in a circle and again the torpedoes replied, this time
all clear.  The hush of a hundred voices, the silence of the bars and
shovels and picks gave back to the chill canyon its loneliness, and the
roar of the river rose undisturbed to the brooding night.

On the ledge Glover was alone.  The final detail he was taking into his
own hands.  The few that could still command the point saw the red
light moving, and beside it a figure vaguely outlined making its way.
When the red light paused, a spark could be seen, a sputtering blaze
would run slowly from it, hesitate, flare and die.  Another and another
of the fuses were touched and passed.  With quickening steps tier after
tier was covered, until those looking saw the red light flung at last
into the air.  It circled high between the canyon walls in its flight
and dropped like a rocket into the Rat.  A muffled report from the
lower tier was followed by a heavier and still a heavier one above.  A
creeping pang shot the heart of the granite, a dreadful awakening was
upon it.

From the tier of the upmost holes came at length the terrific burst of
the heavy mines.  The travail of an awful instant followed, the face of
the spur parted from its side, toppled an instant in the confusion of
its rending and with an appalling crash fell upon the river below.

With the fragments still tumbling, the nearest men started with a cheer
from their concealment.  Smoke rolling white and sullen upward obscured
the moon, and the canyon air, salt and sick with gases, poured over the
high point on which the Pittsburgers stood.  Below, torches were
shooting like fireflies out of the rock.  From every vantage point
headlights flashed one after another unhooded on the scene, and the
song of the river mingled again with the calling of the foremen.

"That ends the fireworks," remarked Bucks to those about him.  "Let us
watch a moment for Mr. Glover's signal to me.  As soon as he inspects
he is to show signals on the Cat's Paw, and if it is a success we will
return at once to Sleepy Cat."

"And by the way, Mr. Bucks, I shall expect you and Mr. Glover up to the
car for my game supper.  Have you arranged for him to come?"

"I have, Mrs. Whitney, thank you."

"Oh, see those pretty red lights over there now.  What are they?" asked
Louise, who stood with Allen Harrison.

"The signals," exclaimed Bucks.  "Three fusees.  Good for Glover; that
means success.  Shall we go?"


When the sightseers made their way out of the canyon material trains
working from both ends of the break were shoving their loaded flats
noisily up to the ballasting crews and the water was echoing the clang
of the spike mauls, the thud of tamping-irons, the clash of picks, the
splash of tumbling stone, and the ceaseless roll of shovels.

Foot by foot, length by length, the gap was shortened.  Bribed by extra
pay, driven by the bosses, and stimulated by the emergency, the work of
the graders became an effort close to fury.  Watches were already
consulted and wagers were being laid between rival foremen on the
moment a train should pass the point.  Above the peaks the stars
glittered, and high in the sky the moon shot a path of clear light down
the river itself.  The camp kettles steamed constantly, and coffee
strong enough to ballast eggs and primed with unusual cordials was
passed every hour among the hundreds along the track.

In the lower yard at Sleepy Cat the pilot train was being made ready
and the clatter of switching came into the canyon.  From still further
came the barking exhaust of the first-train engine waiting for orders
for the canyon run.

Glover pacing the narrow bench below the camp returned again to the
operator's table, and in the light of the lantern wrote a message to
Medicine Bend.  When it had been sent he upended an empty spike keg,
and sitting down before the fire, got his back against a rock and gave
himself to his thoughts.  Men straggled back and forth, but none
disturbed him.  Some, in turn, fed the fire, some rolled themselves in
their blankets and lay down to sleep, but his eyes were lost all the
while in the leaping blaze.

A volleying signal of the locomotive whistles roused him.  He looked at
his watch and stepped to the verge of the ledge.  Toward Sleepy Cat a
headlight was slowly rounding the first curve.  The pilot train was
coming and below where he stood he could see green lights swinging.
The locomotive of the work-train was at the hind end and the
roadmasters standing on the first flat car were signalling.  Mauls were
ringing at the last spikes when the head flat car moved cautiously out
on the new track.  Car after car approached, every second one bearing a
flagman re-signalling to the cab as the train took the short curves of
the canyon and entering the gorge rolled slowly beneath the Cat's Paw
over the prostrate granite.

The trackmen parted only long enough to give way to the advancing cars.
The locomotive steamed gingerly along.  In the gangway stood a small,
broad-hatted man, Morris Blood.  He waved his lantern at Glover, and
Glover caught up a hand-torch to swing an answering greeting.

Down the uncertain track could be seen at reassuring intervals the
slow, green lights of the track foremen swinging all's well.  The
deepening drum of the steaming engine as it entered the gorge walls,
the straining of the injectors, and the frequent hissing check of the
air as the powerful machine restrained its moving load, was music to
the tired listener above.  Then, looming darkly behind the tender,
surprising the onlookers, even Glover himself, came the real train.
Not till the roadbuilders heard the heavy drop of the big cars on the
new rail joints did they realize that the first train of fruit was
already crossing the break.

Ten minutes afterward Bucks, who was with Mr. Brock in the directors'
car, had the news in a message.  The manager had agreed to have Glover
present for the supper which was now waiting, and for some time
messengers and telegrams passed from the Brock Special to the canyon.
It was not until twelve o'clock that they learned definitely through
word from Morris Blood that Glover had torn his hand slightly in
handling powder and had gone to Medicine Bend to have it dressed.




CHAPTER IX

A TRUCE

If Glover's aim in disappearing had been to escape the embarrassment of
Mrs. Whitney's attentions the effort was successful only in part.

Lanning and Harrison left in the morning in charge of Bill Dancing to
join the hunting party in the Park, and Mr. Brock finding himself
within a few hours' ride of Medicine Bend decided to run down.  Late in
the afternoon the Pittsburg train drew up at the Wickiup.

Gertrude and her sister left their car together to walk in the sunshine
that flooded the platform, for the sun was still a little above the
mountains.  In front of the eating-house a fawn-colored collie racing
across the lawn attracted Gertrude, and with her sister she started up
the walk to make friends with him.  In one of his rushes he darted up
the eating-house steps and ran around to the west porch, the two young
ladies leisurely following.  As they turned the corner they saw their
runaway crouching before a man who, with one foot on the low railing,
stood leaning against a pillar.  The collie was waiting for a lump of
sugar, and his master had just taken one from the pocket of his sack
coat when the young ladies recognized him.

"Really, Mr. Glover, your tastes are domestic," declared Marie; "you
make excellent taffy--now I find you feeding a collie."  She pointed to
the lump of sugar.  "And how is your hand?"

"I can't get over seeing you here," said Glover, collecting himself by
degrees.  "When did you come?  Take these chairs, won't you?"

"You, I believe, are responsible for the early resumption of traffic
through the canyon," answered Marie.  "Besides, nothing in our
wanderings need ever cause surprise.  Anyone unfortunate enough to be
attached to a directors' party will end in a feeble-minded institution."

Gertrude was talking to the collie.  "Isn't he beautiful, Marie?" she
exclaimed.  "Come here, you dear fellow.  I fell in love with him the
minute I saw him--to whom does he belong, Mr. Glover?  Come here."

"How is your hand?" asked Marie.

"Do give Mr. Glover a chance," interposed Gertrude.  "Tell me about
this dog, Mr. Glover."

"He is the best dog in the world, Miss Brock.  Mr. Bucks gave him to me
when I first came to the mountains--we were puppies together----"

"And how about your hand?" smiled Marie.

"What is his name?" asked Gertrude.

"It wasn't a hand, it was a wrist, and it is much better, thank
you--his name is Stumah."

"Stumah?  How odd.  Come here, Stumah.  Does he mind?"

"He doesn't mind me, but no one minds me, so I forgive him that."

"Aunt Jane doesn't think you mind very well," said Marie.  "Clem had a
steak twice as large as usual prepared for the supper you ran away
from."

"It is always my misfortune to miss good things."

Talking, Glover and Marie followed Gertrude and Stumah out on the grass
and across to the big platform where an overland train had pulled in
from the west.  They watched the changing of the engines and the crews,
and the promenade of the travellers from the Pullmans.

While Gertrude amused herself with the dog, and Marie asked questions
about the locomotive, Mrs. Whitney and Louise spied them and walked
over.  Glover, to make his peace, was compelled to take dinner with the
party in their car.  The atmosphere of the special train had never
seemed so attractive as on that night.  To cordiality was added
deference.  The effect of his success in the canyon--only striking
rather than remarkable--was noticeable on Mr. Brock.  At dinner, which
was served at one table in the dining-car, Glover was brought by the
Pittsburg magnate to sit at his own right hand, Bucks being opposite.
No one may ever say that the value of resource in emergency is lost on
the dynamic Mr. Brock.  But having placed his guest in the seat of
honor he paid no further attention to him unless his running fire of
big secrets, discussed before the engineer unreservedly with Bucks,
might be taken as implying that he looked on the constructionist of the
Mountain Division as one of his inner official family.

Glover understood the abstraction of big men, and this forgetfulness
was no discouragement.  There was an abstraction on his left where
Gertrude sat that was less comfortable.

At no moment during the time he had spent with the company had he been
able to penetrate her reserve enough to make more than an attempt at an
apology for his appalling blunder in the office.  With the others he
never found himself at a loss for a word or an opportunity; with
Gertrude he was apparently helpless.

The talk at the lower end of the table ran for a while to comment on
the washout, to Glover's wrist, and during lulls Mrs. Whitney across
the table asked questions calculated to draw a family history from her
uneasy guest.  Even Glover's waiter gave him so much attention that he
got little to eat, but the engineer concealed no effort to see that
Gertrude Brock was served and to break down by unobtrusive courtesies
her determined restraint.

When the evening was over he found himself at the pass to which every
evening in her company brought him--the unpleasant consciousness of a
failure of his endeavors and a return of the rage he felt at himself
for having blundered into her bad graces.  Her father wanted him to
return with them in the morning to Sleepy Cat to go over the tunnel
plans again.  That done, Glover resolved at all costs to escape from
the punishment which every moment near her brought.

When they started for Sleepy Cat, the afternoon sun was bright, and
much of the time was spent on the pretty observation platform of the
Brock car.  During the shifting of the groups Mr. Brock stepped forward
into the directors' car for some papers, and Gertrude found herself
alone for a moment on the platform with Glover.  She was watching the
track.  He was studying a blueprint, and this time he made no effort to
break the silence.  Determined that the interval should not become a
conscious one she spoke.  "Papa seems unwilling to give you much rest
to-day."

"I think I am learning more from him, though, than he is learning from
me," returned Glover, without looking up.  "He is a man of big ideas; I
should be glad of a chance to know him."

"You are likely to have that during the next two weeks."

"I fear not."

"Did you not understand that Judge Saltzer and he are both to be with
our party now?"

"But I am to leave it to-night."

She made no comment.  "You do not understand why I joined it," he
continued, "after my----"

"I understand, at least, how distasteful the association must have
been."

He had looked up, and without flinching, he took the blow into his
slow, heavy eyes, but in a manner as mild as Glover's, defiance could
hardly be said to have place at any time.

"I have given you too good ground to visit your impatience on me," he
said, "and I confess I've stood the ordeal badly.  Your contempt has
cut me to the quick.  But don't, I beg, add to my humiliation by such a
reproach.  I'm blundering, but not wholly reprobate."

Her father appeared at the door.  Glover's eyes were fastened on the
blueprint.

Gertrude let her magazine lie in her lap.  She could not at all
understand the plans the two men were discussing, but her father spoke
so confidently about taking up Glover's suggestions in detail during
the two weeks that they should have together, and Glover said so
little, that she intervened presently with a little remark.  "Papa; are
you not forgetting that Mr. Glover says he cannot be with us on the
Park trip."

"I am not forgetting it because Mr. Glover hasn't said so."

"I so understood Mr. Glover."

"Certainly not," objected Mr. Brock, looking at his companion.

"It is a disappointment to me," said Glover, "that I can't be with you."

"Why, Mr. Bucks and I have arranged it, to-day.  There are no other
duties," observed Mr. Brock, tersely.

"True, but the fact is I am not well."

"Nonsense; tired out, that's all.  We will rest you up; the trip will
refresh you.  I want you with me very particularly, Mr. Glover."

"Which makes me the sorrier I cannot be."

"Here, Mr. Bucks," called Mr. Brock, abruptly, through the open door.
"What's the matter with your arrangements?  Mr. Glover says he can't go
through the Park."

The patient manager left Judge Saltzer, with whom he was talking, and
came out on the platform.  Gertrude went into the car.  When the train
reached Sleepy Cat, at dusk, she was sitting alone in her favorite
corner near the rear door.  The train stopped at a junction semaphore
and she heard Bucks' voice on the observation platform.

"I hate to see a man ruin his own chances in this way, that's all," he
was saying.  "I've set the pins for you to take the rebuilding of the
whole main line, but you succeed admirably in undoing my plans.  By
declining this opportunity you relegate yourself to obscurity just as
you've made a hit in the canyon that is a fortune in itself."

"Whatever the effect," she heard someone reply with an effort at
lightness, "deal gently with me, old man.  The trouble is of my own
making.  I seem unable to face the results."

The train started and the voices were lost.  Bucks stepped into the car
and, without seeing Gertrude in the shadow, walked forward.  She felt
that Glover was alone on the platform and sat for several moments
irresolute.  After a while she rose, crossed to the table and fingered
the roses in the jar.  She saw him sitting alone in the dusk and
stepped to the door; the train had slowed for the yard.  "Mr.
Glover?--do not get up--may I be frank for a moment?  I fear I am
causing unnecessary complications--"  Glover had risen.

"You, Miss Brock?"

"Did you really mean what you said to me this afternoon?"

"Very sincerely."

"Then I may say with equal sincerity that I should feel sorry to spoil
papa's plans and Mr. Bucks' and your own."

"It is not you, at all, but I who have----"

"I was going to suggest that something in the nature of a compromise
might be managed----"

"I have lost confidence in my ability to manage anything, but if you
would manage I should be very----"

"It might be for two weeks--"  She was half laughing at her own
suggestion and at his seriousness.

"I should try to deserve an extension."

"--To begin to-morrow morning----"

"Gladly, for that would last longer than if it began to-night.  Indeed,
Miss Brock, I----"

"But--please--I do not undertake to receive explanations."  He could
only bow.  "The status," she continued, gravely, "should remain, I
think, the same."




CHAPTER X

AND A SHOCK

The directors' party had been inspecting the Camp Pilot mines.  The
train was riding the crest of the pass when the sun set, and in the
east long stretches of snow-sheds were vanishing In the shadows of the
valley.

Glover, engaged with Mr. Brock, Judge Saltzer, and Bucks, had been
forward all day, among the directors.  The compartments of the Brock
car were closed when he walked back through the train and the rear
platform was deserted.  He seated himself in his favorite corner of the
umbrella porch, where he could cross his legs, lean far back, and with
an engineer's eye study the swiftly receding grace of the curves and
elevations of the track.  They were covering a stretch of his own
construction, a pet, built when he still felt young; when he had come
from the East fiery with the spirit of twenty-five.

But since then he had seen seven years of blizzards, blockades, and
washouts; of hard work, hardships, and disappointments.  This maiden
track that they were speeding over he was not ashamed of; the work was
good engineering yet.  But now with new and great responsibilities on
his horizon, possibilities that once would have fired his imagination,
he felt that seven years in and out of the mountains had left him
battle-scarred and moody.

"My sister was saying last night as she saw you sitting where you are
now--that we should always associate this corner with you.  Don't get
up."  Gertrude Brock, dressed for dinner, stood in the doorway.  "You
never tire of watching the track," she said, sinking into the chair he
offered as he rose.  Her frank manner was unlooked for, but he knew
they were soon to part and felt that something of that was behind her
concession.  He answered in his mood.

"The track, the mountains," he replied; "I have little else."

"Would not many consider the mountains enough?"

"No doubt."

"I should think them a continual inspiration."

"So they are; though sometimes they inspire too much."

"It is so still and beautiful through here."  She leaned back in her
chair, supported her elbows on its arms and clasped her hands; the
stealing charm of her cordiality had already roused him.

"This bit of track we are covering," said he after a pause, "is the
first I built on this division; and just now I have been recalling my
very first sight of the mountains."  She leaned slightly forward, and
again he was coaxed on.  "Every tradition of my childhood was
associated with this country--the plains and rivers and mountains.  It
wasn't alone the reading--though I read without end--but the stories of
the old French traders I used to hear in the shops, and sometimes of
trappers I used to find along the river front of the old town; I fed on
their yarns.  And it was always the wild horse and the buffalo and the
Sioux and the mountains--I dreamed of nothing else.  Now, so many
times, I meet strangers that come into the mountains--foreigners
often--and I can never listen to their rhapsodies, or even read their
books about the Rockies, without a jealousy that they are talking
without leave of something that's mine.  What can the Rockies mean to
them?  Surely, if an American boy has a heritage it is the Rockies.
What can they feel of what I felt the first time I stood at sunset on
the plains and my very dreams loomed into the western sky?  I toppled
on my pins just at seeing them."

She laughed softly.  "You are fond of the mountains."

"I have little else," he repeated.

"Then they ought to be loyal to you.  But the first impression--it
hardly remains, I suppose?"

"I am not sure.  They don't grow any smaller; sometimes I think they
grow bigger."

"Then you _are_ fond of them.  That's constancy, and constancy is a
capital test of a charm."

"But I'm never sure whether they are, as you say, loyal to me.  We had
once on this division a remarkable man named Hailey--a bridge engineer,
and a very great one.  He and I stood one night on a caisson at the
Spider Water--the first caisson he put into the river--do you remember
that big river you crossed on the plains----"

"Indeed!  I am not likely to forget a night I spent at the Spider
Water; continue."

"Hailey put in the bridge there.  'This old stream ought to be thankful
to you, Hailey, for a piece of work like this,' I said to him.  'No,'
he answered, quite in earnest; 'the Spider doesn't like me.  It will
get me some time.'  So I think about these mountains.  I like them, and
I don't like them.  Sometimes I think as Hailey thought of the
Spider--and the Spider did get him."

"How serious you grow!" she exclaimed, lightly.

"The truce ends to-morrow."

"And the journey ends," she remarked, encouragingly.

"What, please, does that line mean that I see so often, 'Journeys end
in lovers meeting?'"

"I haven't an idea.  But, oh, these mountains!" she exclaimed, stepping
in caution to the guard-rail.  "Could anything be more awful than
this?"  They were crawling antlike up a mountain spur that rose dizzily
on their right; on the left they overhung a bottomless pit.  Their
engines churned, panted, and struggled up the curve, and as they talked
the dense smoke from the stacks sucked far down into the gap they were
skirting.

"The roadbed is chiselled out of the granite all along here.  This is
the famed Mount Pilot on the left, and this the worst spot on the
division for snow.  You wouldn't think of extending our truce?"

"To-morrow we leave for the coast."

"But you could leave the truce; and I want it ever so much."

She laughed.  "Why should one want a truce after the occasion for it
has passed?"

"Sometimes out here in the desert we get away from water.  You don't
know, of course, what it is to want water?  I lost a trail once in the
Spanish Sinks and for two days I wanted water."

"Dreadful.  I have heard of such things.  How did you ever find your
way again?"

He hesitated.  "Sometimes instinct serves after reason fails.  It
wasn't very good water when I reached it, but I did not know about that
for two weeks.  It is a curious thing, too--physiologists, I am told,
have some name for the mental condition--but a man that has suffered
once for water will at times suffer intensely for it again, even though
you saturate him with water, drown him in it."

"How very strange; almost incredible, is it not?  Have you ever
experienced such a sensation?"

"I have felt it, but never acutely until to-day; that is why I want to
get the truce extended.  I dread the next two days."

She looked puzzled.  "Mr. Glover, if you have jestingly beguiled me
into real sympathy I shall be angry in earnest."

"You are going to-morrow.  How could I jest about it?  When you go I
face the desert again.  You have come like water into my life--are you
going out of it forever to-morrow?  May I never hope to see you
again--or hear from you?"  She rose in amazement; he was between her
and the door.  "Surely, this is extraordinary, Mr. Glover."

"Only a moment.  I shall have days enough of silence.  I dread to shock
or anger you.  But this is one reason why I tried to keep away from
you--just this--because I--  And you, in unthinking innocence, kept me
from my intent to escape this moment.  Your displeasure was hard to
bear, but your kindness has undone me.  Believe me or not I did fight,
a gentleman, even though I have fallen, a lover."

The displeasure of her eyes as she faced him was her only reply.
Indeed, he made hardly an effort to support her look and she swept past
him into the car.


The Brock train lay all next day in the Medicine Bend yard.  A number
of the party, with horses and guides, rode to the Medicine Springs west
of the town.  Glover, buried in drawings and blueprints, was in his
office at the Wickiup all day with Manager Bucks and President Brock.

Late in the afternoon the attention of Gertrude, reading alone in her
car, was attracted to a stout boy under an enormous hat clambering with
difficulty up the railing of the observation platform.  In one arm he
struggled for a while with a large bundle wrapped in paper, then
dropping back he threw the package up over the rail, and starting
empty-handed gained the platform and picked up his parcel.  He fished a
letter from his pistol pocket, stared fearlessly in at Gertrude Brock
and knocked on the glass panel between them.

"Laundry parcels are to be delivered to the porter in the forward car,"
said Gertrude, opening the door slightly.

As she spoke the boy's hat blew off and sailed down the platform, but
he maintained some dignity.  "I don't carry laundry.  I carry
telegrams.  The front door was locked.  I seen you sitting in there all
alone, and I've got a note and had orders to give it to you personally,
and this package personally, and not to nobody else, so I climbed over."

"Stop a moment," commanded Gertrude, for the heavy messenger was
starting for the railing before she quite comprehended.  "Wait until I
see what you have here."  The boy, with his hands on the railing, was
letting himself down.

"My hat's blowin' off.  There ain't any answer and the charges is paid."

"Will you wait?" exclaimed Gertrude, impatiently.  The very handwriting
on the note annoyed her.  While unfamiliar, her instinct connected it
with one person from whom she was determined to receive no
communication.  She hesitated as she looked at her carefully written
name.  She wanted to return the communication unopened; but how could
she be sure who had sent it?  With the impatience of uncertainty she
ripped open the envelope.

The note was neither addressed nor signed.

"I have no right to keep this after you leave; perhaps I had no right
to keep it at all.  But in returning it to you I surely may thank you
for the impulse that made you throw it over me the morning I lay asleep
behind the Spider dike."

She tore the package partly open--it was her Newmarket coat.  Bundling
it up again she walked hastily to her compartment.  For some moments
she remained within; when she came out the messenger boy, his hat now
low over his ears, was sitting in her chair looking at the illustrated
paper she had laid down.  Gertrude suppressed her astonishment; she
felt somehow overawed by the unconventionalities of the West.

"Boy, what are you doing here?"

"You said, wait," answered the boy, taking off his hat and rising.

"Oh, yes.  Very well; no matter."

"Ma'am?"

"No matter."

"Does that mean for me to wait?"

"It means you may go."

He started reluctantly.  "Gee," he exclaimed, under his breath, looking
around, "this is swell in here, ain't it?"

"See here, what is your name?"

"Solomon Battershawl, but most folks call me Gloomy."

"Gloomy!  Where did you get that name?"

"Mr. Glover."

"Who sent you with this note?"

"I can't tell.  He gave me a dollar and told me I wasn't to answer any
questions."

"Oh, did he?  What else did he tell you?"

"He said for me to take my hat off when I spoke to you, but my hat
blowed off when you spoke to me."

"Unfortunate!  Well, you are a handsome fellow, Gloomy.  What do you
do?"

"I'm a railroad man."

"Are you?  How fine.  So you won't tell who sent you."

"No, ma'am."

"What else did the gentleman say?"

"He said if anybody offered me anything I wasn't to take anything."

"Did he, indeed, Gloomy?"

"Yes'm."

She turned to the table from where she was sitting and took up a big
box.  "No money, he meant."

"Yes'm."

"How about candy?"

Solomon shifted.

"He didn't mention candy?"

"No'm."

"Do you ever eat candy?"

"Yes'm."

"This is a box that came from Pittsburg only this morning for me.  Take
some chocolates.  Don't be afraid; take several.  What is your last
name?"

"Battershawl."

"Gloomy Battershawl; how pretty.  Battershawl is so euphonious."

"Yes'm."

"Who is your best friend among the railroad men?"

"Mr. Duffy, our chief despatcher.  I owe my promotion to 'im," said
Solomon, solemnly.

"But who gives you the most money, I mean.  Take a large piece this
time."

"Oh, there ain't anybody gives me any money, much, exceptin' Mr.
Glover.  I run errands for him."

"What is the most money he ever gave you for an errand, Gloomy?"

"Dollar, twice."

"So much as that?"

"Yes'm."

"What was that for?"

"The first time it was for taking his washing down to the Spider to him
on Number Two one Sunday morning."

This being a line of answer Gertrude had not expected to develop she
started, but Solomon was under way.  "Gee, the river w's high that
time.  He was down there two weeks and never went to bed at all, and
came up special in a sleeper, sick, and I took care of him.  Gee, he
was sick."

"What was the matter?"

"Noomonia, the doctor said."

"And you took care of him!"

"Me an' the doctor."

"What was the other errand he gave you a dollar for?"

"Dassent tell."

"How did you know it was I you should give your note to?"

"He told me it was for the brown-haired young lady that walked so
straight--I knew you all right--I seen you on horseback.  I guess I'll
have to be going 'cause I got a lot of telegrams to deliver up town."

"No hurry about them, is there?"

"No, but's getting near dinner time.  Good-by."

"Wait.  Take this box of candy with you."

Solomon staggered.  "The whole box?"

"Certainly."

"Gee!"

He slid over the rail with the candy under his arm.

When he disappeared, Gertrude went back to her stateroom, closed the
door, though quite alone in the car, and re-read her note.

"I have no right to keep this after you leave; perhaps I had no right
to keep it at all.  But in returning it to you I surely may thank you
for the impulse that made you throw it over me the morning I lay asleep
behind the Spider dike."

It was he, then, lying in the rain, ill then, perhaps--nursed by the
nondescript cub that had just left her.

The Newmarket lay across the berth--a long, graceful garment.  She had
always liked the coat, and her eye fell now upon it critically,
wondering what he thought of the garment upon making so unexpected an
acquaintance with her intimate belongings.  Near the bottom of the
lining she saw a mud stain on the silk and the pretty fawn melton was
spotted with rain.  She folded it up before the horseback party
returned and put it away, stained and spotted, at the bottom of her
trunk.




CHAPTER XI

IN THE LALLA ROOKH

The car in itself was in no way remarkable.  A twelve-section and
drawing-room, mahogany-finish, wide-vestibule sleeper, done in cream
brown, hangings shading into Indian reds--a type of the Pullman car so
popular some years ago for transcontinental travel; neither too heavy
for the mountains nor too light for the pace across the plains.

There were many features added to the passenger schedule on the West
End the year Henry S. Brock and his friends took hold of the road, but
none made more stir than the new Number One, run then as a crack
passenger train, a strictly limited, vestibuled string, with barbers,
baths, grill rooms, and five-o'clock tea.  In and out Number One was
the finest train that crossed the Rockies, and bar nobody's.

It was October, with the Colorado travel almost entirely eastbound and
the California travel beginning, westbound, and the Lalla Rookh sleeper
being deadheaded to the coast on a special charter for an O. and O.
steamer party; at least, that was all the porter knew about its
destination, and he knew more than anyone else.

At McCloud, where the St. Louis connection is made, Number One sets out
a diner and picks up a Portland sleeper--so it happened that the Lalla
Rookh, hind car to McCloud, afterward lay ahead of the St. Louis car,
and the trainmen passed, as occasion required, through it--lighted down
the gloomy aisle by a single Pintsch burner, choked to an all-night
dimness.

But on the night of October 3d, which was a sloppy night in the
mountains, there was not a great deal to take anybody back through the
Lalla Rookh.  Even the porter of the dead car deserted his official
corpse, and after Number One pulled out of Medicine Bend and stuck her
slim, aristocratic nose fairly into the big ranges the Lalla Rookh was
left as dead as a stringer to herself and her reflections--reflections
of brilliant aisles and staterooms inviting with softened lights, shed
on couples that resented intrusion; of sections bright with lovely
faces and decks ringing with talk and laughter; of ventilators singing
of sunshine within, and of night and stars and waste without--for the
Lalla Rookh carried only the best people, and after the overland voyage
on her tempered springs and her yielding cushions they felt an
affection for her.  When the Lalla Rookh lived she lived; but to-night
she was dead.

This night the pretty car sped over the range a Cinderella deserted,
her linen stored and checked in her closets, her pillows bunked in her
seats, and her curtains folded in her uppers, save and except in one
single instance--Section Eleven, to conform to certain deeply held
ideas of the porter, Raz Brown, as to what might and might not
constitute a hoodoo, was made up.  Raz Brown did not play much: he
could not and hold his job; but when he did play he played eleven
always whether it fell between seven, twenty-seven, or four,
forty-four.  And whenever Raz Brown deadheaded a car through, he always
made up section eleven, and laid the hoodoo struggling but helpless
under the chilly linen sheets of the lower berth.

Glover had spent the day without incident or excitement on the Wind
River branches, and the evening had gone, while waiting to take a train
west to Medicine Bend, in figuring estimates at the agent's desk in
Wind River station.  He was working night and day to finish the report
that the new board was waiting for on the rebuilding of the system.

At midnight when he boarded the train he made his way back to look for
a place to stretch out until two o'clock.

The Pullman conductor lay in the smoking-room of the head 'Frisco car
dreaming of his salary--too light to make any impression on him except
when asleep.  It seemed a pity to disturb an honest man's dreams, and
the engineer passed on.  In the smoking-room of the next car lay a
porter asleep.  Glover dropped his bag into a chair and took off his
coat.  While he was washing his hands the train-conductor, Billy
O'Brien, came in and set down his lantern.  Conductor O'Brien was very
much awake and inclined rather to talk over a Mexican mining
proposition on which he wanted expert judgment than to let Glover get
to bed.  When the sleepy man looked at his watch for the fifth time,
the conductor was getting his wind for the dog-watch and promised to
talk till daylight.

"My boy, I've got to go to bed," declared Glover.

"Every sleeper is loaded to the decks," returned O'Brien.  "This is the
most comfortable place you'll find."

"No, I'll go forward into the chair-car," replied Glover.  "Good-night."

"Stop, Mr. Glover; if you're bound to go, the Lalla Rookh car right
behind this is dead, but there's steam on.  Go into the stateroom and
throw yourself on the couch.  This is the porter here asleep."

"William, your advice is good.  I've taken it too long to disregard it
now," said Glover, picking up his bag.  "Good-night."

But it was not a good night; it was a bad night, and getting worse as
Number One dipped into it.  Out of the northwest it smoked a ragged,
wet fog down the pass, and, as they climbed higher, a bitter song from
the Teton way heeled the sleepers over the hanging curves and streamed
like sobs through the meshed ventilators of the Lalla Rookh.  It was a
nasty night for any sort of a sleeper; for a dead one it was very bad.

Glover walked into the Lalla Rookh vestibule, around the smoking-room
passage, and into the main aisle of the car, dimly lighted at the hind
end.  He made his way to the stateroom.  The open door gave him light,
and he took off his storm-coat, pulled it over him for a blanket, and
had closed his eyes when he reflected he had forgotten to warn O'Brien
he must get off at Medicine Bend.

It was unpleasant, but forward he went again to avoid the annoyance of
being carried by.  He could tell as he came back, by the swing, that
they were heading the Peace River curves, for the trucks were hitting
the elevations like punching-bags.  Just as he regained the main aisle
of the Lalla Rookh, a lurch of the car plumped him against a
section-head.  He grasped it an instant to steady himself, and as he
stopped he looked.  Whether it was that his eyes fell on the curtained
section swaying under the Pintsch light ahead--Section Eleven made
up--or whether his eyes were drawn to it, who can tell?  A woman's head
was visible between the curtains.  Glover stood perfectly still and
stared.  Without right or reason, there certainly stood a woman.

With nobody whatever having any business in the car, a car out of
service, carried as one carries a locked and empty satchel--yet the
curtains of Section Eleven, next his stateroom, were parted slightly,
and the half-light from above streamed on a woman's loose hair.  She
was not looking toward where he stood; her face was turned from him,
and as she clasped the curtain she was looking into his stateroom.
What the deuce! thought Glover.  A woman passenger in a dead sleeper?
He balanced himself to the dizzy wheel of the truck under him, and
waited for her to look his way--since she must be looking for the
porter--but the head did not move.  The curtains swayed with the
jerking of the car, but the woman in Eleven looked intently into the
dark stateroom.  What did it mean?  Glover determined a shock.

"Tickets!" he exclaimed, sternly--and stood alone in the car.

"Tickets!"  The head was gone; not alone that, strangely gone.  How?
Glover could not have told.  It was _gone_.  The Pintsch burned dim;
the Teton song crooned through the ventilators; the wheels of the Lalla
Rookh struck muffled at the fish-plates; the curtains of Section Eleven
swung slowly in and out of the berth--but the head was not there.

A creepy feeling touched his back; his first impulse was to ignore the
incident, go into the stateroom and lie down.  Then he thought he might
have alarmed the passenger in Eleven when he had first entered.  Yet
there was, officially at least, no passenger in Eleven; plainly there
was nothing to do but to call the conductor.  He went forward.  O'Brien
was sorting his collections in the smoking-room of the next car.  Raz
Brown, awake--nominally, at least--sat by, reading his dream-book.

"Is this the Lalla Rookh porter?" asked Glover.  O'Brien nodded.

"Who's your passenger in Eleven back there?" demanded Glover, turning
to the darky.

"Me?" stammered Raz Brown.

"Who's your fare in Eleven in Lalla Rookh?"

"My fare?  Why, I ain't got nair 'a fare in Lalla Rookh.  She's dead,
boss."

"You've got a woman passenger in Eleven.  What are you talking about?
What's the matter with you?"

Raz Brown's eyes rolled marvellously.  "'Fore God, dere ain't nobody
dere ez I knows on, Mr. O'Brien," protested the surprised porter,
getting up.

"There's a woman in Eleven, Billy," said Glover.

"Come on," exclaimed O'Brien, turning to the porter.  "She may be a
spotter.  Let's see."

Raz Brown walked back reluctantly, Conductor O'Brien leading.  Into the
Lalla Rookh, dark and quiet, around the smoking-room, down the aisle,
and facing Eleven; there the Pintsch light dimly burned, the draperies
slowly swayed in front of the darkened berth.  Raz Brown gripped the
curtains preliminarily.

"Tickets, ma'am."  There was a heavy pause.

"Tickets!"  No response.

"C'nduct'h wants youh tickets, ma'am."

The silence could be cut with an axe.  Raz Brown parted the curtains,
peered in, opened them wider, peered farther in; pushed the curtains
back with both hands.  The berth was empty.

Raz looked at Conductor O'Brien.  O'Brien grasped the curtains himself.
The upper berth hung closed above.  The lower, made up, lay
untouched--the pillows fresh, the linen sheets folded back,
Pullmanwise, over the dark blanket.

The porter looked at Glover.  "See foh y'se'f."

Glover was impatient.  "She's somewhere about the car," he exclaimed,
"search it."  Raz Brown went through the Lalla Rookh from vestibule to
vestibule: it was as empty as a ceiling.

Puzzled and annoyed, Glover stood trying to recall the mysterious
appearance.  He walked back to where he had seen the woman, stood where
he had stood and looked where he had looked.  She had not seemed to
withdraw, as he recalled: the curtains had not closed before the head;
it had vanished.  The wind sung fine, very fine through the copper
screens, the Pintsch light flowed very low into the bright globe, the
curtains swung again gracefully to the dip of the car; but the head was
gone.

A discussion threw no light on the mystery.  On one point, however,
Conductor O'Brien was firm.  While the conductor and the porter kept up
the talk, Glover resumed his preparations for retiring in the
stateroom, but O'Brien interfered.

"Don't do it.  Don't you do it.  I wouldn't sleep in that room now for
a thousand dollars."

"Nonsense."

"That's all right.  I say come forward."

They made him up a corner in the smoking-room of the 'Frisco car, and
he could have slept like a baby had not the conviction suddenly come
upon him that he had seen Gertrude Brock.  Should he, after all, see
her again?  And what did it mean?  Why was she looking in terror into
his stateroom?




CHAPTER XII

A SLIP ON A SPECIAL

Glover's train pulled into Medicine Bend, in the rain, at half-past two
o'clock.  The face in the Lalla Rookh had put an end to thoughts of
sleep, and he walked up to his office in the Wickiup to work until
morning on his report.  He lighted a lamp, opened his desk with a clang
that echoed to the last dark corner of the zigzag hall, and, spreading
out his papers, resumed the figuring he had begun at Wind River
station.  But the combinations which at eleven o'clock had gone fast
refused now to work.  The Lalla Rookh curtains intruded continually
into his problems and his calculations dissolved helplessly into an
idle stare at a jumble of figures.

He got up at last, restless, walked through the trainmaster's room,
into the despatcher's office, and stumbled on the tragedy of the night.


It came about through an ambition in itself honorable--the ambition of
Bud Cawkins to become a train-despatcher.

Bud began railroading on the Wind River.  In three months he was made
an agent, in six months he had become an expert in station work, an
operator after a despatcher's own heart, and the life of the line; then
he began looking for trouble.  His quest resulted first in the
conviction that the main line business was not handled nearly as well
as it ought to be.  Had Bud confided this to an agent of experience
there would have been no difficulty.  He would have been told that
every agent on every branch in the world, sooner or later, has the same
conviction; that he need only to let it alone, eat sparingly of brain
food, and the clot would be sure to pass unnoticed.

Unfortunately, Bud concealed his conviction, and asked Morris Blood to
give him a chance at the Wickiup.  The first time, Morris Blood only
growled; the second time he looked at the handsome boy disapprovingly.

"Want to be a despatcher, do you?  What's the matter with you?  Been
reading railroad stories?  I'll fire any man on my division that reads
railroad stories.  Don't be a chump.  You're in line now for the best
station on the division."

But compliments only fanned Bud's flame, and Morris Blood, after
reasonable effort to save the boy's life, turned him over to Martin
Duffy.

Now, of all severe men on the West End, Duffy is most biting.  His
smile is sickly, his hair dry, and his laugh soft.

"Despatcher, eh?  Ha, ha, ha; I see, Bud.  Coming down to show us how
to do business.  Oh, no.  I understand; that is all right.  It is what
brought me here, Bud, when I was about your age and good for something.
Well, it is a snap.  There is nothing in the railroad life equal to a
despatcher's trick.  If you should make a mistake and get two trains
together they will only fire you.  If you happen to kill a few people
they _can't_ make anything more than manslaughter out of it--I know
that because I've seen them try to hang a despatcher for a passenger
wreck--they can't do it, Bud, don't ever believe it.  In this state ten
years is the extreme limit for manslaughter, and the only complication
is that if your train should happen to burn up they might soak you an
extra ten years for arson; but a despatcher is usually handy around a
penitentiary and can get light work in the office, so that he's thrown
more with wife poisoners and embezzlers than with cutthroats and
hold-up men.  Then, too, you can earn nearly as much in State's prison
as you can at your trick.  A despatcher's salary is high, you
know--seventy-five, eighty, and even a hundred dollars a month.

"Of course, there's an unpleasant side of it.  I don't want to seem to
draw it too rosy.  I imagine you've heard Blackburn's story, haven't
you--the lap-order at Rosebud?  I helped carry Blackburn out of that
room"--Duffy pointed very coldly toward Morris Blood's door--"the
morning we put him in his coffin.  But, hang it, Bud, a death like that
is better than going to the insane asylum, isn't it, eh?  A short trick
and a merry one, my boy, for a despatcher, say I; no insane asylum for
me."

It calmed Budwiser, as the boys began to call him, for a time only.  He
renewed his application and was at length relieved of his comfortable
station and ordered into the Wickiup as despatcher's assistant.

For a time every dream was realized--the work was put on him by
degrees, things ran smoothly, and his despatcher, Garry O'Neill, soon
reported him all right.  A month later Bud was notified that a
despatcher's trick would shortly be assigned to him, and to the boys
from the branch who asked after him he sent word that in a few days he
would be showing them how to do business on the main line.

The chance came even sooner.  O'Neill went hunting the following day,
overslept, came down without supper and could not get a quiet minute
till long after midnight.  Heavy stock trains crowded down over the
short line.  The main line, in addition to the regular traffic, had
been pounded all night with government stores and ammunition,
westbound.  From the coast a passenger special, looked for in the
afternoon, had just come into the division at Bear Dance.  Garry laid
out his sheet with the precision of a campaigner, provided for
everything, and at three o'clock he gave Bud a transfer and ran down to
get a cup of coffee.  Bud sat into the chair for the first time with
the responsibility of a full-fledged despatcher.

For five minutes no business confronted him, then from the extreme end
of his territory Cambridge station called for orders for an extra, fast
freight, west, Engine 81, and Bud wrote his first train order.  He
ordered Extra 81 to meet Number 50, a local and accommodation, at
Sumter, and signed Morris Blood's initials with a flourish.  When the
trains had gone he looked over his sheet calmly until he noticed, with
fainting horror, that he had forgotten Special 833, east, making a very
fast run and headed for Cambridge, with no orders about Extra 81.
Special 833 was the passenger train from the coast.

The sheet swam and the yellow lamp at his elbow turned green and black.
The door of the operator's room opened with a bang.  Bud, trembling,
hoped it might be O'Neill, and staggered to the archway.  It was only
Glover, but Glover saw the boy's face.  "What's the matter?"

Bud looked back into the room he was leaving.  Glover stepped through
the railing gate and caught the boy by the shoulder.  "What's the
matter, my lad?"

He shook and questioned, but from the dazed operator he could get only
one word, "O'Neill," and stepping to the hall door Glover called out
"O'Neill!"

It has been said that Glover's voice would carry in a mountain storm
from side to side of the Medicine Bend yard.  That night the very last
rafter in the Wickiup gables rang with his cry.  He called only once,
for O'Neill came bounding up the long stairs three steps at a time.

"Look to your train sheet, Garry," said Glover, peremptorily.  "This
boy is scared to death.  There's trouble somewhere."

He supported the operator to a chair, and O'Neill ran to the inner
room.  The moment his eye covered the order book he saw what had
happened.  "Extra 81 is against a passenger special," exclaimed
O'Neill, huskily, seizing the key.  "There's the order--Extra 81 from
Cambridge to meet Number 50 at Sumter and Special 833 has orders to
Cambridge, and nothing against Extra 81.  If I can't catch the freight
at Red Desert we're in for it--wake up Morris Blood, quick, he's in
there asleep."

Blood, working late in his office, had rolled himself in a blanket on
the lounge in Callahan's old room, and unfortunately Morris Blood was
the soundest sleeper on the division.  Glover called him, shook him,
caught him by the arm, lifted him to a sitting position, talked
hurriedly to him--he knew what resource and power lay under the thick
curling hair if he could only rouse the tired man from his dreamless
sleep.  Even Blood's own efforts to rouse himself were almost at once
apparent.  His eyes opened, glared helplessly, sank back and closed in
stupor.  Glover grew desperate, and lifting Morris to his feet, dragged
him half way across the dark room.

O'Neill, rattling the key, was looking on from the table like a
drowning man.  "Leave your key and steady him here against the
door-jamb, Garry," cried Glover; "by the Eternal, I'll wake him."  He
sprang to the big water-cooler, cast away the top, seized the tank like
a bucket, and dashed a full stream of ice-water into Morris Blood's
face.

"Great God, what's the matter?  Who is this?  Glover?  What?  Give me a
towel, somebody."

The spell was broken.  Glover explained, O'Neill ran back to the key,
and Blood in another moment bent dripping over the nervous despatcher.

The superintendent's mind working faster now than the magic current
before him, listened, cast up, recollected, considered, decided for and
against every chance.  At that moment Red Desert answered.  No breath
interrupted the faint clicks that reported on Extra 81.  O'Neill looked
up in agony as the sounder spelled the words: "Extra 81 went by at
3.05."  The superintendent and the despatcher looked at the clock; it
read 3.09.

O'Neill clutched the order book, but Glover looked at Morris Blood.
With the water trickling from his hair down his wrinkled face, beading
his mustache, and dripping from his chin he stood, haggard with sleep,
leaning over O'Neill's shoulder.  A towel stuffed into his left hand
was clasped forgotten at his waist.  From the east room, operators,
their instruments silenced, were tiptoeing into the archway.  Above the
little group at the table the clock ticked.  O'Neill, in a frenzy, half
rose out of his chair, but Morris Blood, putting his hand on the
despatcher's shoulder, forced him back.

"They're gone," cried the frantic man; "let me out of here."

"No, Garry."

"They're gone."

"Not yet, Garry.  Try Fort Rucker for the Special."

"There's no night man at Fort Rucker."

"But Burling, the day man, sleeps upstairs----"

"He goes up to Bear Dance to lodge."

"This isn't lodge night," said Blood.

"For God's sake, how can you get him upstairs, anyway?" trembled
O'Neill.

"On cold nights he sleeps downstairs by the ticket-office stove.  I
spent a night with him once and slept on his cot.  If he is in the
ticket-office you may be able to wake him--he may be awake.  The
Special can't pass there for ten minutes yet.  Don't stare at me.  Call
Rucker, hard."

O'Neill seized the key and tried to sound the Rucker call.  Again and
again he attempted it and sent wild.  The man that could hold a hundred
trains in his head without a slip for eight hours at a stretch sat
distracted.

"Let me help you, Garry," suggested Blood, in an undertone.  The
despatcher turned shaking from his chair and his superintendent slipped
behind him into it.  His crippled right hand glided instantly over the
key, and the Rucker call, even, sharp, and compelling, followed by the
quick, clear nineteen--the call that gags and binds the whole
division--the despatchers' call--clicked from his fingers.

Persistently, and with unfailing patience, the men hovering at his
back, Blood drummed at the key for the slender chance that remained of
stopping the passenger train.  The trial became one of endurance.  Like
an incantation, the call rang through the silence of the room until it
wracked the listeners, but the man at the key, quietly wiping his face
and head, and with the towel in his left hand mopping out his collar,
never faltered, never broke, minute after minute, until after a score
of fruitless waits an answer broke his sending with the "I, I, Ru!"

As the reply flew from his fingers Morris Blood's eyes darted to the
clock; it was 3.17.  "Stop Special 833, east, quick."

"You've got them?" asked Glover, from the counter.

"If they're not by," muttered Blood.

"Red light out," reported Rucker; then three dreadful minutes and it
came, "Special 833 taking water; O'Brien wants orders."

And the order went, "Siding, quick, and meet Extra 81, west, at
Rucker," and the superintendent rose from the chair.

"It's all over, boys," said he, turning to the operators.  "Remember,
no man ever got to a railroad presidency by talking; but many men have
by keeping their mouths shut.  Lay Cawkins on the lounge in my room.
Duffy said that boy would never do."

"What was Burling doing, Morris," asked Glover, sitting down by the
stove.

"Ask him, Garry," suggested Blood.  They waited for the answer.

"Were you asleep on your cot?" asked the despatcher, getting Rucker
again.

"If that fellow woke on my call, I'll make a despatcher of him,"
declared Morris Blood, with a thrill of fine pride.

"No," answered Rucker, "I slept upstairs tonight."

The two men at the stove stared at one another.  "How did you hear your
call?" asked the despatcher.  Again their ears were on edge.

And Rucker answered, "I always come down once in the night to put coal
on the fire."

"Another illusion destroyed," smiled Morris Blood.  "Hang him, I'll
promote him, anyway, for attending to his fire."

"But you couldn't do that again in a thousand years, Mr. Blood,"
ventured a young and enthusiastic operator who had helped to lay out
poor Bud Cawkins.

The mountain man looked at him coldly.  "I sha'n't want to do that
again in a thousand years.  In the railroad life it always comes
different, every time.  Go to your key."

"I'm glad we got that particular train out of trouble," he added,
turning to Glover when they were alone.

"What train?"

"That Special 833 is the Brock special.  You didn't know it?  We've
been looking for them from the coast for two days."




CHAPTER XIII

BACK TO THE MOUNTAINS

The sudden appearance of Mr. Brock at any time and at any point where
he had interests would surprise only those that did not know him.  On
the coast the party had broken up, Louise Donner going into Colorado
with friends, and Harrison returning to Pittsburg.

Planning originally to recross the mountains by a southern route, and
to give himself as much of a pleasure trip as he ever took, Mr. Brock
changed all his plans at the last moment--a move at which he was
masterly--and wired Bucks to meet him at Bear Dance for the return
trip.  Doctor Lanning, moreover, had advised that Marie spend some
further time in the mountains, where her gain in health had been
decided.

Among the features the general manager particularly wished Mr. Brock to
see before leaving the mountain country was the Crab Valley dam and
irrigation canal, and the second day after the president's special
entered the division it was side-tracked at a way station near Sleepy
Cat for an inspection of the undertaking.  The trip to the canal was by
stage with four horses, and the ladies had been asked to go.

The morning was so exhilarating and the ride so fast that when the head
horses dipped over the easy divide flanking the line of the canal on
the south, and the brake closed on the lumbering wheels, the visitors
were surprised to discover almost at their feet a swarming army of men
and horses scraping in the dusty bed of a long cut.  There the heavy
work was to be seen, and to give his party an idea of its magnitude,
Bucks had ordered the stage driven directly through the cut itself.
With Mr. Brock he sat up near the driver.  Back of them were Doctor
Lanning and Gertrude Brock; within rode Mrs. Whitney and Marie.

As the stage, getting down the high bank, lurched carefully along the
scraper ways of the yellow bed, shovellers, drivers, and water-boys
looked curiously at the unusual sight, and patient mules nosed meekly
the alert, nervous horses that dragged the stage along the uneven way.

At the lower end of the cut a more formidable barrier interposed.  A
pocket of gravel on the eastern bank had slipped, engulfing a steam
shovel, and a gang of men were busy about it.  On a level overlooking
the scene, in corduroy jackets and broad hats, stood two engineers.  At
times one of them gave directions to a foreman whose gang was digging
the shovel out.  His companion, perceiving the approach of the stage,
signalled the driver sharply, and the leaders were swung to the right
of the shovellers so that the stage was brought out on a level some
distance away.

Bucks first recognized the taller of the two men.  "There's Glover," he
exclaimed.  "Hello!" he called across the canal bed.  "I didn't look
for you here."  Glover lifted his hat and walked over to the stage.

"I came up last night to see Ed Smith about running his flume under
Horse Creek bridge.  They cross us, you know, in the canyon there," said
he, in his slow, steady way.  "Just as we got on the ponies to ride
down, this slide occurred----"

"Glad you couldn't get away.  We want to see Ed Smith," returned Bucks,
getting down.  The women were already greeting Glover, and avoiding
Gertrude's eye while he included her in his salutation to all, he tried
to answer several questions at once.  Smith, the engineer in charge of
the canal, was talking with Bucks and Mr. Brock.  On top of the stage
Doctor Lanning was trying to persuade Gertrude not to get down; but she
insisted.

"Mr. Glover will help me, I am sure," she said, looking directly at the
evading Glover, who was absorbed in his talk with her sister.  "I
should advise you not to alight, Miss Brock," said he, unable to ignore
her request.  "You will sink into this dusty clay----"

"I don't mind that, but unless you will give me your hand," she
interrupted, putting her boot on the foot rest to descend, "I shall
certainly break my neck."  When he promptly advanced she took both of
his offered hands with a laugh at her recklessness and dropped lightly
beside him.  "May I go over where you stood?" she asked at once.

"I shouldn't," he ventured.

"But I can't see what they are doing."  She walked capriciously ahead,
and Glover reluctantly followed.  "Why shouldn't you?" she questioned,
waiting for him to come to her side.

"It isn't safe."

"Why did you stand there?"

He answered with entire composure.  "What would be perfectly safe for
me might be very dangerous for you."

She looked full at him.  "How truly you speak."

Yet she did not stop, though at each step her feet sunk into the
loosened soil.

"Pray, don't go farther," said Glover.

"I want to see the men digging."

"Then won't you come around here?"

"But may I not walk over to that car?"

"This way is more passable."

"Then why did you make the driver turn away from that side?"

"You have good eyes, Miss Brock."

"Pray, what is the matter with that man lying behind the car?"

Glover looked fairly at her at last.  "A shoveller was hurt when the
gravel slipped a few minutes ago.  When the warning came he did not
understand and got caught."

"Oh, let us get Doctor Lanning; something can be done for him."

"No.  It is too late."

Horror checked her.  "Dead?"

"Yes.  I did not want you to know this.  Your sister is easily
shocked----"

She paused a moment.  "You are very thoughtful of Marie.  Have you a
sister?"

"I haven't.  Why do you ask?"

"Who taught you thoughtfulness?" she asked, gravely.  He stood
disconcerted.  "I find consideration common among Western men," she
went on, generalizing prettily; "our men don't have it.  Does a life so
rough and terrible as this give men the consideration that we expect
elsewhere and do not find?  Ah, that poor shoveller.  Isn't it horrible
to die so?  Did everyone else escape?"

"They are ready to start, I think," he suggested, uneasily.

"Oh, are they?"

"You are coming to see us?" called Marie, leaning from the top, while
Glover paused behind her sister, when they had reached the stage.  He
stood with his hat in his hand.  The dazzling sun made copper of the
swarthy brown of his lower face and brought out the white of his
forehead where the hair crisped wet in the heat of the morning.
Gertrude Brock, after she had gained her seat with his help, looked
down while he talked; looked at the top of his head, and listening
vaguely to Marie, noted his long, bony hand as it clung to the window
strap--the hand of the most audacious man she had ever met in her
life--who had made an avowal to her on the observation platform of her
father's own car--and she mused at the explosion that would have
followed had she ever breathed a syllable of the circumstance to her
own fiery papa.

But she had told no one--least of all, the young man that had asked her
before she left Pittsburg to marry him and was now writing her every
other day--Allen Harrison.  Indeed, what could be more ridiculously
embarrassing than to be assailed so unexpectedly?  She had no mind to
make herself anyone's laughing-stock by speaking of it.  One thing,
however, she had vaguely determined--since Glover had frightened her
she would retaliate at least a little before she returned to the quiet
of Fifth Avenue.

Marie was still talking to him.  "Why haven't you heard?  I thought
sister would have told you.  The doctor says I gained faster here than
anywhere between the two oceans, and we are all to spend six weeks up
at Glen Tarn Springs.  Papa is going East and coming back after us, and
we shall expect you to come to the Springs very often."

The stage was starting.  Gertrude faced backward as she sat.  She could
see Glover's salutation, and she waved a glove.  He was as utterly
confused as she could desire.  She saw him rejoin his companion
engineer near where lay the shoveller with the covered face, and the
thought of the terrible accident depressed her.  As she last saw Glover
he was pointing at the faulty bank, and she knew that the two men were
planning again for the safety of the men.


About Glen Tarn, now quite the best known of the Northern mountain
resorts, there is no month like October: no sun like the October sun,
and no frost like the first that stills the aspen.  Moreover, the
travel is done, the parks are deserted, the mountains robing for
winter.  In October, the horse, starting, shrinks under his rider, for
the lion, always moving, never seen, is following the game into the
valleys, leaving the grizzly to beat his stubborn retreat from the snow
line alone.

Starting from the big hotel in a new direction every day the
Pittsburgers explored the valleys and the canyons, for the lake and the
springs nestle in the Pilot Mountains and the scenery is everywhere
new.  Mount Pilot itself rises loftily to the north, and from its sides
may be seen every peak in the range.

One day, for a novelty, the whole party went down to Medicine Bend,
nominally on a shopping expedition, but really on a lark.  Medicine
Bend is the only town within a day's distance of Glen Tarn Springs
where there are shops; and though the shopping usually ended in a
chorus of jokes, the trip on the main line trains, which they caught at
Sleepy Cat, was always worth while, and the dining-car, with an
elaborate supper in returning, was a change from the hotel table.

Sometimes Gertrude and Mrs. Whitney went together to the headquarters
town--Gertrude expecting always to encounter Glover.  When some time
had passed, her failure to get a glimpse of him piqued her.  One day
with her aunt going down they met Conductor O'Brien.  He was more than
ready to answer questions, and fortunately for the reserve that
Gertrude loved to maintain, Mrs. Whitney remarked they had not seen Mr.
Glover for some time.

"No one has seen much of him for two weeks; he had a little bad luck,"
explained Conductor O'Brien.

"Indeed?"

"Three weeks ago he was up at Crab Valley.  They had a cave-in on the
irrigation canal and two or three men got caught under a coal platform
near the steam shovel.  Glover was close by when it happened.  He got
his back under the timbers until they could get the men out and broke
two of his ribs.  He went home that night without knowing of it, but a
couple of days afterward he sneezed and found it out right away.  Since
then he's been doing his work in a plaster cast."

Their return train that day was several hours behind time and Gertrude
and her aunt were compelled to go up late to the American House for
supper.  A hotel supper at Medicine Bend was naturally the occasion of
some merriment, and the two diverted themselves with ordering a wild
assortment of dishes.  The supper hour had passed, the dining-room had
been closed, and they were sitting at their dessert when a late comer
entered the room.  Gertrude touched her aunt's arm--Glover was passing.

Mrs. Whitney's first impulse was to halt the silent engineer with one
of her imperative words.  To think of him was to think only of his
easily approachable manner; but to see him was indistinctly to recall
something of a dignity of simplicity.  She contented herself with a
whisper.  "He doesn't see us."

At the lower end of the room Glover sat down.  Almost at once Gertrude
became conscious of the silence.  She handled her fork noiselessly, and
the interval before a waitress pushed open the swinging kitchen door to
take his order seemed long.  The Eastern girl watched narrowly until
the waitress flounced out, and Glover, shifting his knife and his fork
and his glass of water, spread his limp napkin across his lap, and
resting his elbow on the table supported his head on his hand.

The surroundings had never looked so bare as then, and a sense of the
loneliness of the shabby furnishings filled her.  The ghastliness of
the arc-lights, the forbidding whiteness of the walls, and the
penetrating odors of the kitchen seemed all brought out by the presence
of a man alone.

Mrs. Whitney continued to jest, but Gertrude responded mechanically.
Glover was eating his supper when the two rose from their table, and
Mrs. Whitney led the way toward him.

"So, this is the invalid," she said, halting abruptly before him.
"Mrs. Whitney!" exclaimed Glover, trying hastily to rise as he caught
sight of Gertrude.

"Will you please be seated?" commanded Mrs. Whitney.  "I insist----"

He sat down.  "We want only to remind you," she went on, "that we hate
to be completely ignored by the engineering department even when _not_
officially in its charge."

"But, Mrs. Whitney, I can't sit if you are to stand," he answered,
greeting Gertrude and her aunt together.

"You are an invalid; be seated.  Nothing but toast?" objected Mrs.
Whitney, drawing out a chair and sitting down.  "Do you expect to mend
broken ribs on toast?"

"I'm well mended, thank you.  Do I look like an invalid?"

"But we heard you were seriously hurt."  He laughed.  "And want to
suggest Glen Tarn as a health resort."

"Unfortunately, the doctor has discharged me.  In fact, a broken rib
doesn't entitle a man to a lay-off.  I hope your sister continues to
improve?" he added, looking at Gertrude.

"She does, thank you.  Mrs. Whitney and I have been talking of the day
we met you at the irrigation--" he did not help her to a word--"works,"
she continued, feeling the slight confusion of the pause.  "You"--he
looked at her so calmly that it was still confusing--"you were hurt
before we met you and we must have seemed unconcerned under the
circumstances.  We speak often at Glen Tarn of the delightful weeks we
spent in your mountain wilds last summer," she added.

Glover thanked her, but appeared absorbed in Mrs. Whitney's attempt to
disengage her eye-glasses from their holder, and Gertrude made no
further effort to break his restraint.  Mrs. Whitney talked, and Glover
talked, but Gertrude reserved her bolt until just before their train
started.

He had gone with them, and they were standing on the platform before
the vestibule steps of their Pullman car.  As the last moment
approached it was not hard to see that Glover was torn between Mrs.
Whitney's rapid-fire talk and a desire to hear something from Gertrude.

She waited till the train was moving before she loosed her shaft.  Mrs.
Whitney had ascended the steps, the porter was impatient, Glover
nervous.  Gertrude turned with a smile and a totally bewildering
cordiality on the unfortunate man.  "My sister," her glove was on the
hand-rail, "sends some sort of a message to Mr. Glover every time I
come to Medicine Bend--but the gist of them all is that she would be
very"--the train was moving and they were stepping along with it--"glad
to see you at Glen Tarn before----"

"Gertrude," screamed Mrs. Whitney, "will you get on?"

Glover's eyes were growing like target-lights.

"--before we go East," continued Gertrude.  "So should I," she added,
throwing in the last three words most inexplicably, as she kept step
with the engineer.  But she had not miscalculated the effect.

"Are you to go soon?" he exclaimed.  The porter followed them
helplessly with his stool.  Mrs. Whitney wrung her hands, and Gertrude
attempted to reach the lower tread of the car step.

Someone very decidedly helped her, and she laughed and rose from his
hands as lightly as to a stirrup.  When she collected herself, after
the pleasure of the spring, Mrs. Whitney was scolding her for her
carelessness; but she was waving a glove from the vestibule at a big
hat still lifted in the dusk of the platform.




CHAPTER XIV

GLEN TARN

October had not yet gone when they met again in a Medicine Bend street.
Glover, leaving the Wickiup with Morris Blood, ran into Gertrude Brock
coming out of an Indian curio-shop with Doctor Lanning.  She began at
once to talk to Glover.  "Marie was regretting, yesterday, that you had
not yet found your way to Glen Tarn."

The sun beat intensely on her black hat and her suit of gray.  In her
gloved hand she twirled the tip of her open sunshade on the pavement
with deliberation and he shifted his footing helplessly.  His heavy
face never looked homelier than in sunshine, and she gazed at him with
a calmness that was staggering.  He muttered something about having
been unusually busy.

"We, too, have been," smiled Gertrude, "making final preparations for
our departure."

"Do you go so soon?" he exclaimed.

"We are waiting only papa's return now to say good-by to the
mountains."  The way in which she put it stirred him as she had
intended it should--uncomfortably.

"I should certainly want to say good-by to your sister," muttered
Glover.  But in saying even so little his naturally unsteady voice
broke one extra tone, and when this happened it angered him.

"You are not timid, are you?" continued Gertrude.

"I think I am something of a coward."

"Then you shouldn't venture," she laughed, "Marie has a scolding for
you."

Morris Blood had been telling Doctor Lanning that he and Glover were to
go over to Sleepy Cat on the train the doctor and Gertrude were to take
back to Glen Tarn.  The two railroad men were just starting across the
yard to inspect an engine, the 1018, which was to pull the limited
train that day for the first time.  It was a new monster, planned by
the modest little Manxman, Robert Crosby, for the first district run.
"Help her over the pass," Crosby had whispered--the superintendent of
motive power hardly ever spoke aloud--"and she'll buck a headwind like
a canvas-back.  Give her decent weather, and on the Sleepy Cat trail
she'll run away with six, yes, eight Pullmans."

Doctor Lanning was curious to look over the new machine, the first to
signalize the new ownership of the line, and Gertrude was quite ready
to accept Blood's invitation to go also.

With the doctor under the superintendent's wing, Gertrude, piloted by
Glover, crossed the network of tracks, asking railroad questions at
every step.

Reaching the engine, she wanted to get up into the cab, to say that,
before leaving the mountains forever, she had been once inside an
engine.  Glover, after some delay, procured a stepladder from the "rip"
track, and with this the daughter of the magnate made an unusual but
easy ascent to the cab.  More than that, she made herself a heroine to
every yardman in sight, and strengthened the new administration
incalculably.

She ignored a conventional offer of waste from the man in charge of the
cab, who she was surprised to learn, after some sympathetic remarks on
her part, was not the engineman at all.  He was a man that had
something to do with horses.  And when she suggested it would be quite
an event for so big an engine to go over the mountains for the first
time, the hostler told her it had already been over a good many times.

But Mr. Blood had an easy explanation for every confusing statement,
and did not falter even when Miss Brock wanted to start the 1018
herself.  He objected that she would soil her gloves, but she held them
up in derision; plainly, they had already suffered.  Some difficulty
then arose because she could not begin to reach the throttle.  Again,
with much chaffing, the stepladder was brought into play, and steadied
on it by Morris Blood, and coached by the hostler, the heiress to many
millions grasped the throttle, unlatched it and pulled at the lever
vigorously with both hands.

The packing was new, but Gertrude persisted, the bar yielded, and to
her great fright things began to hiss.  The engine moved like a roaring
leviathan, and the author of the mischief screamed, tried to stop it,
and being helpless appealed to the unshaven man to help her.  Glover,
however, was nearest and shut off.

It was all very exciting, and when on the turntable Gertrude was told
by the doctor that her suit was completely ruined she merely held up
both her blackened gloves, laughing, as Glover came up; and caught up
her begrimed skirt and joined him with a flush on her cheeks as bright
as a danger signal.

Some fervor of the magical day, under those skies where autumn itself
is only a heavier wine than spring, something of the deep breath of the
mountain scene seemed to infect her.

She walked at Glover's side.  She recalled with the slightest pretty
mirth his fetching the ladder--the way in which he had crossed a flat
car by planting the ladder alongside, mounting, pulling the steps after
him, and descending on them to the other side.

In her humor she faintly suggested his awkward competence in doing
things, and he, too, laughed.  As they crossed track after track she
would place the toe of her boot on a rail glittering in the sun, and
rising, balance an instant to catch an answer from him before going on.
There was no haste in their manner.  They had crossed the railroad
yard, strangers; they recrossed it quite other.  Their steps they
retraced, but not their path.  The path that led them that day together
to the engine was never to be retraced.


To worry Crosby's new locomotive, Blood's car had been ordered added to
the westbound limited, but neither Glover nor Blood spent any time in
the private car.  The afternoon went in the Pullman with Gertrude Brock
and Doctor Lanning.  At dinner Glover did the ordering because he had
earlier planned to celebrate the promotion, already known, of Morris
Blood to the general superintendency.

If there were few lines along which the construction engineer could
shine he at least appeared to advantage as the host of his friend,
since the ordering of a dinner is peculiarly a gentleman's matter, and
even the modest complement of wine which the occasion demanded, Glover
toasted in a way that revealed the boyish loyalty between the two men.

The spirit of it was so contagious that neither the doctor nor Gertrude
made scruple of adding their congratulations.  But the moments were
fleeting and Glover, next day, could recall them up to one scene only.
When Gertrude found she could not, even after a brave effort, ride with
her back to the engine, and accepted so graciously Mr. Blood's offer to
change seats, it brought her beside Glover; after that his memory
failed.

In the morning he felt miserably overdone, as at Sleepy Cat a man might
after running a preliminary half way to heaven.  Moreover, when they
parted he had, he remembered, undertaken to dine the following evening
at the Springs.

When he entered the apartments of the Pittsburg party at six o'clock,
Mrs. Whitney reproached him for his absence during their month at Glen
Tarn, and in Mrs. Whitney's manner, peremptorily.

"I'm sure we've missed seeing everything worth while about here," she
complained.  Her annoyance put Glover in good humor.  Marie met him
with a gentler reproach.  "And we go next week!"

"But you've seen everything, I know," he protested, answering both of
them.

"Whether we have or not, Mr. Glover should be penalized for his
indifference," suggested Marie.  Doctor Lanning came in.  "Compel him
to show us something we haven't seen around the lake," suggested the
doctor.  "That he cannot do; then we have only to decide on his
punishment."

"Oh, yes, I want to be on that jury," said Gertrude, entering softly in
black.

"But is this Pittsburg justice?" objected Glover, rising at the spell
of her eyes to the raillery.  "Shouldn't I have a try at the scenery
end of the proposition before sentence is demanded?"

"Justify quickly, then," threatened Marie, as they started for the
dining-room; "we are not trifling."

"Of course you've been here a month," began Glover, when the party were
seated.

"Yes."

"Out every day."

"Yes."

"The guides have all your money?"

"Yes."

"Then I stake everything on a single throw----"

"A professional," interjected Doctor Lanning.

"Only desperate gamesters stake all on a single throw," said Gertrude
warningly.

"I am a desperate gamester," said Glover, "and now for it.  Have you
seen the Devil's Gap?"

A chorus of derision answered.

"The very first day--the very first trip!" cried Mrs. Whitney, raising
her tone one note above every other protest.

"And you staked all on so wretched a chance?" exclaimed Gertrude.
"Why, Devil's Gap is the stock feature of every guide, good, bad, and
indifferent, at the Springs."

"I have staked more at heavier odds," returned Glover, taking the storm
calmly, "and won.  Have you made but one trip, when you first came, do
you say?"

"The very first day."

"Then you haven't seen Devil's Gap.  To see it," he continued, "you
must see it at night."

"At night?"

"With the moon rising over the Spanish Sinks."

"Ah, how that sounds!" exclaimed Marie.

"To-night we have full moon," added Glover.  "Don't say too lightly you
have seen Devil's Gap, for that is given to but few tourists."

"Do not call us tourists," objected Gertrude.

"And from where did you see Devil's Gap--The Pilot?"

"No, from across the Tarn."

If the expression of Glover's face, returning somewhat the ridicule
heaped on him, was intended to pique the interest of the sightseers it
was effective.  He was restored, provisionally, to favor; his
suggestion that after dinner they take horses for the ride up Pilot
Mountain to where the Gap could be seen by moonlight was eagerly
adopted, and Mrs. Whitney's objection to dressing again was put down.
Marie, fearing the hardship, demurred, but Glover woke to so lively
interest, and promised the trip should be so easy that when she
consented to go he made it his affair to attend directly to her comfort
and safety.

He summoned one particular liveryman, not a favorite at the fashionable
hotel, and to him gave especial injunctions about the horses.  The
girths Glover himself went over at starting, and in the riding he kept
near Marie.

Lighted by the stars, they left the hotel in the early evening.  "How
are you to find your way, Mr. Glover?" asked Marie, as they threaded
the path He led her into after they had reached the mountain.  "Is this
the road we came on?"

"I could climb Pilot blindfolded, I reckon.  When we came in here I ran
surveys all around the old fellow, switchbacks and everything.  The
line is a Chinese puzzle about here for ten miles.  The path you're on
now is an old Indian trail out of Devil's Gap.  The guides don't use it
because it is too long.  The Gap is a ten-dollar trip, in any case, and
naturally they make it the shortest way."

For thirty minutes they rode in darkness, then leaving a sharp defile
they emerged on a plateau.

Across the Sinks the moon was rising full and into a clear sky.  To the
right twinkled the lights of Glen Tarn, and below them yawned the
unspeakable wrench in the granite shoulders of the Pilot range called
Devil's Gap.  Out of its appalling darkness projected miles of silvered
spurs tipped like grinning teeth by the light of the moon.

"There are a good many Devil's Gaps in the Rockies," said Glover, after
the silence had been broken; "but, I imagine, if the devil condescends
to acknowledge any he wouldn't disclaim this."

Gertrude stood beside her sister.  "You are quite right," she admitted.
"We have spent our month here and missed the only overpowering
spectacle.  This is Dante."

"Indeed it is," he assented, eagerly.  "I must tell you.  The first
time I got into the Gap with a locating party I had a volume of Dante
in my pack.  It is an unfortunate trait of mine that in reading I am
compelled to chart the topography of a story as I go along.  In the
'Inferno' I could never get head or tail of the topography.  One night
we camped on this very ledge.  In the night the horses roused me.  When
I opened the tent fly the moon was up, about where it is now.  I stood
till I nearly froze, looking--but I thought after that I could chart
the 'Inferno.'  If it weren't so dry, or if we were going to stay all
night, I should have a camp-fire; but it wouldn't do, and before you
get cold we must start back.

"See," he pointed, far down on the left.  "Can you make out that speck
of light?  It is the headlight of a freight train crawling up the range
from Sleepy Cat.  When the weather is right you can see the white head
of Sleepy Cat Mountain from this spot.  That train will wind around in
sight of this knob for an hour, climbing to the mining camps."

Doctor Lanning called to Marie.  Gertrude stood with Glover.

"Is that the desert of the Spanish Sinks?" she asked, looking into the
stream of the moon.

"Yes."

"Is that where you were lost two days?"

"My horse got away.  Have you hurt your hand?"

She was holding her right hand in her left.  "I tore my glove on a
thorn, coming up.  It is not much."

"Is it bleeding?"

"I don't know; can you see?"

She drew down the glove gauntlet and held her hand up.  If his breath
caught he did not betray it, but while he touched her she could very
plainly feel his hand tremble; yet for that matter his hand, she knew,
trembled frequently.  He struck a match.  It was no part of her
audacity to betray herself, and she stepped directly between the others
and the little blaze and looked into his face while he Inspected her
wrist.  "Can you see?"

"It is scratched badly, but not bleeding," he answered.

"It hurts."

"Very likely; the wounds that hurt most don't always bleed," he said,
evenly.  "Let us go."

"Oh, no," she said; "not quite yet.  This is unutterable.  I love this."

"Your aunt, I fear, is not interested.  She is complaining of the cold.
I can't light a fire; the mountain is all timber below----"

"Aunt Jane would complain in heaven, but that wouldn't signify she
didn't appreciate it.  Why are you so quickly put out?  It isn't like
you to be out of humor."  She drew on her glove slowly.  "I wish you
had this wrist----"

"I wish to God I had."  The sudden words frightened her.  She showed
her displeasure in half turning away, then she resolutely faced him.
"I am not going to quarrel with you even if you make fun of me----"

"Fun of you?"

"Even if you put an unfair sense on what I say."

"I meant what I said in every sense, either to take the pain or--the
other.  I couldn't make fun of you.  Do you never make fun of me, Miss
Brock?"

"No, Mr. Glover, I do not.  If you would be sensible we should do very
well.  You have been so kind, and we are to leave the mountains so
soon, we ought to be good friends."

"Will you tell me one thing, Miss Brock--are you engaged?"

"I don't think you should ask, Mr. Glover.  But I am not
engaged--unless that in a sense I am," she added, doubtfully.

"What sense, please?"

"That I have given no answer.  Are you still complaining of the cold,
Aunt Jane?" she cried, in desperation, turning toward Mrs. Whitney.  "I
find it quite warm over here.  Mr. Glover and I are still watching the
freight train.  Come over, do."

Going back, Glover rode near to Gertrude, who had grown restless and
imperious.  To hunt this queer mountain-lion was recreation, but to
have the mountain-lion hunt her was disquieting.

She complained again of her wounded hand, but refused all suggestions,
and gave him no credit for riding between her and the thorny trees
through the canyon.  It was midnight when the party reached the hotel,
and when Gertrude stepped across the parlor to the water-pitcher,
Glover followed.  "I must thank you for your thoughtfulness of my
little sister to-night," she was saying.

He was so intent that he forgot to reply.

"May I ask one question?" he said.

"That depends."

"When you make answer may I know what it is?"

"Indeed you may not."




CHAPTER XV

NOVEMBER

They walked back to the parlors.  Doctor Lanning and Marie were picking
up the rackets at the ping-pong table.  Mrs. Whitney had gone into the
office for the evening mail.

Passing the piano, Gertrude sat down and swung around toward the keys.
Glover took music from the table.  Unwilling to admit a trace of the
unusual in the beating of her heart, or in her deeper breathing, she
could not entirely control either; there was something too fascinating
in defying the light that she now knew glowed in the dull eyes at her
side.  She avoided looking; enough that the fire was there without
directly exposing her own eyes to it.  She drummed with one hand, then
with both, at a gavotte on the rack before her.

Overcome merely at watching her fingers stretch upon the keys he leaned
against the piano.

"Why did you ask me to come up?"

As he muttered the words she picked again and again with her right hand
at a loving little phrase in the gavotte.  When it went precisely right
she spoke in the same tone, still caressing the phrase, never looking
up.  "Are you sorry you came?"

"No; I'd rather be trod under foot than not be near you."

"May we not be friends without either of us being martyred?  I shall be
afraid ever to ask you to do anything again.  Was I wrong in--assuming
it would give you as well as all of us pleasure to dine together this
evening?"

"No.  You know better than that.  I am insanely presumptuous, I know
it.  Let me ask one last favor----"

The gavotte rippled under her fingers.  "No."

He turned away.  She swung on the stool toward him and looked very
kindly and frankly up.  "You have been too courteous to all of us for
that.  Ask as many favors as you like, Mr. Glover," she murmured, "but
not, if you please, a last one."

"It shall be the last, Miss Brock.  I only----"

"You only what?"

"Will you let me know what day you are going, so I may say good-by?"

"Certainly I will.  You will be at Medicine Bend in any case, won't
you?"

"No.  I have fifteen hundred miles to cover next week."

"What for--oh, it isn't any of my business, is it?"

"Looking over the snowsheds.  Will you telegraph me?"

"Where?"

"At the Wickiup; it will reach me."

"You might have to come too far.  We shall start in a few days."

"Will you telegraph me?"

"If you wish me to."


Eight days later, when suspense had grown sullen and Glover had parted
with all hope of hearing from her, he heard.  In the depths of the
Heart River range her message reached him.

Every day Giddings, hundreds of miles away at the Wickiup, had had his
route-list.  Giddings, who would have died for the engineer, waited,
every point in the repeating covered, day after day for a Glen Tarn
message that Glover expected.  For four days Glover had hung like a dog
around the nearer stretches of the division.  But the season was
advanced, he dared not delegate the last vital inspection of the year,
and bitterly he retreated from shed to shed until he was buried in the
barren wastes of the eighth district.

The day in the Heart River mountains is the thin, gray day of the
alkali and the sage.  On Friday afternoon Glover's car lay sidetracked
at the east end of the Nine Mile shed waiting for a limited train to
pass.  The train was late and the sun was dropping into an ashen strip
of wind clouds that hung cold as shrouds to the north and west when the
gray-powdered engine whistled for the siding.

Motionless beside the switch Glover saw down the gloom of the shed the
shoes wringing fire from the Pullman wheels, and wondered why they were
stopping.  The conductor from the open vestibule waved to him as the
train slowed and ran forward with the message.

"Giddings wired me to wait for your answer, Mr. Glover," said the
conductor.

Glover was reading the telegram:


"I may start Saturday.

    "G. B."


There was one chance to make it; that was to take the limited train
then and there.  Bidding the conductor wait he hastened to his car,
called for his gripsack, gave his assistant a volley of orders, and
boarded a Pullman.  Not the preferred stock of the whole system would
have availed at that moment to induce an inspection of Nine Mile shed.

There were men that he knew in the sleepers, but he shunned
acquaintance and walked on till he found an empty section into which he
could throw himself and feast undisturbed on his telegram.  He studied
it anew, tried to consider coolly whether her message meant anything or
nothing, and gloated over the magic of the letters that made her
initials: and when he slept, the word last in his heart was Gertrude.

In the morning he breakfasted late in the sunshine of the diner, passed
his friends again and secluded himself in his section.  Never before
had she said "I"; always it had been "we."  With eyes half-closed upon
the window he repeated the words and spoke her name after them, because
every time the speaking drugged him like lotus, until, yielding again
to the exhaustion of the week's work and strain, he fell asleep.

When he woke the car was dark; the train conductor, Sid Francis, was
sitting beside him, laughing.

"You're sleepy to-day, Mr. Glover."

"Sid, where are we?" asked Glover, looking at his watch; it was four
o'clock.

"Grouse Creek."

"Are we that late?  What's the matter?"

The conductor nodded toward the window.  "Look there."

The sky was gray with a driving haze; a thin sweep of snow flying in
the sand of the storm was whitening the sagebrush.

Glover, waking wide, turned to the window.  "Where's the wind, Sid?"

"Northwest."

"What's the thermometer?"

"Thirty at Creston; sixty when we left MacDill at noon."

"Everything running?"

"They've been getting the freights into division since noon.  There'll
be something doing to-night on the range.  They sent stock warnings
everywhere this morning, but they can't begin to protect the stock
between here and Medicine in one day.  Pulling hard, isn't she?  We're
not making up anything."

The porter was lighting the lamps.  While they talked it had grown
quite dark.  Losing time every mile of the way, the train,
frost-crusted to the eyelids, got into Sleepy Cat at half-past six
o'clock; four hours late.

The crowded yard, as they pulled through it, showed the tie-up of the
day's traffic.  Long lines of freight cars filled the trackage, and
overloaded switch engines struggled with ever-growing burdens to avert
the inevitable blockade of the night.  Glover's anxiety, as he left the
train at the station, was as to whether he could catch anything on the
Glen Tarn branch to take him up to the Springs that night, for there he
was resolved to get before morning if he had to take an engine for the
run.

As he started up the narrow hall leading to the telegraph office he
heard the rustle of skirts above.  Someone was descending the stairway,
and with his face in the light he halted.

"Oh, Mr. Glover."

"Why--Miss Brock!"  It was Gertrude.

"What in the world--" he began.  His broken voice was very natural, she
thought, but there was amazement in his utterance.  He noticed there
was little color in her face; the deep boa of fur nestling about her
throat might account for that.

"What a chance that I should meet you!" she exclaimed, her back hard
against the side wall, for the hall was narrow and brought them face to
face.  She spoke on.  "Did you get my----?"

"Did I?" he echoed slowly; "I have travelled every minute since
yesterday afternoon to get here----"

Her uneasy laugh interrupted him.  "It was hardly worth while, all
that."

"--and I was just going up to find out about getting to Glen Tarn."

"Glen Tarn!  I left Glen Tarn this afternoon all alone to go to
Medicine Bend--papa is there, did you know?  He came yesterday with all
the directors.  Our car was attached for me to the afternoon train
coming down."  She was certainly wrought up, he thought.  "But when we
reached here the train I should have taken for Medicine Bend had not
come----"

"It is here now."

"Thank heaven, is it?"

"I came in on it."

"Then I can start at last!  I have been so nervous.  Is this our train?
They said our car couldn't be attached to this train, and that I should
have to go down in one of the sleepers.  I don't understand it at all.
Will you have the car sent back to Glen Tarn in the morning, Mr.
Glover?  And would you get my handbag?  I was nearly run over a while
ago by some engine or other.  I mustn't miss this train----"

"Never fear, never fear," said Glover.

"But I _cannot_ miss it.  Be very, very sure, won't you?"

"Indeed, I shall.  The train won't start for some time yet.  First let
me take you to your car and then make some inquiries.  Is no one down
with you?"

"No one; I am alone."

"Alone?"

"I expected to have been with papa by this time.  It takes so little
time to run down, you know, and I telegraphed papa I should come on to
meet him.  Isn't it most disagreeable weather?"

Glover laughed as he shielded her from the wind.  "I suppose that's a
woman's name for it."

The car, coupled to a steampipe, stood just east of the station, and
Glover, helping her into it, went back after a moment to the telegraph
office.  It seemed a long time that he was gone, and he returned
covered with snow.  She advanced quickly to him in her wraps.  "Are
they ready?"

He shook his head.  "I'm afraid you can't get to Medicine to-night."

"Oh, but I must."

"They have abandoned Number Six."

"What does that mean?"

"The train will be held here to-night on account of the storm.  There
will be no train of any kind down before morning; not then if this
keeps up."

"Is there danger of a blockade?"

"There is a blockade."

"Then I must get to papa to-night."  She spoke with disconcerting
firmness.

"May I suggest?" he asked.

"Certainly."

"Would it not be infinitely better to go back to the Springs?"

"No, that would be infinitely worse."

"It would be comparatively easy--an engine to pull your car up on a
special order?"

"I will not go back to the Springs to-night, and I will go to Medicine
Bend," she exclaimed, apprehensively.  "May I not have a special there
as well as to the Springs?"

Until that moment he had never seen anything of her father in her; but
her father spoke in every feature; she was a Brock.

Glover looked grave.  "You may have, I am sure, every facility the
division offers.  I make only the point," he said, gently, "that it
would be hazardous to attempt to get to the Bend to-night.  I have just
come from the telegraph office.  In the district I left this morning
the wires are all down to-night.  That is where the storm is coming
from.  There is a lull here just now, but----"

"I thank you, Mr. Glover, believe me, very sincerely for your
solicitude.  I have no choice but to go, and if I must, the sooner the
better, surely.  Is it possible for you to make arrangements for me?"

"It is possible, yes," he answered, guardedly.

"But you hesitate."

"It is a terrible night."

"I like snow, Mr. Glover."

"The danger to-night is the wind."

"Are you afraid of the wind?"  There was a touch of ridicule in her
half-laughing tone.

"Yes," he answered, "I am afraid of the wind."

"You are jesting."

She saw that he flushed just at the eyes; but he spoke still gently.

"You feel that you must go?"

"I must."

"Then I will get orders at once."




CHAPTER XVI

NIGHT

Glover looked at his watch; it was Giddings' trick at Medicine Bend,
and he made little doubt of getting what he asked for.  He walked to
the eating-house and from there directly across to the roundhouse, and
started a hurry call for the night foreman.  He found him at a desk
talking with Paddy McGraw, the engineer that was to have taken out
Number Six.

"Paddy," said Glover, "do you want to take me to Medicine to-night?"

"They've just cancelled Number Six."

"I know it."

"You don't have to go to-night, do you?"

"Yes, with Mr. Brock's car.  This isn't as bad as the night you and I
and Jack Moore bucked snow at Point of Rocks," said Glover,
significantly.  "Do you remember carrying me from the number seven
culvert clean back to the station after the steampipe broke?"

"You bet I do, and I never thought you'd see again after the way your
eyes were cooked that night.  Well, of course, if you want to go
to-night, it's go, Mr. Glover.  You know what you're about, but I'd
never look to see you going out for fun a night like this."

"I can't help it.  Yet I wouldn't want any man to go out with me
to-night unwillingly, Paddy."

"Why, that's nothing.  You got me my first run on this division.  I'd
pull you to hell if you said so."

Glover turned to the night foreman.  "What's the best engine in the
house?"

"There's the 1018 with steam and a plough."

Glover started.  "The 1018?"

"She was to pull Six."  The mountain man picked up the telephone, and
getting the operators, sent a rush message to Giddings.  Leaving final
instructions with the two men he returned to the telegraph office.
When Giddings's protest about ordering a train out on such a night
came, Glover, who expected it, choked it back--assuming all
responsibility--gave no explanations and waited.  When the orders came
he inspected them himself and returned to the car.  Gertrude, in the
car alone, was drinking coffee from a hotel tray on the card table.
"It was very kind of you to send this in," she said, rising cordially.
"I had forgotten all about dinner.  Have you succeeded?"

"Yes.  Could you eat what they sent?"

"Pray look.  I have left absolutely nothing and I am very grateful.  Do
I not seem so?" she added, searchingly.  "I want to because I am."

He smiled at her earnestness.  Two little chairs were drawn up at the
table, and facing each other they sat down while Gertrude finished her
coffee and made Glover take a sandwich.

When the train conductor came in ten minutes later Glover talked with
him.  While the men spoke Gertrude noticed how Glover overran the
dainty chair she had provided.  She scrutinized his rough-weather garb,
the heavy hunting boots, the stout reefer buttoned high, and the
leather cap crushed now with his gloves in his hand.  She had been
asking him where he got the cap, and a moment before, while her
attention wandered, he had told her the story of a company of Russian
noblemen and engineers from Vladivostok, who, during the summer, had
been his guests, nominally on a bear hunt, though they knew better than
to hunt bears in summer.  It was really to pick up points on American
railroad construction.  He might go, he thought, the following spring
to Siberia himself, perhaps to stay--this man that feared the wind--he
had had a good offer.  The cap was a present.

The two men went out and she was left alone.  A flagman, hat in hand,
passed through the car.  The shock of the engine coupler striking the
buffer hardly disturbed her reverie; for her the night meant too much.

Glover was with the operators giving final instructions to Giddings for
ploughs to meet them without fail at Point of Rocks.  Hastening from
the office he looked again at the barometer.  It promised badly and the
thermometer stood at ten degrees above zero.

He had made his way through the falling snow to where they were
coupling the engine to the car, watched narrowly, and going forward
spoke to the engineer.  When he re-entered the car it was moving slowly
out of the yard.

Gertrude, with a smile, put aside her book.  "I am so glad," she said,
looking at her watch.  "I hope we shall get there by eleven o'clock; we
should, should we not, Mr. Glover?"

"It's a poor night for making a schedule," was all he said.  The arcs
of the long yard threw white and swiftly passing beams of light through
the windows, and the warmth within belied the menace outside.

At the rear end of the car the flagman worked with one of the
tail-lights that burned badly, and the conductor watched him.  Gertrude
laid aside her furs and threw open her jacket.  Her hat she kept on,
and sitting in a deep chair told Glover of her father's arrival from
the East on Wednesday and explained how she had set her heart on
surprising him that evening at Medicine Bend.  "Where are we now?" she
asked, as the rumble of the whirling trucks deepened.

"Entering Sleepy Cat Canyon, the Rat River----"

"Oh, I remember this.  I ride on the platform almost every time I come
through here so I may see where you split the mountain.  And every time
I see it I ask myself the same question.  How came he ever to think of
that?"

It needed even hardly so much of an effort to lull her companion's
uneasiness.  He was a man with no concern at best for danger, except as
to the business view of it, and when personally concerned in the hazard
his scruples were never deep.  Not before had he seen or known Gertrude
Brock, for from that moment she gave herself to bewilderment and charm.

The great engine pulling them made so little of its load that they
could afford to forget the night; indeed, Gertrude gave him no moments
to reflect.  From the quick play of their talk at the table she led him
to the piano.  When, sitting down, she drew off her gloves.  She drew
them off lazily.  When he reminded her that she still had on her jacket
she did not look up, but leaning forward she studied the page of a song
on the rack, running the air with her right hand, while she slowly
extended her left arm toward him and let him draw the tight sleeve over
her wrist and from her shoulder.  Then his attempt to relieve her of
the second sleeve she wholly ignored, slipping it lightly off and
pursuing the song with her left hand while she let the jacket fall in a
heap on the floor.  By the time Glover had picked it up and she had
frowned at him she might safely have asked him, had the fancy struck
her, to head the engine for the peak of Sleepy Cat Mountain.

Half-way through a teasing Polish dance she stopped and asked suddenly
whether he had had any supper besides the sandwich; and refusing to
receive assurances forthwith abandoned the piano, rummaged the
staterooms and came back bearing in one hand a very large box of candy
and in the other a banjo.  She wanted to hear the darky tunes he had
strummed at the desert campfire, and making him eat of the chocolates,
picked meantime at the banjo herself.

He was so hungry that unconsciously he despatched one entire layer of
the box while she talked.  She laughed heartily at his appetite, and at
his solicitation began tasting the sweetmeats herself.  She led him to
ask where the box had come from and refused to answer more than to
wonder, as she discarded the tongs and proffered him a bonbon from her
fingers, whether possibly she was not having more pleasure in disposing
of the contents than the donor of the box had intended.  Changing the
subject capriciously she recalled the night in the car that he had
assisted in Louise Bonner's charade, and his absurdly effective
pirouetting in a corner behind the curtain where Louise and he thought
no one saw them.

"And, by the way," she added, "you never told me whether your
stenographer finally came that day you tried to put me at work."

Glover hung his head.

"Did she?"

"Yes."

"What is she like?"

He laughed and was about to reply when the train conductor coming
forward touched him on the shoulder and spoke.  Gertrude could not hear
what he said, but Glover turned his head and straightened in his chair.
"I can't smell anything," he said, presently.  With the conductor he
walked to the hind end of the car, opened the door, and the three men
went out on the platform.

"What is it?" asked Gertrude, when Glover came back.

"One of the journals in the rear truck is heating.  It is curious," he
mused; "as many times as I've ridden in this car I've never known a box
to run hot till to-night--just when we don't want it to."

He drew down the slack of the bell cord, pulled it twice firmly and
listened.  Two freezing pipes from the engine answered; they sounded
cold.  A stop was made and Glover, followed by the trainmen, went
outside.  Gertrude walking back saw them in the driving snow beneath
the window.  Their lamps burned bluishly dim.  From the journal box
rose a whipping column of black smoke expanding, when water was got on
the hot steel, into a blinding explosion of white vapor that the storm
snatched away in rolling clouds.  There was running to and from the
engine and the delay was considerable, but they succeeded at last in
rigging a small tank above the wheel so that a stream of water should
run into the box.

The men re-entered with their faces stung by the cold, the engine
hoarsely signalled and the car started.  Glover made little of the
incident, but Gertrude observed some preoccupation in his manner.  He
consulted frequently his watch.  Once when he was putting it back she
asked to see it.  His watch was the only thing of real value he had and
he was pleased to show it.  It contained a portrait of his mother, and
Gertrude, to her surprise and delight, found it.  She made him answer
question after question, asked him to let her take the watch from the
chain and studied the girlish face of this man's mother until she
noticed its outlines growing dim and looked impatiently up at the deck
burner: the gas was freezing in the storage tanks.

Glover walked to the rear; the journal they told him was running hot
again.  The engineer had asked not to be stopped till they reached Soda
Buttes, where he should have to take water.  When he finally slowed for
the station the box was ablaze.

The men hastening out found their drip-tank full of ice: there was
nothing for it but fresh brasses, and Glover getting down in the snow
set the jack with his own hands so it should be set right.  The
conductor passed him a bar, but Gertrude could not see; she could only
hear the ring of the frosty steel.  Then with a scream the safety valve
of the engine popped and the wind tossed the deafening roar in and out
of the car, now half dark.  Stunned by the uproar and disturbed by the
failing light she left her chair, and going over sat down at the window
beneath which Glover was working; some instinct made her seek him.
When the car door opened, the flagman entered with both hands filled
with snow.

"Are you ready to start?" asked Gertrude.  He shook his head and
bending over a leather chair rubbed the snow vigorously between his
fingers.

"Oh, are you hurt?"

"I froze my fingers and Mr. Glover ordered me in," said the boy.
Gertrude noticed for the first time the wind and listened; standing
still the car caught the full sweep and it rang in her ears softly, a
far, lonely sound.

While she listened the lights of the car died wholly out, but the
jargon of noises from the truck kept away some of the loneliness.  She
knew he would soon come and when the sounds ceased she waited for him
at the door and opened it hastily for him.  He looked storm-beaten as
he held his lantern up with a laugh.  Then he examined the flagman's
hand, followed Gertrude forward and placed the lantern on the table
between them, his face glowing above the hooded light.  They were
running again, very fast, and the rapid whipping of the trucks was
resonant with snow.

"How far now to Medicine?" she smiled.

"We are about half-way.  From here to Point of Rocks we follow an
Indian trail."

The car was no longer warm.  The darkness, too, made Gertrude restless
and they searched the storage closets vainly for candles.  When they
sat down again they could hear the panting of the engine.  The exhaust
had the thinness of extreme cold.  They were winding on heavy grades
among the Buttes of the Castle Creek country, and when the engineer
whistled for Castle station the big chime of the engine had shrunk to a
baby's treble; it was growing very cold.

As the car slowed, Glover caught an odor of heated oil, and going back
found the coddled journal smoking again, and like an honest man cursed
it heartily, then he went forward to find out what the stop was for.
He came back after some moments.  Gertrude was waiting at the door for
him.  "What did you learn?"

He held his lantern up to light her face and answered her question with
another.

"Do you think you could stand a ride in the engine cab?"

"Surely, if necessary.  Why?"

"The engine isn't steaming overly well.  When we leave this point we
get the full wind across the Sweetgrass plains.  There's no fit place
at this station for you--no place, in fact--or I should strongly advise
staying here.  But if you stayed in the car there's no certainty we
could heat it another hour.  If we sidetrack the car here with the
conductor and flagman they can stay with the operator and you and I can
take the cab into Medicine Bend."

"Whatever you think best."

"I hate to suggest it."

"It is my fault.  Shall we go now?"

"As soon as we sidetrack the car.  Meantime"--he spoke
earnestly--"remember it may mean life--bundle yourself up in everything
warm you can find."

"But you?"

"I am used to it."




CHAPTER XVII

STORM

Muffled in wraps Gertrude stood at the front door waiting to leave the
car.  It had been set in on the siding, and the engine, uncoupled, had
disappeared, but she could see shifting lights moving near.  One, the
bright, green-hooded light, her eyes followed.  She watched the furious
snow drive and sting hornet-like at its rays as it rose or swung or
circled from a long arm.  Her straining eyes had watched its coming and
going every moment since he left her.  When his figure vanished her
breath followed it, and when the green light flickered again her breath
returned.

The men were endeavoring to reset the switch for the main line contact.
Three lights were grouped close about the stand, and after the rod had
been thrown, Glover went down on his knee feeling for the points under
the snow with his hands before he could signal the engine back; one
thing he could not afford, a derail.  She saw him rise again and saw,
dimly, both his arms spread upward and outward.  She saw the tiny
lantern swing a cautious incantation, and presently, like a monster
apparition, called out of the storm the frosted outlines of the tender
loomed from the darkness.  The engine was being brought to where this
dainty girl passenger could step with least exposure from her vestibule
to its cab gangway.  With exquisite skill the unwieldy monster, forced
in spite of night and stress to do its master's bidding, was being
placed for its extraordinary guest.

Picking like a trained beast its backward steps, with cautious strength
the throbbing machine, storm-crusted and storm-beaten, hissing its
steady defiance at its enemy, halted, and Gertrude was lighted and
handed across the short path, passed up inside the canvas door by
Glover and helped to the fireman's box.

Out in the storm she heard from the conductor and flagman rough shouts
of good luck.  Glover nodded to the engineer, the fireman yelled
good-by, slammed back the furnace door, and a blinding flash of white
heat, for an instant, took Gertrude's senses; when the fireman slammed
the door to they were moving softly, the wind was singing at the
footboard sash, and the injectors were loading the boiler for the work
ahead.

A berth blanket fastened between Gertrude and the side window and a
cushion on the box made her comfortable.  Under her feet lay a second
blanket.  She had come in with a smile, but the gloom of the cab gave
no light to a smile.  Only the gauge faces high above her showed the
flash of the bull's-eyes, and the multitude of sounds overawed her.

On the opposite side she could see the engineer, padded snug in a
blouse, his head bullet-tight under a cap, the long visor hanging
beak-like over his nose.  His chin was swathed in a roll of neck-cloth,
and his eyes, whether he hooked the long lever at his side or stretched
both his arms to latch the throttle, she could never see.  Then, or
when his hand fell back to the handle of the air, as it always fell,
his profile was silent.  If she tried to catch his face he was looking
always, statue-like, ahead.

Standing behind him, Glover, with a hand on a roof-brace, steadied
himself.  In spite of the comforts he had arranged for her, Gertrude,
in her corner, felt a lonely sense of being in the way.  In her
father's car there was never lacking the waiting deference of trainmen;
in the cab the men did not even see her.

In the seclusion of the car a storm hardly made itself felt; in the cab
she seemed under the open sky.  The wind buffeted the glass at her
side, rattled in its teeth the door in front of her, drank the steaming
flame from the stack monstrously, and dashed the cinders upon the thin
roof above her head with terrifying force.  With the gathering speed of
the engine the cracking exhaust ran into a confusing din that deafened
her, and she was shaken and jolted.  The plunging of the cab grew
violent, and with every lurch her cushion shifted alarmingly.  She
resented Glover's placing himself so far away, and could not see that
he even looked toward her.  The furnace door slammed until she thought
the fireman must have thrown in coal enough to last till morning, but
unable to realize the danger of overloading the fire he stopped only
long enough to turn various valve-wheels about her feet, and with his
back bent resumed his hammering and shovelling as if his very salvation
were at stake: so, indeed, that night it was.

Gertrude watched his unremitting toil; his shifty balancing on his
footing with ever-growing amazement, but the others gave it not the
slightest heed.  The engineer looked only ahead, and Glover's face
behind him never turned.  Then Gertrude for the first time looked
through her own sash out into the storm.

Strain as she would, her vision could pierce to nothing beyond the
ceaseless sweep of the thin, wild snow across the brilliant flow of the
headlight.  She looked into the white whirl until her eyes tired, then
back to the cab, at the flying shovel of the fireman, the peaked cap of
the muffled engineer--at Glover behind him, his hand resting now on the
reverse lever hooked high at his elbow.  But some fascination drew her
eyes always back to that bright circle in the front--to the sinister
snow retreating always and always advancing; flowing always into the
headlight and out, and above it darkening into the fire that streamed
from the dripping stack.  A sudden lurch nearly threw her from her
seat, and she gave a little scream as the engine righted.  Glover
beside her like thought caught her outstretched hand.  "A curve," he
said, bending apologetically toward her ear as she reseated herself.
"Is it very trying?"

"No, except that I am in continual fear of falling from my seat--or
having to embrace the unfortunate fireman.  Oh!" she exclaimed, putting
her wrist on Glover's arm as the cab jerked.

"If I could keep out of the fireman's way, I should stand here," he
said.

"There is room on the seat here, I think, if you have not wholly
deserted me.  Oh!"

"I didn't mean to desert you.  It is because the snow is packing harder
that you are rocked more; the cab has really been riding very smoothly."

She moved forward on the box.  "Are you going to sit down?"

"Thank you."

"Oh, don't thank me.  I shall feel ever so much safer if you will."  He
tried to edge up into the corner behind her, pushing the heavy cushion
up to support her back.  As he did so she turned impatiently, but he
could not catch what she said.  "Throw it away," she repeated.  He
chucked the cushion forward below her feet and was about to sit up
where she had made room for him when the engineer put both hands to the
throttle-bar and shut off.  For the first time since they had started
Gertrude saw him look around.

"Where's Point of Rocks?" he called to Glover as they slowed, and he
looked at his watch.  "I'm afraid we're by."

"By?" echoed Glover.

"It looks so."

The fireman opened his furnace with a bang.  The engineer got stiffly
down and straightened his legs while he consulted with Glover.  Both
knew they had been running past small stations without seeing them, but
to lose Point of Rocks with its freight houses, coal chutes, and water
tanks!

They talked for a minute, the engineer climbed up to his seat, the
reverse lever was thrown over and they started cautiously back on a
hunt for the lost station, both straining their eyes for a glimpse of a
light or a building.  For twenty minutes they ran back without finding
a solitary landmark.  When they stopped, afraid to retreat farther,
Glover got out into the storm, walked back and forth, and, chilled to
the bone, plunged through the shallow drifts from side to side of the
right of way in a vain search for reckoning.  Railroad men on the
rotary, the second day after, exploded Glover's torpedoes eleven miles
west of Point of Rocks, where he had fastened them that night to the
rails to warn the ploughs asked for when leaving Sleepy Cat.

With his clothing frozen he swung up into the cab.  They were lost.
She could see his eyes now.  She could see his face.  Their perilous
state she could not understand, nor know; but she knew and understood
what she saw in his face and eyes--the resource and the daring.  She
saw her lover then, master of the elements, of the night and the
danger, and her heart went out to his strength.

The three men talked together and the fireman asked the question that
none dared answer, "What about the ploughs?"

Would Giddings hold them at Point of Rocks till the Special reported?

Would he send them out to keep the track open regardless of the
Special's reaching Point of Rocks?

Had they themselves reached Point of Rocks at all?  If past it, had
they been seen?  Were the ploughs ahead or behind?  And the fireman
asked another question; if they were by the Point tank, would the water
hold till they got to Medicine Bend?  No one could answer.

There was but one thing to do; to keep in motion.  They started slowly.
The alternatives were discussed.  Glover, pondering, cast them all up,
his awful responsibility, unconscious of her peril, watching him from
the fireman's box.  The engineer looked to Glover instinctively for
instructions and, hesitating no longer, he ordered a dash for Medicine
Bend regardless of everything.

Without a qualm the engineer opened his throttle and hooked up his bar
and the engine leaped blindly ahead into the storm.  Glover, in a few
words, told Gertrude their situation.  He made no effort to disguise
it, and to his astonishment she heard him quietly.  He cramped himself
down at her feet and muffled his head in his cap and collar to look
ahead.

They had hardly more than recovered their lost distance, and were
running very hard when a shower of heavy blows struck the cab and the
engine gave a frantic plunge.  Forgetting that he pulled no train
McGraw's eyes flew to the air gauge with the thought his train had
broken, but the pointer stood steady at the high pressure.  Again the
monster machine strained, and again the cab rose and plunged
terrifically.  The engineer leaped at the throttle like a cat;
Gertrude, jolted first backward, was thrown rudely forward on Glover's
shoulder, and the fireman slid head first into the oil cans.  Worst of
all, Glover, in saving Gertrude, put his elbow through the lower glass
of the running-board door.  The engine stopped and a blast of powdered
ice streamed in on them; their eyes met.

She tried to get her breath.  "Don't be frightened," he said; "you are
all right.  Sit perfectly still.  What have you got, Paddy?" he called
to the engineer.  The engineer did not attempt to answer; taking
lanterns, the two men climbed out of the cab to investigate.  The wind
swept through the broken pane and Gertrude slipped down from her seat
with relief, while the fireman caught up a big double handful of waste
from his box and stuffed it into the broken pane.  So intense had the
strain of silence become that she would have spoken to him, but the
sudden stop sprung the safety-valve, and overwhelmed with its roar she
could only watch him in wretched suspense shake the grate, restore his
drip can, start his injector, and hammer like one pursued by a fury at
the coal.  Since she had entered the cab this man had never for one
minute rested.

McGraw, followed by Glover, climbed back under the canvas from the
gangway.  Their clothing, moist with the steam of the cab, had
stiffened the instant the wind struck it.  McGraw hastening to the
furnace seized the chain, jerked open the door and motioned to Glover
to come to the fire, but Glover shook his head behind McGraw, his hands
on the little man's shoulders, and forced him down in front of the
fearful blaze to thaw the gloves from his aching fingers.

All the horror of the storm they were facing had passed Gertrude unfelt
until she saw the silent writhing of the crouching man.  This was three
minutes of the wind that Glover had asked her not to tempt; this was
the wind she had tempted.  She was glad that Glover, bending over the
engineer, holding one hand to the fire as he gazed into it, did not
look toward her.  From cap to boots he was frozen in snow and ice.  The
two men, without speaking, left the cab again.  They were gone longer.
Gertrude felt chills running over her.

"This is a terrible night," she said to the fireman.

"Yes, ma'am, it's pretty bad.  I don't know why they'd send white men
out into this.  I wouldn't send a coyote out."

"They are staying out so long this time," she murmured.  "Could they
possibly freeze while they are out, do you think?"

"Sure, they could; but them boys know too much for that.  Mr. Glover
stays out a week at a time in this kind; he don't care.  That man Paddy
McGraw is his head engineer in the bucking gang; he don't care--them
fellows don't care.  But I've got a wife at the Cat and two babies,
that's my fix.  I never cared neither when I was single, but if I'm
carried home now it's seven hundred and fifty relief and a thousand
dollars in the A. O. U. W., and that's the end of it for the woman.
That's why I don't like to freeze to death, ma'am.  But what can you do
if you're ordered out?  Suppose your woman is a-hangin' to your neck
like mine hung to me to-night and cryin'--whatever can you do?  You've
got to go or lose your job; and if you lose your job who'll feed your
kids then?"

McGraw's head appeared under the canvas doorway.  Glover did not follow
him and Gertrude grew alarmed: but when the canvas rattled and she saw
his cap she was waiting for him at the doorway and she put her hands
happily on his frozen sleeve: "I'm so glad."

He looked at her with humor in his big eyes.

"I was afraid without you," she added, confusedly.

He laughed.  "There's nothing to be afraid of."

"Oh, you are so cold.  Come to the fire."

"What do you think about the ploughs now?" he asked of McGraw, who had
climbed up to his seat.

"How many is there?" returned the engineer as Glover shivered before
the fire.

"There may be a thousand."

"What do you want me to do?"

"There's only one thing, Paddy.  Go through them," answered Glover,
slamming shut the furnace door.

McGraw laid his bar over, and, like one putting his house in order,
looked at his gauges and tried his valves.

"What is it?" whispered Gertrude, at Glover's side.

He turned.  "We've struck a bunch of sheep."

"Sheep?"

"In a storm they drift to keep from freezing out in the open.  These
sheep have bunched in a little cut out of the wind," he explained, as
the fireman sprinkled the roaring furnace.  "You had better get up on
your seat, Miss Brock."

"But what are you going to do?"

"Run through them."

"Run through them?  Do you mean to kill them?"

"We shall have to kill a few; there isn't much danger."

"But oh, must you mangle those poor creatures huddling in the cut out
of the storm?  Oh, don't do that."

"We can't help it."

"Oh, yes, yes, you can if you will, I am sure."  She looked at him
imploringly.

"Indeed I cannot.  Listen a moment."  He spoke steadily.  The wheels
were turning under her, the engine was backing for the dash.  "We know
now the ploughs are not ahead of us, for the cut is full of sheep and
snow.  If they are behind us we are in grave danger.  They may strike
us at any moment--that means, do you understand?  death.  We can't go
back now; there's too much snow even if the track were clear.  To stay
here means to freeze to death."  She turned restively from him.  "Could
you have thought it a joke," he asked, slowly, "to run a hundred and
seventy miles through a blizzard?"  She looked away and her sob cut him
to the heart.  "I did not mean to wound you," he murmured.  "It's only
that you don't realize what self-preservation means.  I wouldn't kill a
fly unnecessarily, but do you think I could stand it to see anyone in
this cab mangled by a plough behind us--or to see you freeze to death
if the engine should die and we're caught here twelve hours?  It is our
lives or theirs, that's all, and they will freeze anyway.  We are only
putting them out of their misery.  Come; we are starting."  He helped
her to her seat.

"Don't leave me," she faltered.  The cylinder cocks were drumming
wildly.  "Which ever way we turn there's danger," he admitted,
reluctantly, "a steam pipe might burst.  You must cover your face."
She drew the high collar of her coat around her neck and buried her
face in her muff, but he caught up a blanket and dropped it completely
over her head; then locking her arm in his own he put one heavy boot
against the furnace door, and, braced between the woman he loved and
the fire-box, nodded to the engineer--McGraw gave head.

Furred with snow, and bearded fearfully with ice; creeping like a
mountain-cat on her prey; quivering under the last pound of steam she
could carry, and hissing wildly as McGraw stung her heels again and
again from the throttle, the great engine moved down on the blocked cut.

Unable to reckon distance or resistance but by instinct, and forced to
risk everything for headway, McGraw pricked the cylinders till the
smarting engine roared.  Then, crouching like a jockey for a final
cruel spur he goaded the monster for the last time and rose in his
stirrups for the crash.

With never a slip or a stumble, hardly reeling in her ponderous frame,
the straining engine plunged headlong into the curve.  Only once, she
staggered and rolled; once only, three reckless men rose to answer
death as it knocked at their hearts; but their hour was not come, and
the engine struggled, righted, and parted the living drift from end to
end.




CHAPTER XVIII

DAYBREAK

Crouching under the mountains in the grip of the storm Medicine Bend
slept battened in blankets and beds.  All night at the Wickiup, O'Neill
and Giddings, gray with anxiety, were trying to keep track of Glover's
Special.  It was the only train out that night on the mountain
division.  For the first hour or two they kept tab on her with little
trouble, but soon reports began to falter or fail, and the despatchers
were reduced at last to mere rumors.  They dropped boards ahead of
Special 1018, only to find to their consternation that she was passing
them unheeded.

Once, at least, they knew that she herself had slipped by a night
station unseen.  Oftener, with blanched faces they would hear of her
dashing like an apparition past a frightened operator, huddled over his
lonely stove, a spectral flame shot across the fury of the sky--as if
the dread night breathing on the scrap-pile and the grave had called
from other nights and other storms a wraith of riven engines and
slaughtered men to one last phantom race with death and the wind.

Within two hours of division headquarters a train ran lost--lost as
completely as if she were crossing the Sweetgrass plains on pony trails
instead of steel rails.  Not once but a dozen times McGraw and Glover,
pawning their lives, left the cab with their lanterns in a vain
endeavor to locate a station, a siding, a rock.  Numbed and bitten at
last with useless exposure they cast effort to the wind, gave the
engine like a lost horse her head, and ran through everything for
headquarters and life.  Consultation was abandoned, worry put away, one
good chance set against every other chance and taken in silence.

At five o'clock that morning despatchers and night men under the
Wickiup gables, sitting moodily around the big stove, sprang to their
feet together.  From up the distant gorge, dying far on the gale, came
the long chime blast of an engine whistle; it was the lost Special.

They crowded to the windows to dispute and listen.  Again the heavy
chime was sprung and a second blast, lasting and defiant, reached the
Wickiup--McGraw was whistling for the upper yard and the long night of
anxiety was ended.  Unable to see a car length into the storm howling
down the yard, save where the big arc-lights of the platform glared
above the semaphores, the men swarmed to the windows to catch a glimpse
of the belated engine.  When the rays of its electric headlight pierced
the Western night they shouted like boys, ran to the telephones, and
while the roundhouse, the superintendent, and the master-mechanic were
getting the news the Special engine steamed slowly into sight through
the whirling snow and stopped at the semaphore.  So a liner shaken in
the teeth of a winter storm, battered by heading seas, and swept by
stiffening spray, rides at last, ice-bound, staggering, majestic, into
port.

The moment they struck the mountain-path into the Bend, McGraw and
Glover caught their bearings by the curves, and Glover, standing at
Gertrude's elbow, told her they were safe.

Not until he had laughed into her ear something that the silent McGraw,
lying on his back under the engine with a wrench, when he confessed he
never expected to see Medicine Bend again, had said of her own splendid
courage did the flood spring from her eyes.

When Glover added that they were entering the gorge, and laughingly
asked if she would not like to sound the whistle for the yard limits,
she smiled through tears and gave him her hand to be helped down,
cramped and chilled, from her corner.

At the moment that she left the cab she faltered again.  McGraw
stripped his cap from his head as she turned to speak.  She took from
the breast of her blouse her watch, dainty as a jewel, and begged him
to take it, but he would not.

She drew her glove and stripped from her finger a ring.

"This is for your wife," she said, pressing it into his hand.

"I have no wife."

"Your sister."

"Nor sister."

"Keep it for your bride," she whispered, retreating.  "It is yours.
Good-by, good-by!"

She sprang from the gangway to Glover's arms and the snow.  The storm
drove pitilessly down the bare street as she clung to his side and
tried to walk the half block to the hotel.  The wind, even for a single
minute, was deadly to face.  No light, no life was anywhere visible.
He led her along the lee of the low street buildings, and mindful of
the struggle it was to make headway at all turned half between her and
the wind to give her the shelter of his shoulders, halting as she
stumbled to encourage her anew.  He saw then that she was struggling in
the darkness for breath, and without a word he bent over her, took her
up like a child and started on, carrying her in his arms.

If he frightened her she gave no sign.  She held herself for an instant
uncertain and aloof, though she could not but feel the heavy draught
she made on his strength.  The wind stung her cheeks; her breath caught
again in her throat and she heard him implore her to turn her face, to
turn it from the wind.  He stumbled as he spoke, and as she shielded
her face from the deadly cold, one hand slipped from her muff.
Reaching around his head she drew his storm-cap more closely down with
her fingers.  When he thanked her she tried to speak and could not, but
her glove rested an instant where the wind struck his cheek; then her
head hid upon his shoulder and her arms wound slowly and tightly around
his neck.

He kicked open the door of the hotel with one blow of his foot and set
her down inside.

In the warm dark office, breathing unsteadily, they faced each other.
"Can you, Gertrude, marry that man and break my heart?"  He caught up
her two hands with his words.

"No," she answered, brokenly.  "Are you sure you are not frozen--ears
or cheeks or hands?"

"You won't marry him, Gertrude, and break my heart?  Tell me you won't
marry him."

"No, I won't."

"Tell me again."

"Shall I tell you everything?"

"If you have mercy for me as I have love for you."

"I ran away from him to-night.  He came out with the directors and
telegraphed he would be at the Springs in the afternoon for his answer,
and--I ran away.  He has his answer long ago and I would not see him."

"Brave girl!"

"Oh, I wasn't brave, I was a dreadful coward.  But I thought----"

"What?"

"--I could be brave, if I found as brave a man--as you."

"Gertrude, if I kiss you I never can give you up.  Do you understand
what that means?  I never in life or death can give you up, Gertrude,
do you understand me?"

She was crying on his shoulder.  "Oh, yes, I understand," and he heard
from her lips the maddening sweetness of his boy name.  "I understand,"
she sobbed.  "I don't care, Ab--if only--, you will be kind to me."

It was only a moment later--her head had not yet escaped from his arm,
for Glover found for the first time that it is one thing to get leave
to kiss a lovely woman and wholly another to get the necessary action
on the conscience-stricken creature--she had not yet, I say, escaped,
when a locomotive whistle was borne from the storm faintly in on their
ears.  To her it meant nothing, but she felt him start.  "What is it?"
she whispered.

"The ploughs!"

"The ploughs?"

"The snow-ploughs that followed us.  Twenty minutes behind--twenty
minutes between us and death, Gertrude, in that blizzard, think of it.
That must mean we are to live."

The solemn thought naturally suggested, to Glover at least, a
resumption of the status quo, but as he was locating, in the dark,
there came from behind the stove a mild cough.  The effect on the
construction engineer of the whole blizzard was to that cough as
nothing.  Inly raging he seated Gertrude--indeed, she sunk quite
faintly into a chair, and starting for the stove Glover dragged from
behind it Solomon Battershawl.  "What are you doing here?" demanded
Glover, savagely.

"I'm night clerk, Mr. Glover--ow----"

"Night clerk?  Very well, Solomon," muttered Glover, grimly, "take this
young lady to the warmest room in the house at once."

"Every room's full, Mr. Glover.  Trains were all tied up last night."

"Then show her to my room."

"Your room's occupied."

"My room occupied, you villain?  What do you mean?  Throw out whoever's
in it instantly."

"Mr. Brock is in your room."

Gertrude had come over to the stove.

"Mr. Brock!"

"My father!"

"Yes, sir; yes, ma'am."

Gertrude and Glover looked at one another.

"Mr. Blood brought him up last night," said Solomon.

"Where's Mr. Blood?"

"He hasn't come up from the Wickiup.  They said he was worried over a
special from the Cat that was caught in the blizzard.  Your laundry
came in all right last night, Mr. Glover----"

"Hang the laundry."

"I paid for it."

"Will you cease your gabble?  If Mr. Blood's room is empty take Miss
Block up there and rouse a chambermaid instantly to attend her.  Do you
hear?"

"Shall I throw out Mr. Brock?"

"Let him alone, stupid.  What's the matter with the lights?"

"The wires are down."

"Get a candle for Miss Brock.  Now, will you make haste?"  Solomon,
when he heard the name, stared at Miss Brock--but when he recognized
her he started without argument and was gone an unconscionably long
time.

They sat down where they could feast on each other's eyes in the glow
of the coal-stove.

"You have looked so worried all night," said Gertrude, in love's
solicitude; "were you afraid we should be lost?"

"No, I didn't intend we should be lost."

"What was it?  What is it that makes you so careworn?"

"Nothing special."

"But you mustn't have any secrets from me now.  What is it?"

"Do you want to know?"

"Yes."

"I couldn't find time to get shaved before we left Sleepy Cat----"

She rose with both hands uplifted: "Shades of vain heroes!  Have I
wasted my sympathy all night on a man who has been saving my life with
perfect calmness and worrying because he couldn't get shaved?"

"Can you dispassionately say that I don't need barbering?"

"No.  But this is what I will say, silly fellow--you don't know much
about a woman's heart, do you, Ab?  When I first looked at you I
thought you were the homeliest man I had ever seen, do you know that?"

Glover fingered his offending chin and looked at her somewhat
pathetically.

"But last night"--her quick mouth was so eloquent--"last night I
watched you.  I saw your face lighted by the anger of the storm.  I
knew then what those heavy, homely lines below your eyes were
for--strength.  And I saw your eyes, to me so dull at first, wake and
fill with such a light and burn so steadily hour after hour that I knew
I had never seen eyes like yours.  I knew you would save me--that is
what made me so brave, goosie.  Sit right where you are, please."

She slipped out of her chair; he pursued.  "If you will say such things
and then run into the dark corners," he muttered.  But when Solomon
appeared with a water-pitcher they were ready for him.

"Now what has kept you all this time?" glared Glover, insincerely.

"I couldn't find any ice-water."

"Ice-water!"

"Every pipe is froze solid, but I chopped up some ice and brought that."

"Ice-water, you double-dyed idiot!  Go get your candle."

"Yes, sir."

"Don't be so cross," whispered Gertrude.  "You were so short with that
poor fireman to-night, and he told me such a pitiful story about being
ordered out and having to go or lose his position----"

"Did Foley tell you that?"

"Yes."

"Surely, nerve runs in his family as well as his cousin's.  The rascal
came because I hung up a little purse for a fireman at the roundhouse,
and he nearly had a fight with another fellow that wanted to cut him
out of the job."

"Such a cheat!  How much did you offer him?"

"Not very much."

"But how much?"

"Twenty-five dollars, and, by heavens, he dunned me for it just after
we started."

"But his poor wife hung to his neck when he left----"

"No doubt.  She has pulled all the hair out of his head twice that I
know of----"

"And I gave him my purse with all the money I had in it."

"How much?"

"About three hundred dollars."

"Three hundred dollars!  Foley will lay off two months and take the
whole family back to Pittsburg.  Now, here's your candle and chopped
ice and Mr. Battershawl."

Gertrude turned for a last whisper--"What should you say if papa came
down?"

"What should I say?  He would probably say, 'Mr. Glover, I have your
room.'  'Don't mention it,' I should reply, 'I have your daughter.'"
But Mr. Brock did not come down.

Barely half an hour later, while Glover waited with anxiety at the foot
of the stairs, Gertrude reappeared, and with her loveliness all new,
walked shyly and haltingly down each step toward him.

Not a soul about the hotel office had stirred, and Glover led her to
the retired little parlor, which was warm and dim, to reassure himself
that the fluttering girl was all his own.  Unable to credit the fulness
of their own happiness they sat confiding to each other all the sweet
trifles, now made doubly sweet, of their strange acquaintance.  Before
six o'clock, and while their seclusion was still their own, a hot
breakfast was served to them where they sat, and day broke on storm
without and lovers within.




CHAPTER XIX

SUSPENSE

What shapes the legends of the Wickiup?  Is it because in the winter
night the wind never sleeps in the gorge above the headquarters shack
that despatchers talk yet of a wind that froze the wolf and the sheep
and the herder to marble together?  Is it because McGraw runs no more
that switchmen tell of the run he made over Sweetgrass the night he
sent a plough through eight hundred head of sheep in less than a tenth
as many seconds?  Could the night that laid the horse and the hunter
side by side in the Spider Park drift have been wildest of all wild
mountain nights?  Or is it because Gertrude Brock and her railroad
lover rode out its storm together that mountain men say there was never
a storm like that?  What shapes the Wickiup legends?

For three days Medicine Bend did not see the sun.  Veering uneasily,
springing from every quarter at once, the wind wedged the gray clouds
up the mountain sides only to roll them like avalanches down the ragged
passes.  At the end of the week snow was falling.

Not until the morning of the third day when reports came in of the
unheard-of temperatures in the North and West did the weather cause
real apprehension.  The division never had been in such a position to
protect its winter traffic--for a year Callahan, Blood, and Glover had
been overhauling and assembling the old and the new bucking equipment.
But the wind settled at last in the northeast, and when it stilled the
mercury sunk, and when it rose the snow fell, roofing the sheds on the
passes, levelling the lower gulches, and piling up reserves along the
cuts.

The first trouble came on the main line in the Heart Mountains, and
Morris Blood, with the roadmaster of the sixth district and Benedict
Morgan, got after it with a crew together.

Between the C bridge and Potter's Gap they spent two days with a rotary
and a flanger and three consolidated engines and went home, leaving
everything swept clean, only to learn in the morning that west of the
gap there were four feet of fresh snow clear to Rozelle.  From the
northern ranges came unusual reports of the continued severity of the
storms.  It was hardly a series of storms, for that winter the first
storm that crossed the line lasted three weeks.

In the interval Bucks was holding to the directors at Medicine Bend,
waiting for the weather to settle enough to send them to the coast.
The Pittsburg party waited at Glen Tarn for Mr. Brock's word to join
him.  At the Bend, Gertrude made love to her father, forfending the
awful moment of disclosure that must come, and the cause of her hidden
happiness and trouble strenuously made love to her.

To the joy of the conspirators, Bucks held Glover closely at
headquarters, keeping him closeted for long periods on the estimates
that were in final cooking for the directors; and so dense are great
people and so keen the simple, that Gertrude held her lone seat of
honor beside her father, at the table of the great financiers in the
dining-room, without the remotest suspicion on their parts that the
superb woman meeting them three times a day was carrying on a
proudly-hidden love affair with the muscular, absorbed-looking man who
sat alone across the aisle.

But the asthmatic old pastry cook, who weighed at least two hundred and
thirty pounds and had not even seen the inside of the dining-room for
three years, was thoroughly posted on every observable phase of the
affair down to the dessert orders; and no one acquainted with the frank
profanity of a mountain meat cook will doubt that the best of
everything went hot from the range to Glover and Gertrude.  Dollar tips
and five-dollar tips from Eastern epicures could not change this, for
the meals were served by waitresses who felt a personal responsibility
in the issue of the pretty affair of the heart.

The whole second floor of the little hotel had been reserved for the
directors' party, and among the rooms was the parlor.  There Glover
called regularly every evening on Mr. Brock, who, somewhat at a loss to
understand the young man's interest, excused himself after the first
few minutes and left Gertrude to entertain the gentleman who had been
so kind to everybody that she could not be discourteous even if he was
somewhat tedious.

One night after a particularly happy evening near the piano for
Gertrude and Glover, Mr. Brock, re-entering the parlor, found the
somewhat tedious gentleman bending very low, as his daughter said
good-night, over her hand; in fact, the gentleman that had been so kind
to everybody was kissing it.

When Glover recovered his perpendicular the cold magnate of the West
End stood between the folding doors looking directly at him.  If the
owner of several trunk lines expected his look to inspire consternation
he was disappointed.  Each of the lovers feared but one person in the
world; that was the other.  Gertrude, with perhaps an extra touch of
dignity, put her compromised hand to her belt for her handkerchief.
Glover finished the sentence he was in the middle of--"If I am not
ordered out.  Good-night."

But when Mr. Brock had turned abruptly on his heel and disappeared
between the portieres they certainly did look at one another.

"Have I got you into trouble now?" murmured Glover, penitently.
Uneasiness was apparent in her expression, but with her back to the
piano Gertrude stood steadfast.

"Not," she said, with serious tenderness, "just now.  Don't you know?
It was the first, the very first, day you looked into my eyes, dear,
that you got me into trouble."

Her pathetic sweetness moved him.  Then he flamed with determination.
He would take the burden on himself--would face her father at once, but
she hushed him in real alarm and said, that battle she must fight
unaided; it was after all only a little one, she whispered, after the
one she had fought with herself.  But he knew she glossed over her
anxiety, for when he withdrew her eyes looked tears though they shed
none.

In the morning there were two vacancies at the breakfast table; neither
Gertrude nor her father appeared.  When Glover returned to the hotel at
five o'clock the first person he saw was Mrs. Whitney.  She and Marie,
with the doctor and Allen Harrison, had arrived on the first train out
of the Springs in four days, and Mrs. Whitney's greeting of Glover in
the office was disconcerting.  It scarcely needed Gertrude's face at
dinner, as she tried to brave the storm that had set in, or her
reluctant admission when she saw him as she passed up to her room that
she and her father had been up nearly the whole of the night before, to
complete his depression.

Every effort he made during the evening to speak to Gertrude was balked
by some untoward circumstance, but about nine o'clock they met on the
parlor floor and Glover led her to the elevator, which was being run
that night by Solomon Battershawl.  Solomon lifted them to the top
floor and made busy at the end of the hall while they had five short
minutes.  When they descended he knew what she was facing.  Even Marie,
the one friend he thought he had in the family, had taken a stand
against them, and her father was deaf to every appeal.

They parted, depressed, with only a hand pressure, a look and a whisper
of constancy.  At midnight, as Glover lay thinking, a crew caller
rapped at his door.  He brought a message and held his electric
pocket-lamp near, while Glover, without getting up, read the telegram.
It was from Bucks asking if he could take a rotary at once into the
Heart Mountains.

Glover knew snow had been falling steadily on the main line for two
days.  East of the middle range it was nothing but extreme cold, west
it had been one long storm.  Morris Blood was at Goose River.  The
message was not an order; but on the division there was no one else
available at the moment that could handle safely such a battery of
engines as would be needed to bore the drifts west of the sheds.
Moreover, Glover knew how Bucks had chafed under the conditions that
kept the directors on his hands.  They were impatient to get to the
coast, and the general manager was anxious to be rid of them as soon as
there should be some certainty of getting them safely over the
mountains.

Glover, on the back of the telegram, scrawled a note to Crosby, the
master-mechanic, and turned over not to sleep, but to think--and to
think, not of the work before him, but of her and of her situation.  A
roundhouse caller roused him at half-past three with word that the snow
battery was marked up for four o'clock.  He rose, dressed deliberately
and carefully for the exposure ahead, and sat down before a candle to
tell Gertrude, in a note, when he hoped to be back.

Locking his trunk when he had done, he snuffed out the candle and
closed his room door behind him.  The hall was dark, but he knew its
turns, and the carpeted stairs gave no sound as he walked down.  At the
second floor there were two stairways by which he could descend.  He
looked up the dim corridor toward where she slept.  Somehow he could
not make up his mind to leave without passing her room.

His heavy tread was noiseless, and at her door he paused and put his
hand uncertainly upon the casing.  In the darkness his head bent an
instant on his outstretched arm--it had never before been hard to go;
then he turned and walked softly away.


At the breakfast table and at the dinner table the talk was of the
snow.  The evening paper contained a column of despatches concerning
the blockade, now serious, in the eighth district.  Half the first page
was given to alarming reports from the cattle ranges.  Two
mail-carriers were reported lost in the Sweetgrass country, and a ski
runner from Fort Steadman, which had been cut off for eight days, told
of thirty-five feet of snow in the Whitewater hills.

Sleepy Cat reported eighteen inches of fresh snow, and a second delayed
despatch under the same date-line reported that a bucking special from
Medicine Bend, composed of a rotary, a flanger, and five locomotives
had passed that point at 9 A.M. for the eighth district.

Gertrude found no interest in the news or the discussion.  She could
only wonder why she did not see Glover during the day, and when he made
no appearance at dinner she grew sick with uncertainty.  Leaving the
dining-room ahead of the party in some vague hope of seeing him,
Solomon hurried up with the note that Glover had left to be given her
in the morning.  The boy had gone off duty before she left her room and
had over-slept, but instead of waiting for his apologies she hastened
to her room and locked her door to devour her lover's words.  She saw
that he had written her in the dead of night to explain his going, and
to say good-by.  Bucks' message he had enclosed.  "But I shall work
very hard every hour I am gone to get back the sooner," he promised,
"and if you hear of the snow flying over the peaks on the West End you
will know that I am behind it and headed straight for you."

When Marie and Mrs. Whitney came up, Gertrude sat calmly before the
grate fire, but the note lay hidden over her heart, for in it he had
whispered that while he was away every night at eight o'clock and every
morning, no matter where she should be, or what doing, he should kiss
her lips and her eyes as he had kissed them that first morning in the
dark, warm office.  When eight o'clock came her aunt and her sister sat
with her; but Gertrude at eight o'clock, musing, was with her lover and
her lips and eyes again were his to do with what he would.  Later
Doctor Lanning came in and she roused to hear the news about the snow.
Between Sleepy Cat and Bear Dance two passenger trains were stalled,
and on Blackbird hill the snow was reported four feet deep on the level.

When the doctor had gone and Marie had retired, Gertrude's aunt talked
to her seriously about her father, whose almost frantic condition over
what he called Gertrude's infatuation was alarming.

Her aunt explained how her final refusal of Allen Harrison, a
connection on which her father had set his heart, might result in the
total disruption of the plans which held so mighty interests together;
and how impossible it was that he should ever consent to her throwing
herself away on an obscure Western man.

Only occasionally would Gertrude interrupt.  "Don't strip the poor man
of everything, auntie.  If it must come to family--the De Gallons and
Cirodes and Glovers were lords of the Mississippi when our Hessian
forefathers were hiding from Washington in the Trenton hazelbushes."

She could meet her aunt's fears with jests and her tears with smiles
until the worried lady chancing on a deeper chord disarmed her.  "You
know you are my pet, Gertrude.  I am your foster-mother, dear, and I
have tried to be mother to you and Marie, and sister to my brother
every day of my life since your mother died.  And if you----"

Then Gertrude's arms would enfold her and her head hide on her aunt's
shoulder, and they would part utterly miserable.

One morning when Gertrude woke it was snowing and Medicine Bend was cut
completely off from the western end of the division.  The cold in the
desert districts had made it impossible to move freights.  During the
night they had been snowed in on sidings all the way from Sleepy Cat
east.  By night every wire was down; the last message in was a private
one from Glover, with the ploughs, dated at Nine Mile.

Solomon brought the telegram up to Gertrude with the intimation that,
confidentially, Mr. Blood's assistant, in charge of the Wickiup, would
be glad to hear any news it might contain about the blockade, as
communication was now cut entirely off.

Gertrude told the messenger only that she understood the blockade in
the eighth district had been lifted and that the ploughs were headed
east.  Then as the lad looked wonderingly at her, she started.  Have I,
she asked herself, already become a part of this life, that they come
to me for information?  But she did not add that the signer of the
message had promised to be with her in twenty-four hours.

That day for the first time in eighteen years, no trains ran in or out
of Medicine Bend, and an entire regiment of cavalry bound for the
Philippines was known to be buried in a snowdrift near San Pete.  The
big hotel swarmed with snow-bound travellers.  The snow fell all day,
but to Gertrude's relief her father and the men of the party were at
the Wickiup with Bucks, who had come in during the night with
reinforcements from McCloud.  Unfortunately, the batteries that
followed him were compelled to double about next morning to open the
line back across the plains.

The gravity of the situation about her, the spectacle of the struggle,
now vast and all absorbing, made by the operating department to cope
with the storm and cold, and the anxieties of her own position plunged
Gertrude into a gloom she had never before conceived of.  Her aunt's
forebodings and tears, her father's unbending silence and aloofness,
made escape from her depression impossible.  When Solomon appeared she
besought him surreptitiously for news, but though Solomon fairly
staggered with the responsibilities of his position he could supply
nothing beyond rumors--rumors all tending to magnify the reliance
placed on Glover's capabilities in stress of this sort, but not at the
moment definitely locating him.

Next morning the creeping eastern light had not yet entered her room
when a timid rap aroused her.  Solomon was outside the door with news.
"The ploughs will be here in an hour," he whispered.

"The ploughs?"

Solomon couldn't resist the low appeal for more definite word.  He had
no information more than he had given, but he bravely journalized, "Mr.
Glover and everybody, ma'am."

"Oh, thank you, Solomon."

She rose, with wings beating love across the miles that separated him
from her.  Day with its perplexities may beset, the stars bring
sometimes only grief; but to lovers morning brings always joy, because
it brings hope.  She detained Solomon a moment.  A resolve fixed itself
at once in her heart; to greet her lover the instant he arrived.  She
could dress and slip down to the station and back before the others
awoke even.  It was hazardous, but what venture is less attractive for
a hazard if it bring a lover?  She made her rapid toilet with affection
in her supple fingers, and welcome glowing in her quick eyes, and she
left her room with the utmost care.  Enveloped in the Newmarket,
because he loved it, her hands in her big muff, and her cheeks closely
veiled, she joined Solomon in the reception room downstairs.

The morning was gray with a snow fog hanging low, and feathery flakes
were sinking upon the whitened street.  "Listen!" cried the boy,
excitedly, as they neared the Wickiup.  From somewhere in the sky came
the faint scream of a locomotive whistle.  "That's them, all right.
Gee!  I'd like to buck snow."

"Would you?"

"Would I?  Wouldn't you?"

A hundred men were strung along the platform, and a sharper blast
echoed across the upper flat.  "There they are!" cried Solomon,
pressing forward.  Gertrude saw a huge snow-covered monster swing
heavily around the yard hill.  The ploughs were at hand.  The head
engine whistled again, those in the battery took up the signal, and
heeled in snow they bore down on the Wickiup whistling a chorus.
Before the long battery had halted, the men about Gertrude were running
toward the cabs, cheering.  Many men poured out of the battered
ice-bound cars at the end of the string.  While Gertrude's eyes
strained with expectation a collie dog shot headlong to the platform
from the steps of the hind caboose, and wheeling about, barked madly
until, last of three men together, Glover, carrying his little bag,
swung down, and listening to his companions, walked leisurely forward.

Swayed by the excitement which she did not fully understand all about
her, Gertrude, with swimming eyes, saw Solomon dash toward Glover and
catch his bag.  As the boy spoke to him she saw Glover's head lift in
the deliberate surprise she knew so well.  She felt his wandering eyes
bend upon her, and his hand rose in suppressed joyfulness.

Doubt, care, anxiety, fled before that gesture.  Stumah, wild with
delight, bounded at her, and before she could greet him, Glover, a
giant in his wrappings, was bending over her, his eyes burning through
the veil that hid her own.  She heard without comprehending his words;
she asked questions without knowing she asked, because his hand so
tightly clasped hers.

They walked up the platform and he stopped but once; to speak to the
snugly clad man that got down from the head engine.  Gertrude
recognized the good-natured profile under the long cap; Paddy McGraw
lifted his visor as she advanced and with a happy laugh greeted him.

Smiling at her welcome he drew off his glove and took from an inner
pocket her ring and held it out on his hand.  "I am taking good care of
my souvenir."

"I hope you are taking good care of yourself," Gertrude responded,
"because every time I ride in the mountains, Mr. McGraw, I want you for
engineer."

Glover was saying something to her as they turned away together, but
she gave no heed to his meaning.  She caught only the low, pretty
uncertainty in his utterance, the unfailing little break that she loved
in his tone.

He was saying, "Yes--some of it thirty feet.  Morris Blood is
tunnelling on the Pilot branch this morning; it's bad up there, but the
main line is clear from end to end.  Surely, you never looked so sweet
in your life.  Gertrude, Gertrude, you're a beautiful girl.  Do you
know that?  What are those fellows shouting about?  Me?  Not at all.
They're cheering you."




CHAPTER XX

DEEPENING WATERS

The stolen interview of the early morning was the consolation of the
day.  Gertrude confided a resolve to Glover.  She had thought it all
out and he must, she said, talk to her father.  Nothing would ever ever
come of a situation in which the two never met.  The terrible problem
was how to arrange the interview.  Her father had already declined to
meet Glover at all.  Moreover, Mr. Brock had a fund of silence that
approximated absolute zero, and Gertrude dreaded the result if Glover,
in presenting his case, should stop at any point and succumb to the
chill.

During such intervals as they managed to meet, the lovers could discuss
nothing but the crisis that confronted them.  The definite clearing of
the line meant perhaps an early separation and something must be done,
if ever, at once.

In the evening Gertrude made a long appeal to her aunt to intercede for
her, and another to Marie, who, softening somewhat, had spent half an
hour before dinner in discussing the situation calmly with Glover; but
over the proposed interview Marie shook her head.  She had great
influence with her father, but candidly owned she should dread facing
him on a matter he had definitely declined to discuss.

They parted at night without light on their difficulties.  In the
morning Glover made several ineffectual efforts to see Gertrude early.
He had an idea that they had forgotten the one who could advise and
help them better than any other--his friend and patron, Bucks.

The second vice-president was now closer in a business way to Mr. Brock
than anyone else in the world.  They were friends of very early days,
of days when they were laying together the foundations of their
careers.  It was Bucks who had shown Mr. Brock the stupendous
possibilities in reorganizing the system, who was responsible for his
enormous investment, and each reposed in the other entire confidence.
Gertrude constantly contended that it was only a question of her
father's really knowing Glover, and that if her lover could be put, as
she knew him, before her father, he must certainly give way.  Why not,
then, take Bucks into their confidence?

It seemed like light from heaven to Glover, and he was talking to
Gertrude when there came a rap at the door of the parlor and a
messenger entered with a long despatch from Callahan at Sleepy Cat.

The message was marked delayed in transmission.  Glover walked with it
to the window and read:

"Doubleday's outfit wrecked early this morning on Pilot Hill while
bucking.  Head engine, the 927, McGraw, partly off track.  Tender
crushed the cab.  Doubleday instantly killed and McGraw badly hurt.
Morris Blood is reported to have been in the cab also, but cannot be
found.  Have sent Doubleday and McGraw to Medicine Bend in my car and
am starting with wrecking crew for the Hill."

"What is it?" murmured Gertrude, watching her lover's face.  He studied
the telegram a long time and she came to his side.  He raised his eyes
from the paper in his hand and looked out of the window.  "What is it?"
she whispered.

"Pilot Hill."

"I do not understand, dearest."

"A wreck."

"Oh, is it serious?"

His eyes fell again on the death message.  "Morris Blood was in it and
they can't find him."

"Oh, oh."

"A bad place; a bad, bad place."  He spoke, absently, then his eyes
turned upon her with inexpressible tenderness.

"But why can't they find him, dearest?"

"The track is blasted out of the mountain side for half a mile.  Bucks
said it would be a graveyard, but I couldn't get to the mines in any
other way.  Gertrude, I must go to the Wickiup at once to get further
news.  This message has been delayed, the wires are not right yet."

"Will you come back soon?"

"Just the minute I can get definite news about Morris.  In half an
hour, probably."

She tried to comfort him when he left her.  She knew of the deep
attachment between the two men, and she encouraged her lover to hope
for the best.  Not until he had gone did she fully realize how deeply
he was moved.  At the window she watched him walk hurriedly down the
street, and as he disappeared, reflected that she had never seen such
an expression on his face as when he read the telegram.

The half hour went while she reflected.  Going downstairs she found the
news of the wreck had spread about the hotel, and widely exaggerated
accounts of the disaster were being discussed.  Mrs. Whitney and Marie
were out sleighriding, and by the time the half hour had passed without
word from Glover, Gertrude gave way to her restlessness.  She had a
telegram to send to New York--an order for bonbons--and she determined
to walk down to the Wickiup to send it; she might, she thought, see
Glover and hear his news sooner.

When she approached the headquarters building unusual numbers of
railroad men were grouped on the platform, talking.  Messengers hurried
to and from the roundhouse.  A blown engine attached to a day coach was
standing near and men were passing in and out of the car.  Gertrude
made her way to the stairs unobserved, walked leisurely up to the
telegraph office and sent her message.  The long corridors of the
building, gloomy even on bright days, were quite dark as she left the
operators' room and walked slowly toward the quarters of the
construction department.

The door of the large anteroom was open and the room empty.  Gertrude
entered hesitatingly and looked toward Glover's office.  His door also
was ajar, but no one was within.  The sound of voices came from a
connecting room and she at once distinguished Glover's tones.  It was
justification: with her coin purse she tapped lightly on the door
casing, and getting no response stepped inside the office and slipped
into a chair beside his desk to await him.  The voices came from a room
leading to Callahan's apartments.

Glover was asking questions, and a man whose voice she could now hear
breaking with sobs, was answering.  "Are you sure your signals were
right?" she heard Glover ask slowly and earnestly; and again,
patiently, "how could you be doubled up without the flanger's leaving
the track?" Then the man would repeat his story.

"You must have had too much behind you," Glover said once.

"Too much?" echoed the man, frantically.  "Seven engines behind us all
day yesterday.  Paddy told him the minute he got in the cab she
wouldn't never stand it.  He told him it as plain as a man could tell a
man.  Then because we went through a thousand feet in the gap like
cheese he ordered us up the hill.  When we struck the big drift it was
slicing rock, Mr. Glover.  Paddy told him she wouldn't never stand it.
The very first push we let go in a hundred feet with the engine
churning her damned drivers off.  We went into it twice that way.  I
could see it was shoving the tender up in the air every time and told
Doubleday--oh, if you'd been there!  The next time we sent the plough
through the first crust and drove a wind-pocket maybe forty or fifty
yards and hit the ice with the seven engines jamming into us.  My God!
she doubled up like a jack-knife--Pat, Pat, Pat."

"Can you recollect where Blood was standing when you buckled?"

"In the right gangway."  There was a pause.  "He must have dropped,"
she heard Glover say.

"Then he'll never drop again, Mr. Glover, for if he slipped off the
ties he'd drop a thousand feet."

"The heaviest snow is right at the top of the hill?"

"Yes, sir."

"If we can cross the hill we can find him anyway."

"Don't try to get across that hill till you put in five hundred
shovellers, Mr. Glover."

"That would take a week.  If he's alive we must get him within
twenty-four hours.  He may freeze to death to-night."

"Don't try to cross that hill with a plough, Mr. Glover.  Mind my
words.  It's no use.  I've bucked with you many a time--you know that."

"Yes."

"You're going to your death when you try that."

"There's the doctor now, Foley," Glover answered.  "Let him look you
over carefully.  Come this way."

The voices receded.  Listening to the talk, little of which she
understood, a growing fear had come over Gertrude.  Her eyes had
pierced the gray light about her, and as she heard Glover walk away she
rose hurriedly and stepped to the doorway to detain him.  Glover had
disappeared, but before her, stretched on the couch back of the table,
lay McGraw.  She knew him instantly, and so strangely did the gloom
shroud his features that his steady eyes seemed looking straight at
her.  She divined that he had been brought back hurt.  A chill passed
over her, a horror.  She hesitated a moment, and, fascinated, stepped
closer; then she knew she was staring at the dead.


Terror-stricken and with sinking strength she made her way to the hotel
and slipped up to the parlor.  Throwing off her wraps she went to the
window; Glover was coming up the street.  There was only a moment in
which to collect herself.  She hastened to her bedroom, wet her
forehead with cologne, and at her mirror her fingers ran tremblingly
over the coils of her hair.  She caught up a fresh handkerchief for her
girdle, looked for an instant appealingly into her own eyes and closed
them to think.  Glover rapped.

She met him with a smile that she knew would stagger his fond eyes.
She drugged his ear with a low-voiced greeting.  "You are late,
dearest."

He looked at her and caught her hands.  As his head bent she let her
lips lie in his kiss, and let his arm find her waist as he kissed her
deeply again.  They walked together toward the fireplace, and when she
saw the sadness of his face fear in her heart gave way to pity.  "What
is it?" she whispered.  "Tell me."

"The car has come with Doubleday and McGraw, Gertrude.  The wreck was
terribly fatal.  Morris Blood must have jumped from the cab.  The track
I have told you is blasted there out of the cheek of the mountain, and
it's impossible to tell what his fate may be: but if he is alive I must
find him.  There is a good hope, I believe, for Morris; he is a man to
squeeze through on a narrow chance.  And Gertrude--I couldn't tell you
if I didn't think you had a right to know everything I know.  It breaks
my heart to speak of it--McGraw is dead."

"I am so glad you told me the truth," she trembled, "for I knew it----"

"Knew it?"  She confessed, hastily, how her anxiety had led her to his
office, and of the terrible shock she had brought on herself.  "But now
I know you would not deceive me," she added; "that is why I love you,
because you are always honest and true.  And do you love me, as you
have told me, more than all the world?"

"More than all the world, Gertrude.  Why do you look so?  You are
trembling."

"Have you come to say good-by?"

"Only for a day or two, darling: till I can find Morris, then I come
straight back to you."

"You, too, may be killed?"

"No, no."

"But I heard the man telling you you would go to your death if you
attempted to cross that hill with a plough.  Be honest with me; you are
risking your life."

"Only as I have risked it almost every day since I came into the
mountains."

"But now--now--doesn't it mean something else?  Think what it means to
me--your life.  Think what will become of me if you should be killed in
trying to open that hill--if you should fall over a precipice as Morris
Blood has fallen and lies now probably dead.  Don't go.  Don't go, this
time.  You have promised me you would leave the mountains, haven't you?
Don't risk all, dearest, all I have on earth, in an attempt that may
utterly fail and add one more precious life to the lives now
sacrificed.  You do heed me, darling, don't you?"

She had disengaged herself to plead; to look directly up into his
perplexed eyes.  He leaned an arm on the mantel, staggered.  His eyes
followed hers in every word she spoke, and when she ceased he stared
blankly at the fire.

"Heed you?" he answered, haltingly.  "Heed you?  You are all in the
world that I have to heed.  My only wish is your happiness; to die for
it, Gertrude, wouldn't be much----"

"All, all I ask is that you will live for it."

"Worthless as I am, I have asked you to put that happiness in my
keeping--do you think your lightest word could pass me unheeded?  But
to this, my dearest Gertrude, every instinct of manhood binds me--to go
to my friend in danger."

"If you go you will take every desperate chance to accomplish your end.
Ah, I know you better than you know yourself.  Ab, Ab, my darling, my
lover, listen to me.  Don't; don't go."

When he spoke she would not have known his voice.  "Can I let him die
there like a dog on the mountain side?  Can't you see what I haven't
words to explain as you could explain--the position it puts me in?
Don't sob.  Don't be afraid; look at me.  I'll come back to you,
darling."

She turned her tearless eyes to the mountains.  "Back!  Yes.  I see the
end.  My lover will come back--come back dead.  And I shall try to kiss
his brave lips back to life and they will speak no more.  And I shall
stand when they take him from me, lonely and alone.  My father that I
have estranged--my foster-mother that I have withstood--my sister that
I have repelled--will their tears flow for me then?  And for this I
broke from my traditions and cast away associations, gave up all my
little life, stood alone against my family, poured out my heart to
these deserts, these mountains, and now--they rob me of my all--and
this is love!"

He stood like a broken man.  "God help me, have I laid on your dear
head the curse of my own life?  Must you, too, suffer because our
perils force us lightly to pawn our lives one for another?  One night
in that yard"--he pointed to the window--"I stood between the rails
with a switch engine running me down.  I knew nothing of it.  There was
no time to speak, no time to think--it was on me.  Had Blood left me
there one second I never should have looked into your dear face.  Up on
the hill with Hailey and Brodie, under the gravel and shale, I should
never have cost your heart an ache like this.  Better the engine had
struck me then and spared you now----"

"No, I say, no!" she exclaimed, wildly.  "Better this moment together
than a lifetime apart!"

"--For me he threw himself in front of the drivers.  This moment is
mine and yours because he gave his right hand for it--shall I desert
him now he needs me?  And so a hundred times and in a hundred ways we
gamble with death and laugh if we cheat it: and our poor reward is only
sometimes to win where far better men have failed.  So in this railroad
life two men stand, as he and I have stood, luck or ill-luck, storm or
fair weather, together.  And death speaks for one; and whichever he
calls it is ever the other must answer.  And this--is duty."

"Then do your duty."

Distinctly, and terrifying in their unexpectedness, came the words from
the farther end of the parlor.  They turned, stunned.  Gertrude's
father was crossing the room.  He raised his hand to dispel Glover's
sudden angry look.  "I was lying on the couch; your voices roused me
and I could not escape.  You have put clearly the case you stand in,"
he spoke to Glover, "and I have intervened only to spare both of you
useless agony of argument.  The question that concerns you two and me
is not at this moment up for decision; the other question is, and it is
for you, my daughter, now, to play the woman.  I have tried as I could
to shield you from rough weather.  You have left port without
consulting me, and the storms of womanhood are on you.  Sir, when do
you start?"

"My engine is waiting."

"Then ask your people to attach my car.  You can make equally good
time, and since for better or worse we have cut into this game we will
see it out together."

Gertrude threw her arms around her father's neck with a happy sob as
Glover left.  "Oh daddy, daddy.  If you only knew him!"




CHAPTER XXI

PILOT

"There are mountains a man can do business with," muttered Bucks in the
private car, his mustache drooping broadly above his reflecting words.
"Mountains that will give and take once in a while, play fair
occasionally.  But Pilot has fought us every inch of the way since the
day we first struck a pick into it.  It is savage and unrelenting.  I'd
rather negotiate with Sitting Bull for a right of way through his
private bathroom than to ask an easement from Pilot for a tamarack tie.
I don't know why it was ever called Pilot: if I named it, it should be
Sitting Bull.  What the Sioux were to the white men, what the Spider
Water is to the bridgemen, that, and more, Pilot has been to the
mountain men.

"There was no compromise with Pilot even after we got in on it.
Snowslides, washouts, bowlders, forest-fires--and yet the richest
quartz mines in the world lie behind it.  This little branch, Mr.
Brock, forty-eight miles, pays the operating expenses of the whole
mountain division, and has done so almost since the day it was opened.
But I'd rather lose the revenue ten times every year than to lose
Morris Blood."  The second vice-president was talking to Mr. Brock.
Their car was just rounding the curve into the gap in front of Mount
Pilot.

"What do you think of Blood's chances?" asked Mr. Brock.

"I don't know.  A mountain man has nine lives."

"What does Glover think?"

"He doesn't say."

"Who built this line?"

"Two pretty good men ran the first thirty miles, but neither of them
could give me a practicable line south of the gap; this last eighteen
miles up and down and around Pilot was Glover's first work in the
mountains.  It's engineering.  Every trick ever played in the Rockies,
and one or two of Brodie's old combinations in the Andes, they tell me,
are crowded into these eighteen miles.  There, there's old Sitting Bull
in all his clouds and his glory."

Glover had left the car at Sleepy Cat, going ahead with the relief
train.  Picked men from every district on the division had been
assembling all the afternoon to take up the search for the missing
superintendent.  Section men from the Sweetgrass wastes, and bridgemen
from the foothills, roadmasters from the Heart Mountains--home of the
storm and the snow--and Rat Canyon trackwalkers that could spot a break
in the dark under twelve inches of ballast; Morgan, the wrecker, and
his men, and the mountain linemen with their foreman, old Bill
Dancing--fiend drunk and giant sober--were scattered on Mount Pilot,
while a rotary ahead of a battery of big engines was shoved again and
again up the snow-covered hill.

Anxious to get the track open in the belief that Blood could best be
got at from beyond the S bridge, Glover, standing with the branch
roadmaster, Smith Young, on the ledge above the engines directed the
fight for the hill.  He had promised Gertrude he would keep out of the
cab, and far across the curve below he could see the Brock car, where
Bucks was directing the search on the eastern side of the gulch.

Callahan and the linemen were spreading both ways through the timber on
the plateau opposite, but the snow made the work extremely difficult,
and the short day allowed hardly more than a start.  On the hill
Glover's men advanced barely a hundred feet in three hours: darkness
spread over the range with no sign of the missing man, and with the
forebodings that none could shake off of what the night's exposure,
even if he were uninjured, might mean.

Supper was served to the men in the relief trains, and outside fires
were forbidden by Glover, who asked that every foot of the track as far
as the gap be patrolled all night.

It was nearly ten o'clock when Glover, supperless, reached the car with
his dispositions made for the night.  While he talked with the men,
Clem, the star cook of the Brock family, under special orders grilled a
big porterhouse steak and presently asked him back to the dining-table,
where, behind the shaded candles, Gertrude waited.

They sat down opposite each other; but not until Glover saw there were
two plates instead of one, and learned that Gertrude had eaten no
dinner because she was waiting for him, did he mutter something about
all that an American girl is capable of in the way of making a man
grateful and happy.  There was nothing to hurry them back to the other
end of the car, and they did not rejoin Mr. Brock and Bucks, who were
smoking forward, until eleven o'clock.  Callahan came in afterward, and
sitting together Mr. Brock and Gertrude listened while the three
railroad men planned the campaign for the next day.

Parting late, Glover said good-night and left with Callahan to inspect
the rotary.  The fearful punishment of the day's work on the knives had
shown itself, and since dark, relays of mechanics from the Sleepy Cat
shops had been busy with the cutting gear, and the companion plough had
already been ordered in from the eighth district.

Glover returned to the car at one o'clock.  The lights were low, and
Clem, a night-owl, fixed him in a chair near the door.  For an hour
everything was very still, then Gertrude, sleeping lightly, heard
voices.  Glover walked back past the compartments; she heard him asking
Clem for brandy--Bill Dancing, the lineman, had come with news.

The negro brought forward a decanter and Glover poured a gobletful for
the old man, who shook from the chill of the night air.

"The boys claim it's imagination," Dancing, steadied by the alcohol,
continued, "but it's a fire way over below the second bridge.  I've
watched it for an hour; now you come."

They went away and were gone a long time.  Glover returned alone--Clem
had disappeared; a girlish figure glided out of the gloom to meet him.

"I couldn't sleep," she whispered.  "I heard you leave and dressed to
wait."  She looked in the dim light as slight as a child, and with his
hand at her waist he sunk on his knee to look up into her face.  "How
can I deserve it all?"

She blinded his upturned eyes in her hands, and not until she found her
fingers were wet did she understand all he had tried to put into his
words.

"Have you any news?" she murmured, as he rose.

"I believe they have found him."

She clasped her hands.  "Heaven be praised.  Oh, is it sure?"

"I mean, Dancing, the old lineman, has seen his fire.  At least, we are
certain of it.  We have been watching it two hours.  It's a speck of a
blaze away across toward the mines.  It never grows nor lessens, just a
careful little campfire where fuel is scarce--as it is now with all the
snow.  We've lighted a big beacon on the hill for an answer, and at
daybreak we shall go after him.  The planning is all done and I am free
now till we're ready to start."

She tried to make him lie down for a nap on the couch.  He tried to
persuade her to retire until morning, and in sweet contention they sat
talking low of their love and their happiness--and of the hills a
reckless girl romped over in old Allegheny, and of the shingle gunboats
a sleepy-eyed boy launched in dauntless fleets upon the yellow eddies
of the Mississippi; and of the chance that should one day bring boy and
girl together, lovers, on the crest of the far Rockies.

Lights were moving up and down the hill when they rose from Clem's
astonishing breakfast.

"You will be careful," she said.  He had taken her in his arms at the
door, and promising he kissed her and whispered good-by.




CHAPTER XXII

THE SOUTH ARETE

They had planned a quick relief with a small party, for every hour of
exposure lessened the missing man's chances.  Glover chose for his
companions two men: Dancing--far and away the best climber in the
telegraph corps, and Smith Young, roadmaster, a chainman of Glover's
when he ran the Pilot line.  Dancing and Glover were large men of
unusual strength, and Young, lighter and smaller, had been known in a
pinch to handle an ordinary steel rail.  But above everything
each--even Glover, the youngest--was a man of resource and experience
in mountain craft.

They left the track near the twin bridges with only ropes and picks and
skis, and carrying stimulants and food.  Without any attempt to catch
his trail from where they knew Blood must have started they made their
way as directly as possible down the side of the mountain and in the
direction of the gap.  The stupendous difficulties of making headway
across the eastern slope did not become apparent until the rescuing
party was out of sight of those they had left, but from where they
floundered in ragged washouts or spread in line over glassy escarpments
they could see far up the mountain the rotary throwing a white cloud
into the sunshine and hear the far-off clamor of the engines on the
hill.

Below the snow-field which they crossed they found the superintendent's
trail, and saw that his effort had been to cross the gap at that point
and make his way out toward the western grade, where an easy climb
would have brought him to the track; or where by walking some distance
he could reach the track without climbing a foot, the grade there being
nearly four per cent.

They saw, too, why he had been forced to give up that hope, for what
would have been difficult for three fresh men with shoes was an
impossibility for a spent man in the snow alone.  They knew that what
they had covered in two hours had probably cost him ten, for before
they had followed him a dozen feet they saw that he was dragging a leg;
farther, the snow showed stains and they crossed a field where he had
sat down and bandaged his leg after it had bled for a hundred yards.

The trail began, as they went on, to lose its character.  Whether from
weakness or uncertainty Blood's steps had become wandering, and they
noticed that he paid less attention to directness, but shunned every
obstacle that called for climbing, struggling great distances around
rough places to avoid them.  They knew it meant that he was husbanding
failing strength and was striving to avoid reopening his wound.

Twice they marked places in which he had sat to adjust his bandages,
and the strain of what they read in the snow quickened their anxiety.
Since that day Smith Young, superintendent now of the mountain
division, has never hunted, because he could never afterward follow the
trail of a wounded animal.

They found places where he had hunted for fuel, and firing signals
regularly they reached the spot where he had camped the night before,
and saw the ashes of his fire.  He was headed south; not because there
was more hope that way--there was less--but as if he must keep moving,
and that were easiest.  A quarter of a mile below where he had spent
the night they caught sight of a man sitting on a fallen tree resting
his leg.  The next moment three men were in a tumbling race across the
slope, and Blood, weakly hurrahing, fainted in Glover's arms.


His story was short.  He reminded his rescuers of the little spring on
the hill at the point where the wreck had occurred.  The ice that
always spread across the track and over the edge of the gulch had been
chopped out by the shovellers the afternoon before, but water trickling
from the rock had laid a fresh trap for unwary feet during the night.
In jumping from the gangway at the moment of the wreck Blood's heels
had landed on smooth ice and he had tumbled and slid six hundred feet.
Recovering consciousness at the bottom of a washout he found the calf
of one leg ripped a little, as he put it.  The loss of one side of his
mustache, swept away in the slide, and leaving on his face a peculiarly
forlorn expression, he did not take account of--declaring on the whole,
as he smiled into the swimming eyes around him, that with the exception
of tobacco he was doing very well.

They got him in front of a big fire, plied him with food and
stimulants, and Glover, from a surgical packet, bandaged anew the wound
in his leg.  Then came the question of retreat.

They discussed two plans.  The first to retrace their steps entirely;
the second, to go back to where the gap could be attempted and the
western track gained below the hill.  Each meant long and severe
climbing, each presented its particular difficulties, and three men of
the four felt that if the torn artery opened once more their victory
would be barren--that Blood needed surgical aid promptly if at all.
But Dancing had a third plan.

It was while they still consulted at this point that their fire was
seen on Pilot Hill and reported to Bucks at the Brock car, from which
the rapidly moving party had been seen only at long intervals during
the morning.

The fire was the looked-for signal that the superintendent had been
reached, and the word went from group to group of men up the hill.
Through the strong glass that Glover had left with her, Gertrude could
see the smoke, and the storming signals of the panting engines above
her made sweeter music after she caught with her eye the faint column
in the distant gap.  Even her father, feeling still something like a
conscript, brightened up at the general rejoicing.  He had produced his
own glass and let Gertrude with eager prompting help him to find the
smoke.  The moment the position of Glover's party was made definite,
Bucks ordered the car run down the Hog's Back to a point so much closer
that across the broad canyon, flanking Pilot on the south, they could
make out with their glasses the figures of the three men and, when they
began to move, the smaller figure of Morris Blood.

Callahan had joined his chief to watch the situation, and they
speculated as to how the four would get out of the gulf in which they
were completely hemmed.  Gertrude and her father stood near.

The eyes of the two bronzed railroad men at her side were like pilot
guides to Gertrude.  When she lost the wayfarers in the gullies or
along the narrow defiles that gave them passage between towering rocks,
their eyes restored the plodding line.  Callahan was the first to
detect the change from the expected course.  "They are working east,"
said he, after a moment's careful observation.

"East?" echoed Bucks.  "You mean west."

Callahan hung to his glass.  "No," he repeated, "east--and south.
Here."

Bucks took the glass and looked a long time.  "I do not understand,"
said he; "they are certainly working east.  What can they be after,
east?  Well, they can't go very far that way without bridging the
Devil's Canyon.  Callahan," he exclaimed, with sure instinct, "they will
head south.  Walt now till they appear again."

He relinquished the glass to explain to Mr. Brock where next to look
for them.  There was a long interval during which they did not
reappear.  Then the little file emerging from the shadow of a rock
skirted a field of snow straight to the south.  There were but three
men in line.  One, a little ahead, breaking path; following, two large
men tramping close together, the foremost stooping under the weight of
a man lying face upward on his back, while the man behind supported the
legs under his arms.

"They are carrying Morris Blood.  He is hurt--that was to be expected.
What?" exclaimed Bucks, hardly a moment afterward, "they are crossing
the snow.  Callahan, by heaven, they are walking for the south side of
Pilot, that's what it means.  It is a forced march; they are making for
the mines."

Mount Pilot, from the crest that divides at Devil's Gap, rises abruptly
in a three-faced peak, the pinnacle of which lies to the south.
Several hundred feet above the base lie the group of gold-mines behind
the mountain, and a short railroad spur blasted across the southern
face runs to them from Glen Tarn.  Below, the mountain wall breaks in
long steps almost vertically to the base, toward which Glover's party
was heading.

The move made new dispositions necessary.  Orders flew from Bucks like
curlews, for it was more essential than ever to open the hill speedily.

The private car was run across the Hog's Back, and the news sent to the
rotary crew with injunctions to push with all effort as far at least as
the mine switch, that help might be sent out on the spur to meet the
party on the climb.

The increased activity apparent far up and down the mountain as the
word went round, the bringing up of the last reserve engines for the
hill battery, the effort to get into communication by telegraph with
the mine hospital and Glen Tarn Springs, the feverish haste of the
officials in the car to make the new dispositions, all indicated to
Gertrude the approach of a crisis--the imminence of a supreme effort to
save one life if the endeavor enlisted the men and resources of the
whole division.  New gangs of shovellers strung on flat-cars were being
pushed forward.  Down the hill, spent and disabled engines were
returning from the front, and while they took sidings, fresh engines,
close-coupled, steamed slowly like leviathans past them up the hill.

The moment the track was clear, the private car was backed again down
the ridge.  Following the serpentine winding of the right of way, the
general manager was able to run the car far around the mountain, and it
stopped opposite the southern face, which rose across the broad canyon.
When the party in the car got their glasses fixed, the little company
beyond the gulf had begun their climb and were strung like marionettes
up the base of Pilot.

The south face of the mountain, sheer for nearly a thousand feet, is
broken by narrow ledges that make an ascent possible, and not until the
peak passes the timber does snow ordinarily find lodgment upon that
side.  Swept by the winds from the Spanish Sinks, the vertical reaches
above the base usually offer no obstruction to a rapid climb, though
except perhaps by early prospectors, the arete had never been scaled.
Glover, however, in locating, had covered every stretch of the mountain
on each of its sides, and Dancing's poles and brackets, like
banderillas stung into the tough hide of a bull, circled Pilot from
face to face.  These two men were leading the ascent; below them could
be distinguished the roadmaster and the injured superintendent.

Stripped to the belt and lashed in the party rope, the leader, gaunt
and sinewy, stretched like an earthworm up the face of the
arete--crossing, recrossing, climbing, retreating, his spiked feet
settling warily into fresh holes below, his sensitive hands spreading
like feelers high over the smooth granite for new holds above.  Slowly,
always, and with the deliberate reserve that quieted with confidence
the feverish hearts watching across the gulf, the leaders steadily
scaled the height that separated them from the track.  Like sailors
patiently warping home, the three men in advance drew and lifted the
fourth, who doughtily helped himself with foot and hand as chance
allowed and watched patiently from below while his comrades disputed
with the sheer wall for a new step above.

Bucks and Callahan, following every move, mapped the situation to their
companions as its features developed.  With each triumph on the arete,
bursts of commendation and surprise came from the usually taciturn men
watching the struggle with growing wonder.  Bucks, apprehensive of
delays in the track-opening on the hill, sent Callahan back in the car
with instructions to pick a gang of ten men and pack them somewhom
across the snow to the mine spur, that they might be ready to meet the
climbing party and carry the superintendent down to the mine hospital.

Thirty feet below the mine track and as far above where Glover at that
moment was sitting--his rope made fast and his legs hanging over a
ledge, while his companions reached new positions--a granite wall rises
to where the upper face has been blasted away from the roadbed.  To the
east, this wall hangs without a break up or down for a hundred feet,
but to the west it roughens and splits away from the main spur, forming
a crevice or chimney from two to three feet wide, opening at the top to
ten feet, where a small bridge carries the track across it.  This
chimney had been Dancing's quest from the moment the ascent began, for
he had lost a man in that chimney when stringing the mine wires, and
knew precisely what it was.

The chimney once gained, Dancing figured that the last thirty feet
should be easy work, and he had made but one miscalculation--when he
had descended it to pull up his lineman, it was summer.  Without
extraordinary difficulty, Glover gained the ledge where the chimney
opened and waited for his companions to ascend.  When all were up, they
rested a few moments on their dizzy perch, and, while Bill Dancing
investigated the chimney, Glover took the chance to renew once more
Morris Blood's bandages, which, strained by the climbing, caused
continual anxiety.

Bucks, with the party in his glass, could see every move.  He saw
Dancing disappear into the rock while his comrades rested, and made him
out, after some delay, reappearing from the cleft.  What he could not
make out was the word that Dancing brought back; the chimney was a
solid mass of ice.

Standing with the two men, Gertrude used her glass constantly.
Frequently she asked questions, but frequently she divined ahead of her
companions the directions and the movements.  The hesitation that
followed Dancing's return did not escape her.  Up and down the narrow
step on which they stood, the three men walked, scanning anxiously the
wall that stretched above them.

So, hounds at fault on a trail double on their steps and move uneasily
to and fro, nosing the missing scent.  As lions flatten behind their
cagebars, the climbers laid themselves against the rock and pushed to
the right and the left seeking an avenue of escape.  They had every
right to expect that help would already have reached them, but on the
hill, through haste and confusion of orders, the new rotary had
stripped a gear, and an hour had been lost in getting in the second
plough.  For safety, the climbers had in their predicament nothing to
fear.  The impelling necessity for action was the superintendent's
condition; his companions knew he could not last long without a surgeon.

When suspense had become unbearable, Dancing re-entered the chimney.
He was gone a long time.  He reappeared, crawling slowly out on an
unseen footing, a mere flaw in the smooth stretch of granite half way
up to the track.  By cutting his rope and throwing himself a dozen
times at death, old Bill Dancing had gained a foothold, made fast a
line, and divided the last thirty feet to be covered.  One by one, his
companions disappeared from sight--not into the chimney, but to the
side of it where Dancing had blazed a few dizzy steps and now had a
rope dangling to make the ascent practicable.

One by one, Gertrude saw the climbers, reappearing above, crawl like
flies out on the face of the rock and, with craning necks and cautious
steps, seek new advantage above.  They discovered at length the remains
of a scrub pine jutting out below the railroad track.  The tree had
been sawed off almost at the root, when the roadbed was levelled, and a
few feet of the trunk was left hugging upward against the granite wall.

Glover, Young, and Dancing consulted a moment.  The thing was not
impossible; the superintendent was bleeding to death.

Spectators across the gap saw movements they could not quite
comprehend.  Safety lines were overhauled for the last time, the picks
put in the keeping of Morris Blood, who lay flat on the ledge.  Glover
and Bill Dancing, facing outward, planted themselves side by side
against the rocky wall.  Smith Young, facing inward, flattened himself
in Glover's arms, passed across him and, pushing his safety-girdle well
up under his arms, stood a moment between the two big men.  Glover and
Dancing, getting their hands through the belt from either side, gripped
him, and Young uncoiled from his right hand a rope noosed like a
lariat.  Steadied by his companions and swinging his arms in a cautious
segment on the wall, he tried to hitch the noose over the trunk of the
pine.

With the utmost skill and patience, he coaxed the loop up again and
again into the air overhead, but the brush of the short branches
against the rock defeated every attempt to get a hold.

He rested, passed the rope into his other hand, and with the same
collected persistence endeavored to throw it over from the left.

Sweat beaded Bucks' forehead as he looked.  Gertrude's father, the man
of sixty millions, with nerves bedded in ice, crushed an unlighted
cigar between his teeth, and tried to steady the glass that shook in
his hand.  Gertrude, resting one hand on a bowlder against which she
steadied herself, neither spoke nor moved.  The roadmaster could not
land his line.

The two men released him and, with arms spread wide, he slipped over to
where Morris Blood lay, took from him the two picks, and cautiously
rejoined his comrades.  Two of the men reversing their positions, faced
the rock wall.  They fixed a pick into a cranny between their heads,
crouched together, and the third, planting his feet first on their
knees and then their shoulders, was raised slowly above them.

The glasses turned from afar caught a sheen of sunshine that spread for
an instant across the face of the mountain and sharply outlined the
flattened form high on the arete.  The figure seemed brought by the
dazzling light startlingly near, and those looking could distinguish in
his hand a pick, which, with his right arm extended, he slowly swung up
and up the face of the rock until he should swing it high to hook
through the roots of the pine.

Gertrude asked Bucks who it was that spread himself above his comrades,
and he answered, Dancing; but it was Glover.

Deliberately his extended arm rose and fell in the arc he was
following, higher and higher, till the pick swung above his head and
lodged where he sent it among the pine-tree roots.  At the very moment,
one of the men supporting him moved--the pick had dislodged a heavy
chip of granite; in falling it struck his crouching supporter on the
head.  The man steadied himself instantly, but the single instant cost
the balance of the upmost figure.  With a suppressed struggle,
heartbreaking half a mile away, the man above strove to right himself.
Like light his second hand reached for the pick handle; he could not
recover it.  The pyramid wavered and Glover, helpless, spread his hands
wide.

By an instinct deeper than life, she knew him then, and cried out and
out in agony.  But the pyramid was dissolving before his eyes, and she
saw a strange figure with outstretched arms, a figure she no longer
knew, slowly slipping headlong down a blood-red wall that burned itself
into her brain.




CHAPTER XXIII

BUSINESS

Cruelly broken and bruised, Young, Bill Dancing, and Glover late that
night were brought up in rope cradles by the wrecking derrick and taken
into the Brock car, turned by its owner into a hospital.  An hour after
the fall on the south arete the hill blockade had been broken.  With
word of the disaster to nerve men already strained to the utmost,
effort became superhuman, the impossible was achieved, and the relief
train run in on the mine track.

Morris Blood, unconscious, was lifted from the narrow shelf at four
o'clock and put under a surgeon's care in time to save his life.  To
rig a tackle for a three-hundred-foot lift was another matter; but even
while the derrick-car stood idle on the spur waiting for the cable
equipment from the mine, a laughing boy of a surgeon from the hospital
was lowered with the first of the linemen to the snow-field where the
three men roped together had fallen, and surgical aid reached them
before sunset.




Last to come up, because he still gave the orders, Glover, cushioned
and strapped in the tackle, was lifted out of the blackness of the
night into the streaming glare of the headlights.  Very carefully he
was swung down to the mattresses piled on the track, and, before all
that looked and waited, a woman knelt and kissed his sunken eyes.  Not
then did the men, dim in the circle about them, show what they felt,
though they knew, to the meanest trackhand, all it meant; not when,
after a bare moment of hesitation, Gertrude's father knelt opposite on
the mattress-pile, did they break their silence, though they shrewdly
guessed what that meant.

But when Glover pulled together his disordered members and at
Gertrude's side walked without help to the step of the car, the murmur
broke into a cheer that rang from Pilot to Glen Tarn.

"It was more than half my fault," he breathed to her, after his broken
arms had been set and the long gash on his head stitched.  "I need not
have lost my balance if I had kept my head.  Gertrude, I may as well
admit it--I'm a coward since I've begun to love you.  I've never told
you how I saw your face once between the curtains of an empty sleeper.
But it came back to me just as Dancing's shoulder slipped--that's why I
went.  I'm done forever with long chances."  And she, silent, tried
only to quiet him while the car moved down the gap bearing them from
Pilot together.


"Do you know what day to-morrow is?"  Gertrude was opening a box of
flowers that Solomon had brought from the express-office; Glover,
plastered with bandages, was standing before the grate fire in the
hotel parlor.

"To-morrow?" he echoed.  "Sunday."

"Sunday!  Why do you always guess Sunday when I ask you what day it is?"

"You would think every day Sunday if you had had as good a time as I
have for six weeks."

"The doctor does say you're doing beautifully.  I asked him yesterday
how soon you would be well and he said you never had been so well since
he knew you.  But what is to-morrow?"

"Thanksgiving."

"Thanksgiving, indeed!  Yes, every day is Thanksgiving for us.  But
it's not especially _that_."

"Christmas."

"Nonsense!  To-morrow is the second anniversary of our engagement."

"My Lord, Gertrude, have we been engaged two years?  Why, at that rate
I can't possibly marry you till I'm forty-four."

"It isn't two years, it's two months.  And to-night they have their
memorial services for poor Paddy McGraw.  And, do you know, your friend
Mr. Foley has our engine now?  Yes; he came up the other day to ask
about you, but in reality to tell me he had been promoted.  I think he
ought to have been, after I spoke myself to Mr. Archibald about it.
But what touched me was, the poor fellow asked if I wouldn't see about
getting some flowers for the memorial at the engineer's lodge
to-night--and he didn't want his wife to know anything about it,
because she would scold him for spending his money--see what you are
coming to!  So I suggested he should let me provide his flowers and
ours together, and when I tried to find out what he wanted, he asked if
a throttle made of flowers would be all right."

"Your heart would not let you say no?"

"I told him it would be lovely, and to leave it all to me."

She brought forward the box she was opening.  "See how they have laid
this throttle-bar of violets across these Galax leaves--and latched it
with a rose.  Here, Solomon," she exiled the boy from an adjoining
room, "take this very carefully.  No.  There isn't any card.  Oh," she
exclaimed, as he left, and she clasped her lifted hands, "I am glad, I
am glad we are leaving these mountains.  Do you know papa is to be here
to-morrow?  And that your speech must be ready?  He isn't going to give
his consent without being asked."

"I suppose not," said Glover, dejectedly.

"What are you going to say?"

"I shall say that I consider him worthy of my confidence and esteem."

"I think you would make more headway, dearest, if you should tell him
you considered yourself worthy of _his_ confidence and esteem."

"But, hang it, I don't."

"Well, couldn't you, for once, fib a little?  Oh, Ab; I'll tell you
what I wish you _could_ do."

"Pray what?"

"Talk a little business to him.  I feel sure, if you could only talk
business awhile, papa would be _all_ right."

"Business!  If it's only a question of talking business, the thing's as
good as done.  I can't talk anything but business."

"Can't you, indeed!  I like that.  Pray what did you talk to me on the
platform of my father's own car?"

"Business."

"You talked the silliest stuff I ever listened to----"

"Not reflecting on anyone present, of course."

"And, Ab----"

"Yes."

"If you could take him aback somehow--nothing would give him such an
idea of you.  I think that was what--well, I was so _completely_
overcome by your audacity----"

"You seemed so," commented Glover, rather grimly.  "Very well, if you
want him taken aback, I will take him aback, even if I have to resort
to force."  He withdrew his right arm from its sling and began
unwrapping the bandages and throwing the splints Into the fire.

"What in the world are you doing?" asked Gertrude, in consternation.

"There's no use carrying these things any longer.  My right arm is just
as strong as it ever was--and to tell the truth----"

"Now keep your distance, if you please."

"To tell the truth, I never could play ball left-handed, anyway,
Gertrude.  Now, let's begin easy.  Just shake hands with me."

"I'll do nothing of the sort.  It's bad form, anyway.  You may just
shake hands with yourself.  All things considered, I think you have
good reason to."


"I understand you were chief engineer of this system at one time,"
began Mr. Brock, at the very outset of the dreaded interview.

"I was," answered Glover.

"And that you resigned voluntarily to take an inferior position on the
Mountain Division?"

"That is true."

"Railroad men with ambition," commented Mr. Brock, dryly, "don't
usually turn their faces from responsibility in that way.  They look
higher, and not lower."

"I thought I was looking higher when I came to the mountains."

"That may do for a joke, but I am talking business."

"I, too; and since I am, let me explain to you why I resigned a higher
position for a lower one.  The fact is well known; the reason isn't.  I
came to this road at the call of your second vice-president, Mr. Bucks.
I have always enjoyed a large measure of his confidence.  We saw some
years ago that a reorganization was inevitable, and spent many nights
discussing the different features of it.  This is what we determined:
That the key to this whole system with its eight thousand miles of main
line and branches is this Mountain Division.  To operate the system
economically and successfully means that the grades must be reduced and
the curvature reduced on this division.  Surely, with you, I need not
dwell on the A B C's of twentieth century railroading.  It is the road
that can handle the tonnage cheapest that will survive.  All this we
knew, and I told him to put me out on this division.  It was during the
receivership and there was no room for frills.

"I have worked here on a small salary and done everything but maul
spikes to keep down expenses on the division, because we had to make
some showing to whoever wanted to buy our junk.  In this way I took a
roving commission and packed my bag from an office where I could
acquire nothing I did not already know to a position where I could get
hold of the problem of mountain transportation and cut the coal bills
of the road in two."

"Have you done it?"

"Have I cut the coal bills in two?  No; but I have learned how.  It
will cost money to do that----"

"How much money?"

"Thirty millions of dollars."

"A good deal of money."

"No."

"No?"

"No.  Don't let us be afraid to face figures.  You will spend a hundred
millions before you quit, Mr. Brock, and you will make another hundred
millions in doing it.  To put it bluntly, the mountains must be brought
to terms.  For three years I have eaten and lived and slept with them.
I know every grade, curve, tunnel, and culvert from here to Bear
Dance--yes, to the coast.  The day of heavy gradients and curves for
transcontinental tonnage is gone by.  If I ever get a chance, I will
rip this right of way open from end to end and make it possible to send
freight through these ranges at a cost undreamed of in the estimates of
to-day.  But that was not my only object in coming to the mountains."

"Go ahead."

"Mr. Bucks and the men he has gathered around him--Callahan, Blood and
the rest of us--are railroad men.  Railroading is our business; we know
nothing else.  There was an embarrassing chance that when our buyer
came he might be hostile to the present management.  Happily," Glover
bowed to the Pittsburg magnate, "he isn't; but he might have been----"

"I see."

"We were prepared for that."

"How?"

"I shouldn't speak of this if I did not know you were Mr. Bucks'
closest friend.  Even he doesn't know it, but six months of my own
time--not the company's--I put in on a matter that concerned my friends
and myself, and I have the notes for a new line to parallel this if it
were needed--and Blood and I have the only pass within three hundred
miles north or south to run it over.  These were some of the reasons,
Mr. Brock, why I came to the mountains."

"I understand.  I understand perfectly.  Mr. Glover, what is your age,
sir?"

The time seemed ripe to put Gertrude's second hint into play.

"That is a subject I never discuss with anyone, Mr. Brock."

He waited just a moment to let the magnate get his breath, and
continued, "May I tell you why?  When the road went into the
receivership, I was named as one of the receivers on behalf of the
Government.  The President, when I first met him during my term, asked
for my father, thinking he was the man that had been recommended to
him.  He wouldn't believe me when I assured him I was his appointee.
'If I had known how young you were, Glover,' said he to me, afterward,
'I never should have dared appoint you.'  The position paid me
twenty-five thousand dollars a year for four years; but the incident
paid me better than that, for it taught me never to discuss my age."

"I see.  I see.  A fine point.  You have taught _me_ something.  By the
way, about the pass you spoke of--I suppose you understand the
importance of getting hold of a strategic point like that
to--a--forestall--competition?"

"I have hold of it."

"I do not mind saying to you, under all the circumstances, that there
has been a little friction with the Harrison people.  Do you see?  And,
for reasons that may suggest themselves, there may be more.  They might
conclude to run a line to the coast themselves.  The young man has, I
believe, been turned down----"

"I understood the--the slate had been--changed slightly," stammered
Glover, coloring.

"There might be resentment, that's all.  Blood is loyal to us, I
presume."

"There's no taint anywhere in Morris Blood.  He is loyalty itself."

"What would you think of him as General Manager?  Callahan goes to the
river as Traffic Manager.  Mr. Bucks, you know, is the new President;
these are his recommendations.  What do you think of them?"

"No better men on earth for the positions, and I'm mighty glad to see
them get what they deserve."

"Our idea is to leave you right here in the mountains."  It was hard to
be left completely out of the new deal, but Glover did not visibly
wince.  "With the title," added Mr. Brock, after he knew his arrow had
gone home, "with the title of Second Vice-president, which Mr. Bucks
now holds.  That will give you full swing in your plans for the
rebuilding of the system.  I want to see them carried out as the
estimates I've been studying this winter show.  Don't thank me.  I did
not know till yesterday they were entirely your plans.  You can have
every dollar you need; it will rest with you to produce the results.  I
guess that's all.  No, stop.  I want you to go East with us next week
for a month or two as our guest.  You can forward your work the faster
when you get back, and I should like you to meet the men whose money
you are to spend.  Were you waiting to see Gertrude?"

"Why--yes, sir--I----"

"I'll see whether she's around."

Gertrude did not appear for some moments, then she half ran and half
glided in, radiant.  "I couldn't get away!" she exclaimed.  "He's
talking about you yet to Aunt Jane and Marie.  He says you're charged
with dynamite--_I_ knew that--a most remarkable young man.  How did you
ever convince him you knew anything?  I am confident you don't.  You
must have taken him somehow aback, didn't you?"

"If you want to give your father a touch of asthma," suggested Glover,
"ask him how old I am; but he had me scared once or twice," admitted
the engineer, wiping the cold sweat from his wrists.

"_Did_ he give his consent?"

"Why--hang it--I--we got to talking business and I forgot to----"

"So like you, dear.  However, it must be all right, for he said he
should need your help in buying the coast branches and The Short Line."

"The Short Line," gasped Glover.  "Well, I haven't inventoried lately.
If we marry in June----"

"Don't worry about that, for we sha'n't marry in June, my love."

"But when we do, we shall need some money for a wedding-trip----"

"We certainly shall; a lot of it, dearie."

"I may have ten or twelve hundred left after that is provided for.  But
my confidence in your father's judgment is very great, and if he's
going to make up a pool, my money is at his service, as far as it will
go, to buy The Short Line--or any other line he may take a fancy to."

"Why, he's just telling Marie about your making a hundred thousand
dollars in four years by being wonderfully shrewd----"

"But that confounded mine that I told you about----"

"You dear old stupid.  Never mind, you have made a real strike to-day.
But if you ever again delude papa into thinking you know more than I
do, I shall expose you without mercy."

The train, a private car special, carrying Mr. Brock, chairman of the
board, and his family, the new president and the second vice-president
elect, was pulling slowly across the long, high spans of the Spider
bridge.  Glover and Gertrude had gone back to the observation platform.
Leaning on his arm, she was looking across the big valley and into the
west.  The sun, setting clear, tinged with gold the far snows of the
mountains.

"It is less than a year," she was murmuring, "since I crossed this
bridge; think of it.  And what bridges have I not crossed since!  See.
Your mountains are fading away----"

"My mountains faded away, dear heart, don't you know, when you told me
I might love you.  As for those"--his eyes turned from the distant
ranges back to her eyes--"after all, they brought me you."



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DAUGHTER OF A MAGNATE***


******* This file should be named 24696.txt or 24696.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/6/9/24696



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

