The Project Gutenberg EBook of Notes and Queries, 1850.12.21, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Notes and Queries, 1850.12.21
       A Medium of Inter-communication for Literary Men, Artists,
       Antiquaries, Genealogists, etc.

Author: Various

Editor: George Bell

Release Date: March 11, 2008 [EBook #24803]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, 1850.12.21 ***




Produced by Charlene Taylor, William Flis, Jonathan Ingram
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)





NOTES AND QUERIES:

A MEDIUM OF INTER-COMMUNICATION FOR LITERARY MEN, ARTISTS,
ANTIQUARIES, GENEALOGISTS, ETC.

       *       *       *       *       *

"When found, make a note of."--CAPTAIN CUTTLE.

       *       *       *       *       *

No. 60.] SATURDAY, DECEMBER 21. 1850. [Price Threepence. Stamped
Edition 4d.

       *       *       *       *       *{489}



CONTENTS.

  Notes:--                                                   Page
    Division of Intellectual Labour                           489
    On a Passage in "Love's Labour's Lost"                    490
    Treatise of Equivocation                                  490
    Parallel Passages, by Albert Cohn                         491
    Minor Notes:--True or False Papal Bulls--Burning Bush
      of Sinai--The Crocodile--Umbrella--Rollin's Ancient
      History, and History of the Arts and Sciences--MSS.
      of Locke--The Letter [gh]--A Hint to Publishers         491
  Queries:--
    Bibliographical Queries                                   492
    Minor Queries:--Meaning of "Rab. Surdam"--Abbot Richard
      of Strata Florida--Cardinal Chalmers--Armorial
      Bearings--"Fiat Justitia"--Painting by C. Bega--Darcy
      Lever Church--R. Ferrer--Writers on the
      Inquisition--Buckden--True Blue--Passage in
      "Hamlet"--Inventor of a secret Cypher--Fossil Elk of
      Ireland--Red Sindon--Lights on the Altar--Child's
      Book by Beloe                                           493
  Replies:--
    Mercenary Preacher, by Henry Campkin                      495
    "The Owl is abroad," by Dr. E.F. Rimbault                 495
    Old St. Pancras Church, by J. Yeowell                     496
    Replies to Minor Queries:--Cardinal Allen's
      Admonition--Bolton's Ace--Portrait of Cardinal
      Beaton--"He that runs may read"--Sir George
      Downing--Burning to Death, or Burning of the
      Hill--The Roscommon Peerage--The Word "after"
      in the Rubric--Disputed Passage in the
      "Tempest"--Lady Compton's Letter--Midwives
      licensed--Echo Song--The Irish Brigade--To save
      one's bacon--"The Times" Newspaper and the Coptic
      Language--Luther's Hymns--Osnaburg Bishopric--Scandal
      against Queen Elizabeth--Pretended reprint of Ancient
      Poetry--Martin Family--Meaning of "Ge-ho"--Lady Norton  497
  Miscellaneous:--
    Notes on Books, Sales, Catalogues, &c.                    501
    Books and Odd Volumes Wanted                              501
    Notices to Correspondents                                 502
    Advertisements                                            502

       *       *       *       *       *


Notes.


DIVISION OF INTELLECTUAL LABOUR.

Every one confesses, I believe, the correctness of the _principle_
called "Division of labour." But if any one would form an adequate
estimate of the ratio of the effect produced, in this way, to the
labour which is expended, let him consult Dr. Adam Smith. I think he
states, as an example, that a single labourer cannot make more than
ten pins in a day; but if eight labourers are employed, and each of
them performs one of the eight separate processes requisite to the
formation of a pin, there will not merely be eight times the number of
pins formed in a day, but nearly eighty times the number. (Not having
the book by me, I cannot be certain of the exact statistics.)

If this principle is proved, then, to be of such extraordinary
utility, why should it not be made serviceable in other matters
besides the "beaver-like" propensity of amassing wealth and satisfying
our material desires? Why should not your periodical be instrumental
in transferring this invaluable principle to the labours of the
intellectual world? If your correspondents were to send you abstracts
or _precis_ of the books which they read, would there not accrue a
fourfold benefit? viz.:

1. A division of intellectual labour; so that the amount of knowledge
available to each person is multiplied in an increasing ratio.

2. Knowledge is thus presented in so condensed a form as to be more
easily comprehended at a glance; so that your readers can with greater
facility construct or understand the theories deducible from the whole
circle of human knowledge.

3. Authors and inquiring men could tell, before expending days on the
perusal of large volumes, whether the _particulars_ which these books
contain would be suitable to the object they have in view.

4. The unfair criticisms which are made, and the erroneous notions
diffused by interested reviewers, would in a great measure be
corrected, in the minds, at least, of your readers.

You might object that such _precis_ would be as partial as the reviews
of which the whole literary world complain. But, in the first place,
these abstracts would be written by literary men who are not dependent
on booksellers for their livelihood, and would not therefore be likely
to write up trashy books or detract from the merit of valuable works,
for the sake of the book trade. And besides, your correspondents give
their articles under their signature, so that one could be openly
corrected by another who had read the same work. Again, it is only the
_leading idea_ of the book which you would require, and no attendant
praise or blame, neither eulogistic exordium nor useless appeals to
the reader. The author, moreover, might send you the skeleton of his
own book, and {490} you would of course give this the prior place in
your journal.

Another objection is, that the length of such _precis_ would not
permit them to come within the limits of your work. But they _should
not_ be long. And even if one of them should take up four or five
pages, you could divide it between two or three successive numbers of
your periodical. And, besides, your work, by embracing this object,
would be greatly increased in utility; the number of your subscribers
would be multiplied, and the increased expense of publication would
thus be defrayed.

But, if the advantages resulting from such a division of intellectual
labour would be as great as I fondly hope, I feel sure that the energy
and enterprise which caused you to give a tangible reality to your
scheme for "Notes and Queries" would also enable you to overcome all
difficulties, and answer all trifling objections.

R.M.

       *       *       *       *       *


ON A PASSAGE IN LOVE'S LABOUR'S LOST.

In _Love's Labour's Lost_, Act II. Sc. 1., Boyet, speaking of the King
of Navarre and addressing the Princess of France, says:

  "All his behaviours did make their retire
  To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:
  His heart, like an agate, with your print impressed,
  Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressed:
  His tongue, _all impatient to speak and not see_,
  Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
  All senses to that sense did make their repair,
  To feel only looking on fairest of fair."

This speech is a remarkable specimen of the affected style of
compliment prevalent in the time of Elizabeth. The third couplet, at
first sight, appears to have a signification exactly opposed to that
which the context requires. We should expect, instead of "the tongue
all impatient _to speak_," to find "the tongue all impatient _to
see_."

No one of the editors of Shakspeare appears to me to have given a
satisfactory explanation of this passage. I therefore venture to offer
the following.

In the Latin poets (who in this followed the Greeks) we find
adjectives and participles followed by the genitive case and the
gerund in _di_. Thus in Horace we have "patiens pulveris atque solis,"
"patiens liminis aut aquae coelestis," and in Silius Italicus (vi.
612.), "vetus bellandi." For other instances, see Mr. Baines' _Art of
Latin Poetry_, pp. 56-60.

The Latin poets having taken this license, then proceeded a step
further, and substituted the infinitive mood for the gerund in _di_.
I cannot find any instance either of "patiens" or "impatiens" used
in this connection; but numerous instances of other adjectives and
participles followed by the infinitive mood may be found in pp. 68. to
73. of the _Art of Latin Poetry_. I cite two only, both from Horace:
"indocilis pauperiem pati," "quidlibet impotens sperare."

Following these analogies, I suggest that the words "impatient to
speak and not see" mean "impatient of speaking (impatiens loquendi)
and not seeing," i.e., "dissatisfied with its function of speaking,
preferring that of seeing."

This construction, at least, renders the passage intelligible.

X.Z.

       *       *       *       *       *


TREATISE OF EQUIVOCATION.

(Vol. ii., pp. 168. 446.)

I feel greatly indebted to J.B. for a complete solution of the
question respecting this ambiguous book. Bewildered by the frequent
reference to it by nearly cotemporaneous writers, I had apprehended
it certain, that it had been a _printed_, if not a published work; and
that even a second edition had altered the title of the first. It is
now certain, that its existence was, and is, only _in manuscript_;
and that the alteration was intended only for its first impression,
if printed at all. It is a fact not generally known, that many papal
productions of the time were multiplied and circulated by copies
in MS.: Leycester's _Commonwealth_, of which I have a very neat
transcript, and of which many more are extant in different libraries,
is one proof of the fact.[1] I observe that in Bernard's very valuable
_Bibliotheca MSS., &c._, I had marked under _Laud Misc. MSS._, p.
62. No. 968. 45. _A Treatise against Equivocation or Fraudulent
Dissimulation_, what I supposed might be the work in request: but
being prepossessed with the notion that the work was in print, I did
not pursue any inquiry in that direction. I almost now suspect that
this is the very work which J.B. has brought to light. I had hoped
during the present year to visit the Bodleian, and satisfy myself with
an inspection of the important document. I am additionally gratified
with the information relative to the same subject by Mr. Sansom, p.
446. J.B. observes, that the MS. occupies sixty-six pages only. Will
no one have the charity for historic literature to make it a public
benefit? If with notes, so much the better. It is of far more
interest, as history is concerned, and that of our own country, than
many of the tracts in the Harleian or Somers' Collections. Parsons's
notice of it in his _Mitigation_, and towards the end, as if he was
just then made acquainted with it, is very {491} characteristic and
instructive. He knew of it well enough, but thought others might not.

Again I say, why not print the work?

J.M.

    [We have reason to believe that this important historical
    document is about to be printed.]

[Footnote 1: _A Memorial for the Reformation in England_, by R.P.
(Parsons), of which I have a well transcribed copy, is another. It was
published by Gee.]

       *       *       *       *       *


PARALLEL PASSAGES.

In Shakspeare's _Henry IV._, Act V. Sc. 4., the Prince exclaims,
beholding Percy's corpse,--

  "When that this body did contain a spirit,
  A kingdom for it was too small a bound;
  But now two paces of the vilest earth
  Is room enough!"

In Ovid we find the following parallel:--

  "... jacet ecce Tibullus,
  Vix manet e toto parva quod urna capit."

A second one appears in the pretended lines on the sepulchre of Scipio
Africanus:--

  "Cui non Europa, non obstitit Africa unquam,
  Respiceres hominem, quem brevis urna premit."

The same reflection we find in Ossian:--

  "With three steps I measure thy grave,
  O thou, so great heretofore!"

It is very difficult indeed to determine in which of these passages
the leading thought is expressed best, in which is to be found the
most energy, the deepest feeling, the most touching shortness. I
think one should prefer the passage of Shakspeare, because the direct
mention of the corporal existence gives a magnificent liveliness to
the picture, and because the very contrast of the space appears most
lively by it; whereas, at the first reading of the other passages, it
is not the human being, consisting of body and soul, which comes in
our mind, but only the human spirit, of which we know already that it
cannot be buried in the grave.

One of the most eminent modern authors seems to have imitated the
passage of Shakspeare's _Henry IV_. Schiller, in his _Jungfrau von
Orleans_, says:--

  "Und von dem maecht'gen Talbot, der die Welt
  Mit seinem Kriegeruhm fuellte, bleibet nichts
  Als eine Hand voll leichten Staubs."

  (And of the mighty Talbot, whose warlike
  Glory fill'd the world, nothing remains
  But a handful of light dust.)

Albert Cohn.

Berlin.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Notes.

_True or False Papal Bulls_.--

    "Utrum bulla papalis sit vera an non.

    "Si vis scire utrum literae domini Papae sint veraces vel non,
    numera punctos quae sunt in bulla. Et si inveneris circulum
    ubi sunt capita apostolorum habentem 73 punctos, alium vero
    circulum 46, alium super caput Beati Petri habentem 26, alium
    super caput Sancti Pauli habentem 25 punctos, et punctos quae
    sunt in barba 26, veraces sunt; alioquin falsae.--Sir Matthew
    Hale's _Manuscripts_, Library of Lincoln's Inn, vol. lxxiii.
    p. 176.

To which may be added, that in digging for the foundations of the
new (or present) London Bridge, an instrument was dug up for
counterfeiting the seals or Bullae? Where is it now deposited?

J.E.


_Burning Bush of Sinai._--

    "Pococke asserts that the monks have planted in their garden
    a bush similar to those which grow in Europe, and that by
    the most ridiculous imposture, they hesitate not to affirm
    that it is the same which Moses saw--the miraculous bush.
    The assertion is false, and the alleged fact a mere
    invention."--Geramb's _Pilgrimage to Palestine, &c._, English
    trans.

March 1. 1847. The bush was exhibited by two of the monks at the back
of the eastern apse of the church, but having its root within the
walls of the chapel of the burning bush. It was the common English
bramble, not more than two years old, and in a very sickly state, as
the monks allowed the leaves to be plucked by the English party then
in the convent. The plant grows on the mountain, and therefore could
be easily replaced.

Viator.


_The Crocodile_ (Vol. ii., p. 277.).--February, 1847, a small
crocodile was seen in the channel, between the island of Rhoda and the
right bank of the Nile.

Viator.


_Umbrella._--It was introduced at Bristol about 1780. A lady, now
eighty-three years of age, remembers its first appearance, which
occasioned a great sensation. Its colour was red, and it probably came
from Leghorn, with which place Bristol at that time maintained a great
trade. Leghorn has been called Bristol on a visit to Italy.

Viator.


_Rollin's Ancient History, and History of the Arts and
Sciences._--Your correspondent Iota inquires (Vol. ii., p. 357.),
"How comes it that the editions" (of Rollin) "since 1740 have been
so castrated?" i.e. divested of an integral portion of the work, the
_History of the Arts and Sciences_. It is not easy to state _how_
this has come to pass. During the last century comparatively little
interest was felt in the subjects embraced in the _History of the Arts
and Sciences_; and _probably_ the publishers might on that account
omit this portion, with the view of making the book cheaper and more
saleable. It is more difficult to assign any reason why Rollin's
Prefaces to the various sections of his _History_ should have been
mutilated and manufactured into a _general_ Introduction or Preface,
to make up which the whole of chap. iii. book x. was also taken out
of its proper place and order. A more remarkable instance of merciless
distortion of an {492} author's labours is not to be found in
the records of literature. Iota may take it as a fact--and that a
remarkable one--that since 1740 there had appeared no edition of
Rollin having any claim to integrity, until the one edited by Bell,
and published by Blackie, in 1826, and reissued in 1837.

Veritas.

Glasgow, Dec. 7. 1850.


_MSS. of Locke._--E.A. Sandford, Esq., of Nynehead, near Taunton, has
a number of valuable letters, and other papers, of Locke, and also an
original MS. of his _Treatise on Education_. Locke was much at Chipley
in that neighbourhood, for the possessor of which this treatise was, I
believe composed.

W.C. Trevelyan.


_The Letter [gh]_.--Dr. Todd, in his _Apology for the Lollards_,
published by the Camden Society, alludes to the pronunciation of
the old letter [gh] in various words, and remarks that "it has
been altogether dropped in the modern spelling of [gh]erþ, 'earth,'
fru[gh]t, 'fruit,' [gh]erle, 'earl,' abi[gh]d, 'abide.'" The Doctor
is, however, mistaken; for I have heard the words "earl" and "earth"
repeatedly pronounced, in Warwickshire, _yarl_ and _yarth_.

J.R.


_A Hint to Publishers_ (Vol. ii., p. 439.) reminds me of a particular
grievance in Alison's _History of Europe_. I have the first edition,
but delay binding it, there being no index. Two other editions have
since been published, possessing each an index. Surely the patrons
and possessors of the first have a claim upon the Messrs. Blackwood,
independent of the probability of its repaying them as a business
transaction.

T.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


Queries.

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL QUERIES.

(Continued from p. 441.)

(25.) Has there been but a single effort made to immortalise
among printers Valentine Tag? Mercier, Abbe de Saint-Leger, in his
_Supplement a l'Hist. de l'Imprimerie_, by Marchand, p. 111., accuses
Baron Heinecken of having stated that this fictitious typographer set
forth the _Fables Allemandes_ in 1461. Heinecken, however, had merely
quoted six German lines, the penultimate of which is

  "An Sant Valantinus Tag,"

intimating only that the work had been concluded on St. Valentine's
day.

(26.) Can there be any more fruitful source of error with respect to
the age of early printed books than the convenient system of esteeming
as the primary edition that in which the date is for the first time
visible? It might be thought that experienced bibliographers would
invariably avoid such a palpable mistake; but the reverse of this
hypothesis is unfortunately true. Let us select for an example the
case of the _Vita Jesu Christi_, by the Carthusian Ludolphus de
Saxonia, a work not unlikely to have been promulgated in the infancy
of the typographic art. Panzer, Santander, and Dr. Kloss (189.)
commence with an impression at Strasburg, which was followed by one
at Cologne, in 1474. Of these the former is mentioned by Denis, and by
Bauer also (ii. 315.). Laire notes it likewise (_Ind. Par._, i. 543.:
cf. 278.), but errs in making Eggestein the printer, as no account
of him is discernible after 1472. (Meerman, i. 215.) Glancing at the
misconceptions of Maittaire and Wharton, who go no farther back than
the years 1478 and 1483 respectively, let us return to the suppressed
_editio princeps_ of 1474. De Bure (_Theol._, pp. 121-2.) records
a copy, and gives the colophon. He says, "Cette edition, qui est
l'originale de cet ouvrage, est fort rare;" and his opinion has been
adopted by Seemiller (i. 61.), who adds, "Litteris impressum est hoc
opus sculptis." In opposition to all these eminent authorities, I will
venture to express my belief that the earliest edition is one which
is _undated_. A volume in the Lambeth collection, without a date, and
entered in Dr. Maitland's _List_, p. 42., is thus described therein:
"Folio, eights, Gothic type, col. 57 lines;" and possibly the
printer's device (_List_, p. 348.) might be appropriated by I.
Mentelin, of Strasburg. To this book, nevertheless, we must allot a
place inferior to what I would bestow upon another folio, in which
the type is particularly Gothic and uneven, and in which each of the
double columns contains but forty-seven lines, and the antique initial
letters sometimes used are plainly of the same xylographic race as
that one with which the oldest _Viola Sanctorum_ is introduced. It
may be delineated, in technical terms, as being _sine loco, anno,
et nomine typographi. Car. sigg., paginarum num. et custodd. Vocum
character majusculus est, ater, crassus, et rudis._ Why should not
Mentz have been the birthplace of this book? for there it appears that
the author's MS. was "veneratione non parva" preserved, and there he
most probably died. I would say that it was printed between 1465 and
1470. It is bound up with a _Fasciculus Temporum_, Colon. 1479, which
looks quite modern when compared with it, and its beginning is: "De
Vita hiesu a venerabili viro fratro (_sic_) Ludolpho Cartusiensi edita
incipit feliciter." The leaves are in number forty-eight. At the end
of the book itself is, "Explicit vita ihesu." Then succeeds a leaf,
on the recto of which is a table of contents for the entire work
and after its termination we find: "Explicit vita cristi de quatuor
ewagelistis et expositone doctorum sanctorum sumpta."

(27.) Upon what grounds should Mr. Bliss (Vol. ii., p. 463.) refuse to
be contented with the {493} very accurate reprint of Cardinal Allen's
_Admonition to the Nobility and People of England and Ireland_, with a
Preface by Eupator (the Rev. Joseph Mendham), London, Duncan, 1842?

(28.) In an article on Ticknor's _History of Spanish Literature_, in
the _Quarterly Review_ for last September, p. 316, we read:

    "The second _Index Expurgatorius_ ever printed was the Spanish
    one of Charles V. in 1546."

Was the critic dreaming when he wrote these words? for, otherwise, how
could he have managed to compress so much confusion into so small a
space? To say nothing of "the _second_" Expurgatory Index, the _first_
was not printed until 1571; and this was a _Belgic_, not a "_Spanish_
one." It is stamped by its title-page as having been "in Belgia
concinnatus," and it was the product of the press of Plantin, at
Antwerp. With regard to the _Indices Expurgatorii_ of Spain, the
earliest of them was prepared by the command of Cardinal Quiroga, and
issued by Gomez, typographer-royal at Madrid, in 1584. The copy in
my hand, which belonged to Michiels, is impressed with his book-mark
"premiere edition." Will the writer in the _Quarterly Review_
henceforth remember that an _Expurgatory_ Index is essentially
different from one of the _Prohibitory_ class? But even though he
should faithfully promise to bear this fact in mind, his misreport as
to the year "1546" must not remain uncensured; for this was not the
date of the "second" appearance of an imperial _mandement_. There was
an ordinance published for the restraint of the press, not only in
1544, but also in 1540, and even in 1510. For the last, see Panzer,
vii. 258.

(29.) What is the nearest approach to certainty among the attempts
successfully to individuate the ancient relater of _Mirabilia Romae_?
That he lived in the thirteenth century seems to be admitted; and the
work, as put forth in Montfaucon's _Diarium Italicum_ (pp. 283-298.),
will be found to differ considerably from the edition, in 12mo. with
the arms of Pope Leo X. on the title-page.

(30.) "_Antiquitas Saeculi Juventus Mundi._"--The discussion in your
pages (Vol. ii., pp. 218. 350. 395. 466.) of the origin of this
phrase has so distinctly assumed a bibliographical aspect, that I
feel justified on the present occasion in inquiring from your various
correspondents whether, while they have been citing Bacon and Bruno,
Whewell and Hallam, they have lost sight of the beautiful language of
the author of the Second Book of Esdras (chap. xiv. 10.)?

    "The world hath lost his youth, and the times begin to wax
    old."

    "Saeculum perdidit juventutem suam, et tempora appropinquant
    senescere."--_Biblia_, ed. Paris, 1523.

R.G.

       *       *       *       *       *


Minor Queries.

_Rab. Surdam, Meaning of._--The eccentric but clever and learned
William Nicol, one of the masters of the High School of Edinburgh, and
noted as the friend of Burns, was the son of a poor man, a tailor,
in the village of Ecclefechan, in Dumfriesshire. He erected, over
the grave of his parents, in Hoddam churchyard, a _throuch stone_, or
altar-formed tomb, bearing the words

"RAB. SURDAM."

Query the meaning of these mystical characters?

Edinensis.


_Abbot Richard of Strata Florida._--Can you or any of your antiquarian
readers solve me the following. It is stated in vol. i. p. 100. of
Lewis Dwnn's _Heraldic Visitation into Wales, &c._, art. "Williames of
Ystradffin in the county of Caermarthen":--

    "William ab Thomas Goch, Esq., married Joan, daughter and
    sole heiress to Richard the Abbot of Strata Florida, county of
    Cardigan (temp. Henry VII.), son of David ab Howel of Gwydyr,
    North Wales."

From this I naturally expected to find some connecting link between
the Abbot and the ancient family of Wynn of Gwydyr, derived from
Rhodri Lord of Anglesey. In their lineage, however, the name of David
ab Howel does not occur; but about the aforesaid period one of their
progenitors named Meredith ab Sevan, it is stated, purchased Gwydyr
from a David ab Howel Coytmore, derived through the Lord of Penymachno
from Prince David, Lord of Denbigh, the ill-fated brother of Llewelyn,
last sovereign prince of North Wales. Is it not therefore likely that
the said Abbot Richard was son to the above David ab Howel (Coytmore),
the ancient proprietor of Gwydyr; that his surname was Coytmore;
and the arms he bore were those of his ancestor David Goch, Lord of
Penymachno, viz., Sa. a lion ramp., ar. within a bordure engr. or.

W.G.S.J.


_Cardinal Chalmers._--Can any of your readers give me some information
about a Cardinal Chalmers,--whether there ever was a cardinal of the
name, and where I could find some account of him? I have the boards of
an old book on which are stamped in gilding the Chalmers arms, with
a cardinal's hat and tassels over them. If I remember correctly,
the arms are those of the family of Chalmers, of Balnacraig, in
Aberdeenshire.

I have some reason to believe that the boards were purchased at the
sale of the author of _Caledonia_.

S.P.


_Armorial Bearings_ (Vol. ii., p. 424.).--My note of the coat-armour
in question stands thus: "Three bars between ten bells, four,
three, two, and one." And I have before now searched in vain for its
appropriation. I am consequently obliged to {494} content myself with
the supposition that it is a corruption, as it may easily be, of the
coat of Keynes, viz. "vair, three bars gules," the name of the wife of
John Speke, the great-great-grandfather of Sir John Speke, the founder
of the chapel; and this is the more probable as the arms of Somaster,
the name of his grandfather's wife, appear also in the roof of the
same chapel.

J.D.S.

    [J.D.S. is right in his blazon; and we had been requested by
    J.W.H. to amend his Query respecting this coat.--ED.]


"_Fiat Justitia_"--Who is the author of the apothegm--

  "Fiat justitia, ruat coelum?"

J.E.B. MAYOR.


_Painting by C. Bega_.--

  "Wy singen vast wat nieus, en hebben noch een buyt,
  Een kraekling, is ons winst, maet tliedtkenmoet eerst wt."

I have a small oil painting on oak panel which bears the above
inscription. The subject of the painting is a boy, who holds in his
hands a song, which he appears to be committing to memory, whilst
another boy is looking at the song over his shoulder. "C. Bega" is
written on the back of the picture-frame, that evidently being the
artist's name. I shall feel obliged by your translating the above two
lines for me, and also for information as to "C. Bega."

W.E. Howlett.

Kirton.


_Darcy Lever Church._--On the line of railway from Normanton to Bolton
there is a small station called Darcy Lever.

The church there struck me, on a casual view, as one of the most
beautiful examples of ecclesiastical architecture which I have ever
seen, and I should therefore like very much to know the date of the
structure, and, if possible, the architect.

The singularity which attracts attention is the delicate tracery of
the spire, which I should wish to see largely imitated.

E.


_R. Ferrer._--I have a drawing, _supposed_ to be of Sir W. Raleigh
by himself when in the Tower: it came from Daniel's _History of Henry
VII._, and below it was written,

  "R. Ferrer,
    Nec Prece nec Pretio."

Could the "Notes and Queries" ask if anything is known of this R.F.?

H.W.D.


_Writers on the Inquisition._--In the English edition of Voltaire's
_Philosophical Dictionary_, article "Inquisition," I find, among other
authors on that subject who are quoted, Hiescas Salazar, Mendoca
(sic: Query, Salasar y Mendoca?), Fernandez, Placentinus, Marsilius,
Grillandus, and Locatus. Can any of your bibliographical friends give
me any information as to these authors or their works? Let me at the
same time ask information respecting Bordoni, the author of _Sacrum
Tribunal Indicum in causis sanctae fidei contra Hereticos, &c._, Rome,
1648.

Iota.


_Buckden_ (Vol. ii., p. 446.).--Will M.C.R. explain his allusion to
"the abbot's house" at Buckden. I am not aware of Buckden having
been the seat of a monastic establishment. Perhaps what he calls "the
abbot's house" is part of the palace of the bishops of Lincoln.

C.H. Cooper.

Cambridge, December 2. 1850.


_True Blue._--Query the origin of the term "True Blue." After the
lapse of a few years it seems to have been applied indifferently to
Presbyterians and Cavaliers. An amusing series of passages might be
perhaps gathered exemplifying its use even to the present time. The
colour and "cry" True Blue are now almost monopolised by the Tory
party, although there are exceptions--Westmoreland and Yorkshire, for
instance.

Viator.


_Passage in Hamlet._--In Mr. C. Knight's "Library," "Pictorial," and
"Cabinet" editions of Shakspeare, the following _novel_ reading is
given without note or comment to say why the universally received text
has been altered. It occurs in _Hamlet_, Act I. Sc. 7.

  _Ham._               "Staid it long?
  _Hor._ "While one with _modern_ haste might tell a hundred."

As Mr. Knight is now publishing a "National" edition of Shakspeare,
perhaps you will allow me through your pages to ask for his authority
for this change of "moderate" to "modern," in order that his new
reading may either be justified or abandoned.

J.J.M.


_Inventor of a secret Cypher._--I think that there was in the
fifteenth century a Frenchman so profound a calculator that he
discovered for the King of France a secret cypher, used by the court
of Spain. I saw a notice of him in Collier's great _Dictionary_, but
have forgotten him, and should like to renew my acquaintance.

Tyro-Etymologicus.


_Fossil Elk of Ireland._--Can any of your learned readers give me
information on the fossil elk of Ireland--_Cervus Megaceros_,
_Cervus Giganteus_ of Goldsmith? It is stated to be found in various
countries, as France, Germany, and Italy, besides England and Ireland.
In the Royal Dublin Society museum there is, I am told, a rib of this
animal which has the appearance of having been wounded by some sharp
instrument, which remained long fixed in the bone, but not so deeply
as to affect the creature's life. It seemed to be such a wound as the
head of an arrow would produce.

It has been by some thought to be the "Sech" of Celtic tradition. I
have learned that the last specimen was shot so lately as 1533, and
that a {495} figure of the animal, mistaken for the common elk, is,
engraved in the November Chronicle. Now I should feel exceedingly
obliged if any information could be rendered me on the matters stated
above, as I am most anxious to collect all possible information
regarding this most noble species of the Dama tribe.

W.R.C. (a Subscriber).

Exeter, Nov. 1850.


_Red Sindon_ (Vol. ii., p. 393.).--Will Mr. Planche be so good as to
say what the _red sindon_ of the chamber of Philippa was?

B.W.


_Lights on the Altar._--1. What evidence is there that in the British
or Saxon churches lights were burned on the altar at the time of the
eucharist?

2. Are there any Canons of these churches, sanctioning the practice?

3. What evidence is there of any other service or solemnity, where
lights were burned in the day-time in these churches.

D. Sholbus.


_Beloe, Child's Book by._--In the _Sexagenarian_, by Beloe, is the
following passage:

    "In four mornings he (Rev. W. Beloe) wrote a book which
    he intended as an amusement for his children. Some friends
    recommended him to print it, and though many years have
    elapsed since it was written, it still continues so great a
    favourite with younger readers, that an edition is every year
    published."

Can any of your readers inform me the name of the book here alluded
to; and who was the publisher?

F.B. Relton

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies.

MERCENARY PREACHER.

In reply to a Query as to the meaning of this epithet in an obituary
notice, quoted, in Vol. i, p. 384., your correspondent Arun suggests,
in the same volume, p. 489., that it was most likely "used in its
primary signification, and in the sense in which we still apply it
to troops in the pay of a state, foreign to their own." I cannot help
thinking, that by the designation _mercenary_ was implied something
more disreputable than that merely of "one who, having no settled
cure, was at liberty to be 'hired;'" and in this I am borne out by
Chaucer, no mean authority, who, in his well-known picture of the
parson, in the Prologue to the _Canterbury Tales_, amongst the various
items of piety and virtuousness with which, in that inimitable piece
of character-painting, he credits the "pore persoun of a toun,"
distinctly states (I quote Mr. Wright's Percy Society edition),--

  "He was a Schepperde and no _mercenarie_."

Now this emphatic disclaimer shows clearly enough that when Chaucer
wrote, to be a _mercenary preacher_ was not, in _reputation_ at least,
a desirable position; and whether some two centuries and a half later,
the appellation became less objectionable, is a question not unworthy
of elucidation. No lengthened transcript is needed from so popular a
description; its whole spirit is directed not only against hirelings,
but also against non-residents:--

  "He sette not his benefice to huyre,
  And lefte his scheep encombred in the myre;
         *       *       *       *       *
  But dwelte at hoom and kepte wel his folde."

Neither hireling nor non-resident found favour in Chaucer's eyes. They
could have very little in common with one whom he says:--

  "But Criste's lore, and his apostles twelve,
  He taught, but first he folwed it himselve."

The _date_ of the obituary quoted, 1646, lends, too some force to the
supposition that "old Mr. Lewis" was, vulgarly speaking, "no better
than he ought to be." Milton not many years afterwards published his
memorable philippic _On the likeliest Means to remove Hirelings out
of the Church_; and after all allowance is made for the sternness of
the Puritan poet's theology, there would still remain enough to show
that his fiercely eloquent tract might well have been called forth
by the presence in the church of an overweening army of "Mercenary
Preachers." Further space, however, need not now be trenched on;
but should any new facts be adduced by some of your correspondents
illustrative of the curious entry referred to, I am sure they will
be welcomed by all your readers, and by none more than by yours,
obediently,

Henry Campkin.

Reform Club, Dec. 2. 1850.

       *       *       *       *       *


"THE OWL IS ABROAD."

(Vol. ii., p. 393.)

A.R. asks, "On what ground is the base song, 'The Owl is abroad'
attributed to Henry Purcell?" To which I reply, the mistake--for
_mistake_ it is--originated with Dr. Clarke (afterwards Clarke
Whitfield), who inserted it in his _Beauties of Purcell_. How little
this musician knew of the "beauties" of Purcell is exhibited in
his work; and how little he knew of the style and peculiarities of
the music of the period, is shown by his insertion of the song in
question. Dr. Clarke's mistake is noticed in the late William Linley's
elegant work entitled _Shakspeare's Dramatic Songs_, vol. i. p. 6. His
words are these:

    "In regard to the _Tempest_ music of Mr. Smith, it has been
    put to a strange medley of words; some of them are, however by
    Shakspeare; but they do not appear to come the brighter from
    the polish it was his design to give them; here and there we
    have a flash or two, but they must ever be vainly opposed to
    Purcell's pure and steady light. The song of 'No More {496}
    Dams,' is however an excellent one, and it has been selected
    accordingly. The other song, 'The Owl is abroad,' is also
    characteristic, but the words are not Shakspeare's. The last
    air has been inserted in Dr. Clarke's _Beauties of Purcell_,
    as Purcell's. _This is a mistake, which, in justice to Smith,
    should be rectified._"

Your correspondent also refers to Mr. G. Hogarth's _Memoirs of the
Musical Drama_, as an authority for attributing the song in question
to Purcell. Mr. Hogarth's work, I am sorry to say, can never be
depended upon as to facts. It is almost entirely made up from
_second-hand_ authorities; consequently blunders of the greatest
magnitude occur in every chapter. It has the merit of being a
well-written and an entertaining book; but here any praise must end.

A.R. speaks of having referred to Purcell's _Tempest_. I must beg to
correct him in this statement, as no _complete_ copy of that work
(my own excepted) is known to exist. Goodeson's (printed at the end
of the last century) is the only copy approaching to anything like
completeness, and that is very unlike Purcell's _Tempest_. Did A.R.
find in Purcell's _Tempest_ the music of the beautiful lyric, "Where
the Bee sucks?" No. Yet Purcell composed music to it. The absence,
then, of "The Owl is abroad," is no proof that Purcell did not write
music for that song also.

But, in the present case, A.R. may rest assured that the song about
which he inquires is the veritable composition of John Christopher
Smith.

Edward F. Rimbault.

       *       *       *       *       *


OLD ST. PANCRAS CHURCH.

Your correspondent Stephen (Vol. ii., p. 407.) asks for information
respecting the "Gospel Oak Tree at Kentish Town." Permit me to
connect with it another Query relative to the foundation of the
old St. Pancras Church, as the period of its erection has hitherto
baffled research. From the subjoined extracts, it appears to be of
considerable antiquity. The first extract is from a MS. volume which
I purchased at the sale of the library of the Rev. H.F. Lyte (Lot
2578.), entitled,--

    "Spicilegium: or A Brief Account of Matters relating to the
    ecclesiastical Politie of the British Church, compiled from
    Histories, Councils, Canons, and Acts of Parliament," A.D.
    1674.

It was apparently written for publication, but is without name
or initials. At p. 21. the writer, after giving an account of the
foundation of the cathedral church of Canterbury, goes on to say,--

    "Without the walls, betwixt the Cathedral and St. Martin's
    Church, stood an idol temple, which, with the leave and
    goodwill of King Ethelbert, St. Augustine purged, and then
    consecrated it to the memory of St. Pancras the martyr, and
    after prevailed with the king to found a monastery there for
    the monks, in honour of the two prime apostles, St. Peter and
    Paul, appointing it to be the burial-place of the _Kentish_
    Kings, as also for his successors in that see. The like
    to this was Pancras Church, near London, otherwise called
    _Kentish_ Church, which some ignorantly imagine was the mother
    of St. Paul's Church in London. I rather think it might be
    the burying-place belonging to the church of St. Paul, before
    Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury, obtained leave of the Pope
    to bury in cities. And in imitation of that at Canterbury,
    this near London was dedicated to St. Pancras and called
    _Kentish_ Church."

Connected with the Query of Stephen, it is worthy of notice that
St. Augustine held a conference with the Cambrian bishops at a place
called by Bede, Augustine's Ac, or Oak, on the borders of the Weccii
and West Saxons, probably near Austcliffe, in Gloucestershire (Bede's
_Eccles. Hist._ lib. ii. c. 2.).

_Norden_, who wrote in the reign of Elizabeth, in his _Speculum
Britainniae_, says that--

    "The church of St. Pancras standeth all alone, as utterly
    forsaken, old and weather-beaten, which, for the antiquitie
    thereof, is thought not to yield to Paule's of London."

which idea is repeated by _Weever_. And in the year 1749, some unknown
poet, soliloquising upon the top of Primrose Hill, bursts out into
the following rapturous musing at the sight of "the old weather-beaten
church" in the distance.--

  "The rev'rend spire of ancient Pancras view,
  To ancient Pancras pay the rev'rence due;
  _Christ's sacred altar there, first Britain saw_,
  And gaz'd, and worshipp'd, with an holy awe,
  Whilst pitying heav'n diffus'd a saving ray,
  And heathen darkness changed to Christian day."

_Gentleman's Mag._, xiv. 276.

Perhaps some of the gentlemen now engaged in compiling historical
notices of the parish of St. Pancras will be able to dispel the
Cimmerian darkness which at present envelopes the consecration of the
old church.

The late Mr. Smith, author of _Nollekins and his Times_, made some
collections towards a History of St. Pancras. Query, What has become
of them?

J. Yeowell.

Hoxton.


_Old St. Pancras Church_ (Vol. ii., p. 464.)--In a note in Croker's
edition of Boswell's _Johnson_ (8vo. 1848, p. 840.), Mr. Markland
says, that the reason assigned by your correspondent, and in the
text of Boswell, for the preference given by the Roman Catholics to
this place of burial, rests, as he had learned from unquestionable
authority, upon no foundation; "that mere prejudice exists amongst the
Roman Catholics in favour of this church, as is the case with respect
to other places of burial in various parts of the kingdom." Mr.
Markland derived his information from the late {497} Dr. Bramston, Mr.
Charles Butler, and Mr. Gage Rokewoode.

S.D.

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies to Minor Queries.


_Cardinal Allen's Admonition_ (Vol. ii., p. 463.).--In the Grenville
Library, at the British Museum, there is a copy of this work, which I
happen to have seen only a few hours before I read Mr. Bliss's Query.
Mr. Mendham's reprint of the _Admonition_, published by Duncan in
1842, appeared to me to be remarkably accurate, from a hasty collation
which I made of some parts of it with the original. The Grenville
copy was formerly Herbert's, and may possible be the same which was
sold for 35s. in Mr. Caldecott's sale in 1832. Connected with this
_Admonition_ of Cardinal Allen, there is another question of some
interest. In Bohn's Guinea Catalogue, No. 16,568., was a broadside,
there said to be _unknown and unique_, and entitled _A Declaration of
the Sentence and Deposition of Elizabeth, the Usurper and pretended
Queen of England_. This was drawn up by Cardinal Allen, and printed
at Antwerp; and copies were intended to be distributed in England upon
the landing of the Spanish Armada. Can any of your readers inform me
who is the present possessor of the document referred to, or whether
it has ever been reprinted, or referred to by any writer? Antony Wood,
I am aware, refers to the document, but it is plain that he never saw
it.

H.P.


_Bolton's Ace_ (Vol. ii., p. 413.).--Ray's anecdote concerning the
proverb, "Bate me an ace, quoth Bolton," is perhaps more correctly
told in the _Witty Aunsweres and Saiengs of Englishmen_ (Cotton MS.
Jul. F. x.):

    "William Paulett, Marques of Wynchester and Highe Treasurer
    of Engelande, being presented by John Heywoode with a booke,
    asked hym what yt conteyned? and when Heywoode told him 'all
    the proverbs in Englishe.' 'What all?' quoth my Lorde; 'No,
    _Bate me an ace, quoth Bolton_, is that in youre booke?' 'No,
    by my faith, my Lorde, I thinke not,' annswered Heywoode."

The "booke" presented by Heywoode to the Marquis of Winchester was _A
Dialogue contayning in Effect the Number of all the Proverbes in the
English Tongue compact in a Matter concerning two Marriages; first
printed by Berthelet in_ 1546. In 1556 it was "Newly overseen and
somewhat augmented." A copy of the latter is in the British Museum.

John Bolton, from whom the proverb derives its origin, was one of
Henry VIII.'s "diverting vagabonds." He is several times mentioned
as winning money from the king at cards and dice in one of the _Royal
Household Books_.

It is but right that I should give this information to your
correspondent "T. Cr.", as I have omitted to "note it" in my reprint
of Hutton's curious tract.

Edward F. Rimbault.


_Cardinal Beaton_ (Vol. ii., p. 433.).--In Smith's _Iconographia
Scotica_ is a portrait of Beaton said to be painted by Vandyke, and
evidently the one engraved in Lodge. It is accompanied by a memoir,
which would probably be of use to Scotus, as it contains references to
a great number of authorities used in its compilation. If Scotus has
not met with this, and will send me his address I will forward to him
the leaves containing the life.

John I. Dredge.

Pateley Bridge.


_Portrait of Cardinal Beaton_ (Vol. ii., p. 433.).--In No. 57.
allusion is made to the portrait of Cardinal Beaton, now at Blairs
College, near Aberdeen. In Fyvie Castle, Aberdeenshire, where one
of the copies of this portrait, from the easel of James Giles, Esq.,
R.S.A., now is, there are some manuscripts of Abbe Macpherson (who
sent the Blairs picture to this country), purchased at the sale of
the late Mr. Chalmers, author of _Caledonia_. Among them there might
possibly be some which might tend to confirm the authenticity of the
original painting.

S.P.


"_He that runs may read_" (Vol. ii., pp. 374. 439.).--It is idle to
prolong this controversy. I think it is no interpretation of part
of ver. 2., chap. ii, Habakkuk. Nor do I believe that it has any
reference to it. But it is obviously a favourite poetic quotation, and
your readers will find it at line 80, in Cowper's _Tirocinium, or A
Review of Schools_.

J.G.H.

Pimlico.


_Sir George Downing_ (Vol. ii., p. 464.).--Particulars respecting the
first Sir George Downing may be found in Wood's _Athenae Oxonienses_,
ii. 27. 758, 759.; Wotton's _English Baronetage_, iv. 415.;
_Parliamentary History of England_, xix. 411. 465. 499.; _Continuation
of the Life of Edward Earl of Clarendon_, royal 8vo. edit., 1116,
1117. 1165-1170, Burnet's _History of his own Time_, ed. 1838, 136.;
Heath's _Chronicle_, 2nd edit., 448. 528, 529, 530. 582.; _Personal
History of Charles II_. (at end of Bohn's edition of _Grammont_),
431.; Lister's _Life of Clarendon_, ii. 231-255. 268-271. 311-315.
(Mr. Lister's third volume contains numerous letters to and from Sir
George Downing); Vaughan's _Protectorate of Cromwell_, i. 227. 255,
256. 264. 266. 268., ii. 299. 317. 433.; Courtenay's _Memoirs of Sir
W. Temple_, i. 117. 264. 269.; Pepys's _Diary_; and Evelyn's _Diary_.

Wotton was not acquainted with the fact stated by your correspondent,
that "the family is of most ancient origin in Devonshire." Wotton
states, and apparently on good authority, that the first of the family
of whom he had found mention, was Godfrey Downing, of the county of
the city of {498} _Norwich_, who had a son, Arthur Downing, of the
county of _Norfolk_, whose son, Calybut (the grandfather of the first
Sir George), was of Shennington, in _Gloucestershire_.

Mr. Sims, in his _Index to the Heralds' Visitations_, refers to
pedigrees and arms of the family of Downing under _Buckinghamshire_,
_Essex_, and _Norfolk_.

C.H. Cooper.

Cambridge, December 9. 1850.


_Burning to Death, or Burning of the Hill_ (Vol. ii., p. 441.).--The
following extract from Collinson's _Somerset_, vol. iii. p. 374.,
where it is quoted from the _Laws of the Miners of Mendip_, 1687, may
throw some light upon the incidents referred to by J.W.H.:--

    "Among certain laws by which the miners were anciently
    regulated is the following, viz.:

    "'That if any man of that occupation do pick or steal any lead
    or ore to the value of thirteen pence halfpenny, the lord or
    his officer may arrest all his lead and ore, house and hearth,
    with all his goods, grooves, and works, and keep them as
    forfeit to his own use; and shall take the person that hath so
    offended, and bring him where his house and work, and all his
    tools and instruments belonging to the same occupation, are;
    and put him into his house or work, and set every thing on
    fire about him, and banish him from that occupation before all
    the miners for ever.'--_Laws of the Miners of Mendip_, 1687.

    "This is called _Burning of the Hill_."

It is to be hoped that any of the readers of "Notes and Queries"
resident among this mining population (who are said to retain many
other ancient and remarkable customs), and possessing any information
in illustration of it, will record it in your columns.

William J. Thoms.


_The Roscommon Peerage_ (Vol. ii., p. 469.).--My attention has been
called to an article in No. 58. respecting the descendants of the
first Earl of Roscommon.

As I am very interested in the subject, I beg An Hiberian, should this
meet his eye, to allow me to correspond with him.

He is quite right as to the old tombstone. When I was a boy, some five
or six and forty years ago, my father, one day as we were passing by
the churchyard, mentioned that stone to me; but as I had then several
cousins living whose claims were prior to mine, the matter made but
little impression upon my mind.

My father was Thomas, the second son of Garrett, who was the son of
Thomas, down to whom the genealogy from the first Earl was traced upon
the stone.

That stone and another, as I learn, were removed and destroyed, or
concealed, many years ago, doubtless through some interested motive;
and, unfortunately, no copies of the inscriptions have, that I can
discover, been preserved by any branch of the family.

When the late Earl became a claimant, it was not known whether
the descendants of Patrick, my father's elder brother, who had all
emigrated, were living or dead; which circumstance, it was considered,
would be an impediment to my claim.

Besides which it was also thought, the testimony on the stone having
been lost, that the traditions in the family would not be sufficient
to establish a claim: under these circumstances I refrained from
coming forward to oppose the claims of the late Earl. But now, as
it is believed that there are none of my cousins living, I am
endeavouring to collect evidence in support of my claim; and proof of
what your correspondent states would be exceedingly useful.

Garrett Dillon, M.D.

8. Queen's Parade, Bath.


_The Word "after" in the Rubric_ (Vol. ii., p. 424.).--In the edition
of the _Latin Common Prayer_, published in 12mo., Londini, 1574, which
must be a very early edition (probably the fourth or fifth), there is
a great verbal difference in the conclusion of the exhortation from
the English original. It stands thus:

    "Quapropter omnes vos qui praesentes hic adestis, per Dei nomen
    obtestor, ut interni sensus vestri, cum meo conjuncti pariter,
    ad caelestis clementiae thronum subvolent, ut in hunc, qui
    sequitur, sermonem, succedatur."

Then follows the rubric, "Generalis confessio, ab universa
congregatione dicenda, genibus flexis." It would appear from this,
that the confession was repented at the same time by the minister and
the congregation, and not by the congregation after the minister.

Of the authenticity of this edition there can be no doubt. It bears
the royal arms on the titlepage, and is printed "Cum privilegio Regiae
majestatis. Excudebat Thomas Vautrollerius." I have not seen the
earlier editions. A Greek version was printed with the Latin, in one
volume, one year before; and the Latin was republished in 1584. The
edition of 1574 was printed before the Catechism was completed by the
questions on the sacraments. In the rubrics of the Lord's Prayer, in
the Post Communion, and in the last prayers the Commination Service,
the word _after_ is rendered by _post_.

The difference between the Latin and the English in the exhortation
is very remarkable, for it does not make the priest dictate the
confession, but repeat it with them; whereas the English services of
Edward and Elizabeth, unaltered in any subsequent editions, distinctly
make the priest dictate the confession. There can be no doubt about
the sense of the word _after_, when we find it in the rubrics of the
Post Communion and Commination translated _post_. Some of your readers
may be able to give an account of the Latin versions, and explain by
what influence the alteration {499} was made, and how it came to be
sanctioned, while the English remained unchanged.

E.C.H.


_Disputed Passage in the Tempest_ (Vol. ii., pp. 259. 299. 337.
429.).--Allow me to remind Mr. George Stephens, who takes credit for
adhering to the "primitive" text of a certain disputed passage in
the _Tempest_, that neither he nor any one else does so; that the
"primitive" text, that is, the text of the first folio, is mere
nonsense, and that he simply adopts the first attempt at correction,
instead of the second, or the third, or the fourth.

Enough has been written, perhaps, on the meaning of this passage; and
opinion will always be divided between those who adopt the prosaical,
and those who prefer the more poetical reading: but when Mr. Stephens
says the construction is merely an instance of a "common ellipsis,"
I cannot but think it would be an advantage if he would inform us
whether he uses this term in its common acceptation, and if so, if he
would give the meaning stated at first. If this be a common ellipsis,
I must confess myself to be so stupid as not to understand it.

I dissent, too, altogether from the opinion that the comma is of
any importance in the construction of this passage. Assuming, as one
correspondent says, and as Mr. Stephens (for I don't quite understand
his brief judgment) seems to say, that "_most busie least_" means
_least busy_, the placing a comma between "least" and the conjunction
"when" can in no way affect the sense, though, as a matter of taste, I
should decidedly object to it.

To show that I am not wedded to any particular interpretation, I have
another suggestion to make which has struck me even while writing.
Taking "lest" for _least_, can it have been used for _at least_, or as
some people say, _leastwise_? The sense would still be the same as I
have contended for, expressed something like this: "But these sweet
thoughts do even refresh my labours: at least they are most busy when
I forget myself in my occupation."

Samuel Hickson.


_Lady Compton's Letter_ (Vol. ii., p. 424.).--Mr. C.H. Cooper inquires
whether this letter appeared before 1839? Gifford gives an extract
from it in Massinger's _City Madam_, Act II., where the daughters of
Sir John Frugal make somewhat similar stipulations from their suitors.
When speaking of this letter as "a modest and consolatory one,"
Gifford adds, "it is _yet extant_." The editor of a work entitled
_Relics of Literature_ (1823) gives it at length, with this reference,
"Harleian MSS. 7003." The property of Lady Compton's father, Sir John
Spencer, is stated variously from 300,000l. to 800,000l. In this case,
riches brought with them their customary share of anxieties. Lysons,
in his _Environs of London_, informs us that a plot was actually laid
for carrying off the wealthy merchant from his house at Canonbury, by
a pirate of Dunkirk, in the hope of obtaining a large ransom.

J.H.M.


_Midwives licensed_ (Vol. ii., p. 408.).--I have a manuscript volume
which belonged to Bishop Warburton, and apparently to other Bishops
of Gloucester before him; containing, amongst other Pontificalia, in
writing of various ages, a number of forms of licences, among which
occurs "Licentia Obstetricis," whereby the bishop

    "eandem A.B. ad exercendam Artem et Officium Obstetricis in et
    per totam Diocesin Gloucestrensem praedietam admisit et Literas
    Testimoniales superiade fieri decrevit."

There is no mention of charms or incantations in the licence, but the
oath "de jure in hac parte requisito," is required to have been made.
The form is of the same writing as several others which bear dates
from 1709 to 1719. Below is a memorandum of the fees, amounting to
17s. 6d.

Thomas Kerslake.

Bristol.


_Echo Song_ (Vol. ii., p. 441.).--Although I cannot supply Llyd Rhys
Morgan with the name of the writer, I may refer him to D'Israeli's
_Curiosities of Literature_, p. 257. (Moxon's edit. 1840), where he
will find another Echo Song, by a certain Francis Cole, so similar to
the one he quotes as to induce me to think that they either come from
the same pen, or that the one is an imitation of the other.

Y.


_The Irish Brigade_ (Vol. ii., pp. 407. 452.).--It is understood John
C. O'Callaghan, Esq., author of the _Green Book_, contemplated a
much more copious work on the subject than that by the late Matthew
O'Connor, mentioned by your correspondent (p. 452.). The _Union
Quotidienne_ of 23rd April last announced a work by M. de la Ponce,
_Essai sur l'Irlande Ancienne, et sur les Brigades Irlandaises au
Service de France, depuis leur Organisation en 1691_; but whether
published or not I am not aware. Perhaps some of your correspondents
may know.

Drumlethglas.


_To save one's Bacon_ (Vol. ii., p. 424.).--May I venture to suggest
that this phrase has reference to the custom at Dunmow, in Essex, of
giving a flitch of bacon to any married couple residing in the parish,
who live in harmony for a year and a day. A man and his wife who
stopped short when on the verge of a quarrel might be said to have
"just saved their bacon;" and in course of time the phrase would be
applied to any one who barely escaped any loss or danger.

X.Z.


_"The Times" Newspaper and the Coptic Language_ (Vol. ii., p.
377.).--J.E. quotes a passage from _The Times_ newspaper respecting
the Coptic language, and asks if any correspondent can furnish a
clearer account of its structure than the writer of that article has
given. A reference to the work {500} which he was reviewing (Kenrick's
_Ancient Egypt under the Pharaohs_) will show the origin of the
apparent inconsistency on which J.E. animadverts. In that work it is
said (vol. i. p. 100.):

    "The roots of the Coptic language appear to have been
    generally monosyllabic, and the derivatives have been formed
    by a very simple system of prefixing, inserting, and affixing
    certain letters, which have usually undergone but little
    change, not having been incorporated with the root, nor melted
    down by crasis, nor softened by any euphonic rules."

Again (vol. i. p. 107.), speaking of the supposed connexion between
India and Egypt:

    "The Sanscrit is the most polished and copious language ever
    spoken by man; the Coptic, the most rude of all which were
    used by the civilised nations of antiquity."

The writer in _The Times, currente calamo_, has thrown the contents
of these two sentences together, and somewhat strengthened the
expressions of his author, who does not call the Coptic system of
inflexion rude, nor assert that it is totally different from the
Syro-Arabian system, but quotes the opinion of Benfey, that they
differ so much that neither can have originated from the other, but
both from a parent language. The distinction between a system of
_inflexion_ and one of _affixes_ and _prefixes_ is not permanent. What
we call the inflexions of the Greek verb were once, no doubt, affixes;
but while, in the Greek, they have become incorporated with the root,
in the Coptic they stand rigidly apart from it.

Herampion.


_Luther's Hymns_ (Vol. ii., p. 327.).--A writer in the _Parish Choir_
of September last (p. 140.) has traced the words "In the midst of life
we are in death" to a higher source than the Salisbury Service-book.
It occurs in the choir-book of the monks of St. Gall in Switzerland,
and was probably composed by Notker, surnamed the Stammerer, about the
end of the ninth century, or the beginning of the tenth.

C.H.

St. Catherine's Hall, Cambridge.


_Osnaburg Bishopric_ (Vol. ii., pp. 358. 484.).--The occupiers of this
bishopric were princes ecclesiastical of the empire, and had not
only the ordinary authority of bishops in their dioceses, but were
sovereigns of their provinces and towns in the same manner as were the
princes temporal.

The bishopric of Osnaburg was founded by Charlemagne, and was filled
by various princes until 1625, when Cardinal Francis William, Count of
Wartemburg, was elected by the chapter.

By the Treaty of Osnaburg, 1642, which was ratified at the Peace of
Westphalia, 1648, the House of Brunswick resigned all claims to the
archbishoprics of Magdeburg and Bremen, and to the bishoprics of
Halberstadt and Ratzburg; and received the alternate nomination of
the bishopric of Osnaburg, which was declared to belong jointly to the
Catholic and the Protestant branch of Brunswick.

Under this arrangement, on the death of Count Wartemburg in 1662,
Ernest Augustus I., the sixtieth bishop, patriarch of the present
royal family of England, succeeded to the government of Osnaburg,
which he held for thirty-six years.

Ernest Augustus II, sixty-second bishop, Duke of Brunswick and
Lunenburg, was made Duke of York and Albany, and Bishop of Osnaburg,
in 1716, in the room of Charles Joseph of Lorraine. He died in 1748.

Frederick, second son of George III., was appointed bishop at an early
age; he being called, in a work dedicated to him in 1772, "An infant
bishop."

By the Treaty of Vienna, the bishopric of Osnaburg was made part of
the kingdom of Hanover.

The ancient territory of the Bishop of Osnaburg consisted of Osnaburg,
Iborg, Forstenau, Bostel, Quakenburg, Vorde Gronsburg, Hunteburg on
the lake Dummer, Witlage, Melle, and Holte.

In Halliday's _History of the House of Guelph_, 4to., 1821, at
p. 133., the conditions of the Treaty of Osnaburg relative to the
bishopric are given at length.

Whilst preparing the above I have seen the reply of F.E. at p. 447.,
and would beg to correct the following errors:--

The Treaty of Osnaburg was 1642, not 1624.

Halliday's _House of Guelph_ was published 1821, not 1820.

Reference to the conditions of the treaty at p. 133. is omitted.

F.B. Relton.


_Scandal against Queen Elizabeth_ (Vol. ii., p. 393.).--There is a
current belief in Ireland that the family of Mapother, in Roscommon,
is descended from Queen Elizabeth: and there are many other traditions
completely at variance with the ordinarily received opinion as to
her inviolate chastity. A discussion of the matter might discover the
foundation on which they rest.

R. Ts.


_Pretended Reprint of Ancient Poetry_ (Vol. ii., p. 463.).--The late
Rev. Peter Hall was the person at whose expense the two copies of the
work mentioned by Dr. Rimbault were reprinted. At the sale of that
gentleman's library, in May last, one of these two reprints was sold
for 20s.

Cato.


_Martin Family_ (Vol. ii., p. 392.).--If your correspondent Clericus
will refer to Morant's _History of Essex_, vol. ii. p. 188., he will
find some account of the family of Martin. There do not appear to
be any families of the name of Cockerell or Hopkins in the same
neighbourhood.

J.A.D.


"_Ge-ho_," _Meaning of_.--I am a little girl, only two years and five
months old, and my kind aunt Noo teaches me to spell. Now I hear the
men, when driving their horses, say "Ge-ho;" {501} and I think they
say so because G, O, spells "Go." Is it so, can anybody say?

I am, your youngest correspondent,

Katie.

    [Better etymologists than Katie have made far worse guesses
    than our youngest correspondent. But in Brand's _Popular
    Antiquities_, by Ellis, vol. i. p. 294. ed. 1841 (the
    passage is not in the last edition), is the following curious
    illustration of the phrase _Ge-ho_.

    "A learned friend, whose communications I have frequently had
    occasion to acknowledge in the course of this work, says,
    the exclamation '_Geho, Geho_,' which carmen use to their
    horses, is probably of great antiquity. It is not peculiar to
    this country, as I have heard it used in France. In the story
    of the Milkmaid, who kicked down her pail, and with it all her
    hopes of getting rich, as related in a very ancient collection
    of apologues, entitled _Dialogus Creaturarum_, printed
    at Gonda in 1480, is the following passage: 'Et cum sic
    gloriaretur, et cogitaret cum quanta gloria duceretur ad illum
    virum super equum dicendo _gio gio_, cepit percutere terram
    quasi pungeret equum calcaribus.'"

    Brand's learned correspondent was, doubtless, the late Mr.
    Douce, from whom the writer of this Note has often heard the
    same illustration.]


_Lady Norton_ (Vol. ii., p. 480.).--An account of lady Norton may be
seen in _Memoirs of several ladies of Great Britain, who have been
celebrated for their writings or skill in the learned languages arts
and sciences_. By George Ballard. Oxford, 1752. 4º. She is said to
have written two books, viz.: _The applause of virtue. In four parts._
etc. London, 1705. 4º. pp. 262; and _Memento mori: or meditations on
death_. London 1705. 4º. pp. 108. She was living in advanced years,
about 1720.

The same biographical repertory contains an account of her daughter,
lady Gethin--of whom some particulars were given by myself in a small
volume of essays printed for private circulation, under the title of
_Curiosities of literature illustrated_, in 1837. On that occasion
I ventured to express my belief that lady Gethin did not compose one
sentence of the _remains_ ascribed to her; but I hope the claims of
lady Norton to _patristic learning_ may more successfully bear the
test of critical examination.

Bolton Corney.

       *       *       *       *       *


Miscellaneous.

NOTES ON BOOKS, SALES, CATALOGUES, ETC.

Honour to the University of Oxford, Honour to the Rev. Josiah
Forshall, and though last not least, Honour to the learned Keeper
of the Manuscripts in the British Museum, Sir Frederick Madden, for
giving us _The Holy Bible containing the Old and New Testaments with
the Apocryphal Books, in the earliest English versions made from the
Latin Vulgate, by John Wycliffe and his followers_. Never did the
University Press put forth a more valuable or more important work
than these four handsome quartos, (published, too, at the marvellously
small price of five guineas), in which are now printed, for the first
time, in an entire form, those Versions which may be regarded as
the earliest in the English language which embrace any considerable
proportion of the Holy Scriptures. By this publication, Oxford has
done her part towards wiping away the disgrace which has so long
attached to this country--which boasts, and justly and proudly boasts,
of being _the_ country of Bibles--for its long-continued neglect of
these early versions of the vernacular Scriptures. How great was
the influence which they exercised upon the religious opinions and
sentiments of the nation at large in the interval between the years
1382 and 1526, how great an amount of scriptural truth they diffused,
how effectually they supplied the opponents of the Papal system with
the means of exposing its abuses and errors, and how they thereby
laid a deep foundation for the reform of the sixteenth century, may be
clearly seen by a perusal of the Preface to this great work; on which
the learned editors have employed their learning and industry for two
and twenty years, to their own high credit, and to the vindication
of English scholarship. But our limited space will not admit of
our detailing all the claims which this _editio princeps_ of the
_Wycliffite Scriptures_ has upon the attention of our readers, or of
pointing out all the great services which its editors have rendered
to the literary, no less than to the religious world. When we state
briefly that in the work before us we have the _two_ versions, the
_earlier_ and _later_ versions, printed side by side; that these
are accompanied by various readings gathered from the collection of
upwards of one hundred different manuscripts; introduced by a preface
full of new and most interesting particulars of this first attempt to
give to this country the Scriptures in a tongue "understanded of the
people;" and the whole rendered complete by an extensive and most
valuable glossary, we feel persuaded our readers will agree with us in
giving honour to all who have had hand or heart in the production of
these deeply interesting volumes.

We have received the following Catalogues:--C.J. Stewart's (11.
King William Street, Strand) Catalogue of Doctrinal, Controversial,
Practical, and Devotional Divinity; a well-timed catalogue containing
some extraordinary Collections, as of Roman and Spanish Indexes of
Books prohibited and expurgated, and of Official and Documentary
Works on the Inquisition; B.R. Wheatley's (44. Bedford Street, Strand)
Catalogue of Scarce and Interesting Books for 1851; Joel Rowsell's
(28. Great Queen Street) Catalogue No. XL. of a Select Collection of
Second-hand Books; John Miller's (43. Chandos Street) Catalogue No.
15. for 1850 of Books Old and New.

       *       *       *       *       *


BOOKS AND ODD VOLUMES

WANTED TO PURCHASE.

George Herbert, Jacula Prudentum; or, Outlandish Proverbs, etc. 12mo.
London. 1651.

N.R. Gent, Proverbs, English, French, Dutch, Italian, and Spanish.
12mo. London. 1659.

*** Letters, stating particulars and lowest price, _carriage free_,
to be sent to Mr. Bell, Publisher of "NOTES AND QUERIES," 186. Fleet
Street.

       *       *       *       *       *{502}


Notices to Correspondents.

Our Christmas Number. _This week our able contemporary_, Household
Words, _treats his readers to a Christmas Number. It is one of the
many good things in which our popular friend has anticipated us.
Thanks, however, to the Peace Congress, we are content to be thus
anticipated without giving utterance to the time-honoured_ "Pereant
qui ante nos nostra dixerunt." _Still, as we earnestly desire to
close the year in peace with all the world, or, which is much the same
thing, with all the readers of_ Notes and Queries, _we propose, on
Saturday next, treating them to a_ Christmas Number, _rich in articles
on_ Folk Lore, Popular Literature, &c., _and to use as ballast for our
barque, which will at such occasion be of unwonted lightness, a number
of Replies which we have by us imploring for admittance into our
columns._

The Index to Volume the Second _will be ready early in January._

_All Catalogues, Bills, or Prospectuses intended for insertion in our
next Monthly Part, must be sent to the Office, 186. Fleet Street, by
Friday the 27th instant._

       *       *       *       *       *

Seventeenth Thousand. Fcp., price 7s.

PROVERBIAL PHILOSOPHY. A Book of Thoughts and Arguments, originally
treated. By Martin Farquhar Tupper, Esq., D.C.L.F.R S., of Christ
Church, Oxford. With a Portrait.

London: Thomas Hatchard, 187. Piccadilly.

       *       *       *       *       *

The concluding Volume of the Archbishop of Canterbury's Exposition of
the New Testament.

Just published, 8vo., or 2 vols. 12mo., price 9s.

A PRACTICAL EXPOSITION OF ST. PAUL'S EPISTLES to the THESSALONIANS, to
TIMOTHY, TITUS, PHILEMON, and to the HEBREWS, in the form of Lectures,
intended to assist the practice of Domestic Instruction and Devotion.
By John Bird Sumner, D.D., Archbishop of Canterbury.

London: Thomas Hatchard, 187. Piccadilly.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now Ready, cloth, 1s.

THE GREEK CHURCH. A Sketch by the Author of "Proposals for Christian
Union."

"Like its predecessors, the volume is amiable and
interesting."--_Notes and Queries._

"Anything written by the Author of 'Proposals for Christian Union' is
sure to be distinguished by an excellent spirit. The 'Greek Church,'
a Sketch, is well put together; and, though slight, will be found to
contain as much real information as many a book of greater size and
more pretension."--_The Guardian_.

This Essay concludes the Series. The four preceding numbers on sale,
Second Edition, 1s. each.

London: James Darling, Great Queen Street, Lincoln's-Inn-Fields.
Edinburgh: 12. South St. Andrew's Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Price 1d., by Post 2d., or 5s. per Hundred for Distribution.

WESTMINSTER AND DR. WISEMAN; or, FACTS _v._ FICTION. By William
Page Wood, Esq., M.P., Q.C. Reprinted from _The Times_ with an
Advertisement on the subject of the Westminster Spiritual Aid Fund,
and more especially on the Duty and Justice of applying the Revenues
of the suspended Stalls of the Abbey for the adequate Endowment of the
District Churches in the immediate neighbourhood.

Second Edition, with an Appendix.

London: George Bell, 186. Fleet Street; Messrs. Rivington's, St.
Paul's Church-yard, and Waterloo Place; and Thomas Hatchard, 187.
Piccadilly and _by Order_, of all Booksellers.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. MURRAY'S

LIST OF BOOKS JUST READY.

       *       *       *       *       *

I.

LAVENGRO. By George Borrow, Author of "The Bible in Spain." Portrait.
3 vols. Post 8vo.

II.

THE LEXINGTON PAPERS; or the Official and Private Correspondence of
Robert Sutton, while Minister at Vienna, 1694-98. 8vo. 14s.

III.

THE MILITARY EVENTS IN ITALY, 1848-9. From the German. By Lord
Ellesmere. Map. Post 8vo. 9s.

IV.

A MEMOIR OF BISHOP STANLEY, with his Addresses and Charges. By Rev.
A.P. Stanley, Author of "Life of Dr. Arnold." 8vo.

V.

A VOYAGE TO THE MAURITIUS AND BACK. By the Author of "Paddiana." Post
8vo.

VI.

THE LAW OF NAVAL COURTS MARTIAL, for the guidance of Naval Officers.
By William Hickman, R.N. 8vo.

VII.

ENGLAND AS IT IS: Political, Social, and Industrial. By William
Johnston. 2 vols. Post 8vo. Next Week.

VIII.

CHRISTIANITY IN CEYLON. Its Introduction and Progress. By Sir J.
Emerson Tennent. Woodcuts. 8vo. 15s.

IX.

THE PALACES OF NINEVEH AND PERSEPOLIS RESTORED. An Essay on Assyrian
and Persian Architecture. By James Fergusson. Woodcuts. 8vo.

X.

A MANUAL OF ELEMENTARY GEOLOGY. By Sir Charles Lyell. Third Edition,
revised. Woodcuts. 8vo.

XI.

HANDBOOK OF ITALIAN PAINTING. From the German of Kugler. Edited by Sir
Charles Eastlake. Second Edition. 100 Woodcuts. Post 8vo.

XII.

SALMONIA or, Days of Fly-Fishing. By Sir H. Davy. Fourth Edition.
Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. 6s.

XIII.

CONSOLATIONS IN TRAVEL. By Sir H. Davy. Fifth Edition. Woodcuts. Fcap.
8vo. 6s.

XIV.

SPECIMENS OF THE TABLE-TALK OF SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE. Third edition.
Portrait. Fcap. 8vo. 6s.

XV.

REJECTED ADDRESSES. By James and Horace Smith. Twenty-second Edition.
Portraits. Fcap. 8vo. 5s.

XVI.

MURRAY'S MODERN COOKERY, based on the well-known work of Mrs.
Rundell. Entirely revised, and adapted to the present time. By A Lady.
Woodcuts. Fcap. 8vo. Next Week.

XVII.

THE PROGRESS OF THE NATION. By G.R. Porter. Third Edition, corrected
to the present time. 8vo.

50. Albemarle Street.

       *       *       *       *       *{503}

On the 1st of January 1851 will be commenced the Publication of

A CHEAP RE-ISSUE

In Five Monthly Volumes, price only 6s. each, with Portraits, &c.,
handsomely bound, of

PEPYS' DIARY AND CORRESPONDENCE.

ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE REIGNS OF CHARLES II. AND JAMES II.

Edited by LORD BRAYBROOKE.

This Edition will contain all the passages restored from the Original
Manuscript, and all the Additional Notes. Vol. I. will be ready with
the Magazines on the 1st of January, 1851, and the subsequent volumes
will appear in regular monthly succession. Those who desire copies
on the days of publication, are requested to give their orders
immediately to their respective Booksellers.

"We unhesitatingly characterize this journal as the most remarkable
production of its kind which has ever been given to the world. Pepys
paints the Court, the Monarchs, and the times, in more vivid
colours than any one else. His 'Diary' makes us comprehend the great
historical events of the age, and the people who bore a part in them,
and gives us more clear glimpses into the true English life of the
times than all the other memorials of them that have come down to our
own."--_Edinburgh Review_.

"The best book of its kind in the English language. 'Pepys' Diary' is
the ablest picture of the age in which the writer lived, and a work of
standard importance in English literature."--_Athenaeum._

       *       *       *       *       *

Also now ready, in 2 vols. 8vo., uniform with "The Curiosities of
Literature." 28s. bound.

THE LIFE AND REIGN OF CHARLES I.

BY J. DISRAELI.

A New and Revised Edition, edited, with a Preface, by B. DISRAELI,
M.P.

The appearance of this New Edition at the present moment will
doubtless be considered remarkably opportune, for the subjects of
which the work treats not only attract, but absorb the mind of the
nation.

"By far the most important work upon the important age of Charles I.
that modern times have produced."--_Quarterly Review._

       *       *       *       *       *

Henry Colburn, Publisher, 13. Great Marlborough Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

Just Published,

CHRISTMAS PRESENTS AND NEW-YEAR GIFTS. A Series of Sixteen Interesting
Designs, illustrating TEARS, by Miss Jessie Macleod, with Descriptive
Poems.

  There is a fountain in the human heart
  Whence every feeling of our nature flows;
  Ofttimes the waters fall as years depart,
  Yet leave the source where once their brightness rose;
  Thus all our joys and sorrows, hopes and fears,
  O'erflow the swelling breast, and find relief in tears.

Elegantly bound, price 1l. 11s. 6d. The Borders embellished with gold,
and extra bound in morocco, 2l. 2s.

       *       *       *       *       *

By Miss Girard, beautifully coloured as the originals,

FLOWERS OF SHAKSPEARE,

FLOWERS OF MILTON,

Price per Volume, 26s. cloth. Bound in morocco, 42s.

London: Ackermann & Co., 96. Strand.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO FOREIGN BOOKSELLERS.--Four Pounds are offered for a copy of an old
German book, printed at Tuebingen by Erhardo Cellio in 1602, containing
an account of the Travels in England of Lord Frederick, Duke of
Wuerttemburg and Teck, Count of Muempelgart, &c. The original title is
not known. Address to J.O.H., care of Mr. J. Russell Smith, 4. Old
Compton Street, Soho Square, London.

       *       *       *       *       *

44. Bedford Street, Strand.

May now be had, price 6d., or sent by Post on receipt of Twelve
Postage Stamps,

B.R. WHEATLEY'S CATALOGUE FOR 1851 OF BOOKS IN LITERARY HISTORY AND
BIBLIOGRAPHY, interspersed with Works on a variety of subjects likely
to interest the Gatherer of Trifles in the pleasant By-ways of History
and Literature.

       *       *       *       *       *

SMITH, ELDER, & Co.'s NEW PUBLICATIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW CHRISTMAS BOOKS.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Thackeray's New Christmas Book.

THE KICKLEBURYS ON THE RHINE. A New Picture Book, Drawn and Written by
Mr. M.A. Titmarsh. Price 5s. plain, 7s. 6d. coloured. Now ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

A New Fairy Tale.

THE KING OF THE GOLDEN RIVER. Or, The Black Brothers. With
Illustrations by Richard Doyle. Now ready.

       *       *       *       *       *

NEW WORKS NOW READY.

TABLE TALK. By Leigh Hunt. 1 vol. crown 8vo., cloth gilt, price 7s.

       *       *       *       *       *

PIQUE: A Novel. In 3 vols. post 8vo.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONVERSATIONS OF GOETHE WITH ECKERMANN. By John Oxenford. Translated
from the German. In 2 vols. post 8vo., cloth, price 24s.

       *       *       *       *       *

WUTHERING HEIGHTS AND AGNES GREY. With a Selection of the Literary
Remains of ELLIS and ACTON BELL, and a Biographical Notice of both
Authors by Currer Bell. 1 vol. small post 8vo., cloth, price 6s.

London: Smith, Elder, & Co., 65. Cornhill.

       *       *       *       *       *{504}

NEW BOOKS

PUBLISHED OR SOLD BY

HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.

       *       *       *       *       *

JAMESON'S (MRS.) BEAUTIES OF THE COURT OF CHARLES THE SECOND;

Illustrating the Diaries of Pepys, Evelyn, Clarendon, &c. Imp. 8vo.
Illustrated by Twenty-one Beautiful Portraits, comprising the whole
of the celebrated suite of Paintings by Sir Peter Lely, preserved at
Hampton Court and the Windsor Gallery, extra cloth, richly gilt back
and sides, gilt edges, 1l. 5s.; or with India proof impressions of the
Plates, 2l. 10s.


SILVESTRE'S UNIVERSAL PALEOGRAPHY;

Or, Fac-similes of the Writings of every Age, taken from the Most
Authentic Missals and Manuscripts. Containing upwards of Three Hundred
large and beautifully executed Fac-similes, richly illuminated in the
Finest Style of Art. 2 vols. atlas folio, half Morocco extra, gilt
edges, 31l. 10s.


MADDEN'S (SIR FREDERICK) UNIVERSAL PALEOGRAPHY,

From the French of BARON SILVESTRE. (Descriptive Letter press to the
preceding Work.) 2 vols. royal 8vo. 1l. 16s. 1850.


BARBER'S ISLE OF WIGHT.

Illustrated by Forty-five Fine Steel Plates, including a Portrait of
Her Majesty, with a Map of the Island, and Dr. Mantell's Geological
Map. 8vo. A New and Improved Edition, completed to the Present Time,
elegant, in cloth gilt, 10s. 6d. 1850.

*** The present Edition contains Two new and very accurate Views
of Ryde from the Sea, a new View of Osborne, and every possible
Information up to September, 1850.


PUGIN'S GLOSSARY OF ECCLESIASTICAL ORNAMENT AND COSTUME;

Setting forth the Origin, History, and Signification of the various
Emblems, Devices, and Symbolical Colours peculiar to Christian Design
of the Middle Ages. Eighty Plates, splendidly printed in gold and
colours, royal 4to. half morocco extra, 7l. 7s.


PUGIN'S NEW WORK ON FLORIATED ORNAMENT.

Thirty Plates splendidly printed in gold and colours, royal 4to.
Elegantly bound in cloth, with rich gold ornaments, 3l. 3s.


BURKE'S ENCYCLOPAEDIA OF HERALDRY;

Or, General Armoury of England, Scotland, and Ireland, containing a
very Comprehensive and Exact Account of the Arms of English Families,
with an Introduction to Heraldry, a Dictionary of Terms, and a
Supplement. Imperial 8vo. (uniform with his Peerage), 1l. 5s.


SKELTON'S POETICAL WORKS, BY DYCE.

2 vols. 8vo. (published at 1l. 12s.) cloth, 12s.


SHAKSPEARE LIBRARY,

Consisting of Romances, Novels, Poems and Histories used by Shakspeare
as the Foundation of his Dramas, by PAYNE COLLIER. 2 vols. 8vo.
(published at 1l. 1s.) cloth, 10s. 6d.


STRUTT'S DRESSES AND HABITS OF THE PEOPLE OF ENGLAND.

Edited by J.R. Planche, Esq, F.S.A. 2 vols. royal 4to. 153 Plates. 4l.
4s. Or, with the Plates coloured, 7l. 7s.; or, splendidly illuminated
in the Missal Style, 20l.


STRUTT'S ROYAL AND ECCLESIASTICAL ANTIQUITIES OF ENGLAND.

Royal 4to. Seventy-two Plates. 2l. 2s. Edited by J.R. Planche Esq.
Or, with the Plates coloured, 4l. 4s.; or splendidly illuminated, 12l.
12s.


BINGHAM'S ANTIQUITIES OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH.

New Edition. 2 vols. imperial 8vo. 1l. 11s. 6d.


BRYAN'S DICTIONARY OF PAINTERS AND ENGRAVERS.

New Edition. Corrected, enlarged, and continued to the Present Time,
by GEO. STANLEY, Esq. Imperial 8vo. (above 1000 pages). With numerous
Plates of Monograms, 2l. 2s.

       *       *       *       *       *

Printed by Thomas Clark Shaw, of No. 8. New Street Square, at No. 5.
New Street Square, in the Parish of St. Bride in the City of London,
and published by George Bell, of No. 186. Fleet Street, in the Parish
of St. Dunstan in the West, in the City of London, Publisher, at No.
186. Fleet Street aforesaid.--Saturday, December 21. 1850.





End of Project Gutenberg's Notes and Queries, 1850.12.21, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOTES AND QUERIES, 1850.12.21 ***

***** This file should be named 24803.txt or 24803.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/0/24803/

Produced by Charlene Taylor, William Flis, Jonathan Ingram
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
