i"?The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Re-echo Club, by Carolyn Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Re-echo Club

Author: Carolyn Wells

Release Date: March 15, 2008 [EBook #24840]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RE-ECHO CLUB ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)







  ONYX SERIES




  THE RE-ECHO CLUB


  By
  CAROLYN WELLS


  NEW YORK
  FRANKLIN BIGELOW CORPORATION
  THE MORNINGSIDE PRESS
  PUBLISHERS




  Copyright, 1913, by
  FRANKLIN BIGELOW CORPORATION


ONYX SERIES




THE RE-ECHO CLUB




THE RE-ECHO CLUB

DIVERSIONS OF THE RE-ECHO CLUB


A recent discovery has brought to light the long-hidden papers of the
Re-Echo Club. This is a great find, and all lovers of masterpieces of
the world's best literature will rejoice with us that we are enabled to
publish herewith a few of these gems of great minds. Little is known of
the locale or clientele of this club, but it was doubtless a successor
of the famous Echo Club of Boston memory, for, like that erudite body,
it takes pleasure in trying to better what is done. On the occasion of
the meeting of which the following gems of poesy are the result, the
several members of the club engaged to write up the well-known tradition
of the Purple Cow in more elaborate form than the quatrain made famous
by Mr. Gelett Burgess:

  "I never saw a Purple Cow,
    I never hope to see one;
  But I can tell you, anyhow,
    I'd rather see than be one."

The first attempt here cited is the production of Mr. John Milton:

  Hence, vain, deluding cows.
    The herd of folly, without color bright,
    How little you delight,
  Or fill the Poet's mind, or songs arouse!
  But, hail! thou goddess gay of feature!
  Hail! divinest purple creature!
  Oh, Cow, thy visage is too bright
  To hit the sense of human sight.
  And though I'd like, just once, to see thee,
  I never, never, never'd be thee!


MR. P. BYSSHE SHELLEY:

          Hail to thee, blithe spirit!
            Cow thou never wert;
          But in life to cheer it
            Playest thy full part
  In purple lines of unpremeditated art.

          The pale purple color
            Melts around thy sight
          Like a star, but duller,
            In the broad daylight.
  I'd see thee, but I would not be thee if I might.

          We look before and after
            At cattle as they browse;
          Our most hearty laughter
            Something sad must rouse.
  Our sweetest songs are those that tell of Purple Cows.


MR. W. WORDSWORTH:

  She dwelt among the untrodden ways
   Beside the springs of Dee;
  A Cow whom there were few to praise
   And very few to see.
  A violet by a mossy stone
    Greeting the smiling East
  Is not so purple, I must own,
    As that erratic beast.
  She lived unknown, that Cow, and so
    I never chanced to see;
  But if I had to be one, oh,
    The difference to me!


MR. T. GRAY:

  The curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
    The lowing herd winds slowly o'er the lea;
  I watched them slowly wend their weary way,
    But, ah, a Purple Cow I did not see.

  Full many a cow of purplest ray serene
    Is haply grazing where I may not see;
  Full many a donkey writes of her, I ween,
    But neither of these creatures would I be.


MR. J. W. RILEY:

  There, little Cow, don't cry!
    You are brindle and brown, I know.
        And with wild, glad hues
        Of reds and blues,
    You never will gleam and glow.
  But though not pleasing to the eye,
  There, little Cow, don't cry, don't cry.


LORD A. TENNYSON:

  Ask me no more. A cow I fain would see
    Of purple tint, like to a sun-soaked grape--
    Of purple tint, like royal velvet cape--
  But such a creature I would never be--
            Ask me no more.


MR. R. BROWNING:

        All that I know
          Of a certain Cow
        Is it can throw,
          Somewhere, somehow,
        Now a dart of red,
          Now a dart of blue
        (That makes purple, 'tis said).
          I would fain see, too,
  This Cow that darkles the red and the blue!


MR. J. KEATS:

  A cow of purple is a joy forever.
  Its loveliness increases. I have never
  Seen this phenomenon. Yet ever keep
  A brave lookout; lest I should be asleep
  When she comes by. For, though I would not be one,
  I've oft imagined 'twould be joy to see one.


MR. D.G. ROSSETTI:

  The Purple Cow strayed in the glade;
    (Oh, my soul! but the milk is blue!)
  She strayed and strayed and strayed and strayed
    (And I wail and I cry Wa-hoo!)

  I've never seen her--nay, not I;
    (Oh, my soul! but the milk is blue!)
  Yet were I that Cow I should want to die.
    (And I wail and I cry Wa-hoo!)
    But in vain my tears I strew.


MR. T.B. ALDRICH:

  Somewhere in some faked nature place,
    In Wonderland, in Nonsense Land,
  Two darkling shapes met face to face,
    And bade each other stand.

  "And who are you?" said each to each;
    "Tell me your title, anyhow."
  One said, "I am the Papal Bull,"
    "And I the Purple Cow."


MR. E. ALLAN POE:

      Open then I flung a shutter,
      And, with many a flirt and flutter,
  In there stepped a Purple Cow which gayly tripped around my floor.
      Not the least obeisance made she,
      Not a moment stopped or stayed she,
  But with mien of chorus lady perched herself above my door.
  On a dusty bust of Dante perched and sat above my door.

      And that Purple Cow unflitting
      Still is sitting--still is sitting
  On that dusty bust of Dante just above my chamber door,
      And her horns have all the seeming
      Of a demon's that is screaming,
      And the arc-light o'er her streaming
  Casts her shadow on the floor.
  And my soul from out that pool of Purple Shadow on the floor
  Shall be lifted Nevermore!


MR. H. LONGFELLOW:

  The day is done, and the darkness
    Falls from the wing of night
  As ballast is wafted downward
    From an air-ship in its flight.

  I dream of a purple creature
    Which is not as kine are now;
  And resembles cattle only
    As Cowper resembles a cow.

  Such cows have power to quiet
    Our restless thoughts and rude;
  They come like the Benedictine
    That follows after food.


MR. A. SWINBURNE:

  Oh, Cow of rare rapturous vision,
    Oh, purple, impalpable Cow,
  Do you browse in a Dream Field Elysian,
    Are you purpling pleasantly now?
  By the side of wan waves do you languish?
    Or in the lithe lush of the grove?
  While vainly I search in my anguish,
    O Bovine of mauve!

  Despair in my bosom is sighing,
    Hope's star has sunk sadly to rest;
  Though cows of rare sorts I am buying,
    Not one breathes a balm to my breast.
  Oh, rapturous rose-crowned occasion,
    When I such a glory might see!
  But a cow of a purple persuasion
    I never would be.


MR. F.D. SHERMAN:

  I'd love to see
    A Purple Cow,
  Oh, Goodness me!
  I'd love to see
  But not to be
    One. Anyhow,
  I'd love to see
    A Purple Cow.


MR. B. CARMAN:

  Now the joys of the road are chiefly these,
  A Purple Cow that no one sees,
  A grove of green and a sky of blue,
  And never a hope that cow to view.
  But a firm conviction deep in me
  That cow I would rather be than see.
  Though, alack-a-day, there be times enow,
  When I see pink snakes and a Purple Cow.


MR. H.C. BUNNER:

  Oh, what's the way to Arcady,
    Where all the cows are purple?
  Ah, woe is me! I never hope
  On such a sight my eyes to ope;
  But, as I sing in merry glee
  Along the road to Arcady,
  Perchance full soon I may espy
  A Purple Cow come dancing by.
    Heigho! I then shall see one.
  Her horns bedecked with ribbons gay,
  And garlanded with rosy may,--
    A tricksy sight. Still I must say
    I'd rather see than be one.


MR. R.L. STEVENSON:

  In winter I get up at night
  And hunt that cow by lantern light;
  In summer quite the other way,
  I seek a Purple Cow by day.
  And does it not seem strange to you,
  I can't find cows of purple hue?
  But I can tell you, anyhow,
  I'm glad I'm not a Purple Cow.


MR. R. KIPLING:

  In the old ten-acre pasture,
    Lookin' eastward toward a tree,
  There's a Purple Cow a-settin'
  And I know she thinks of me.
  For the wind is in the gum-tree,
    And the hay is in the mow,
  And the cow-bells are a-calling
    "Come and see a Purple Cow!"

    But I am not going now,
    Not at present, anyhow,
  For I am not fond of purple, and
    I can't abide a cow;
  No, I shall not go to-day,
  Where the Purple Cattle play,
  Though I think I'd rather see one
    Than to be one, anyhow.


MR. O. HERFORD:

  Children, observe the Purple Cow,
  You cannot see her, anyhow;
  And, little ones, you need not hope
  Your eyes will e'er attain such scope.
  But if you ever have a choice
  To be, or see, lift up your voice
  And choose to see. For surely you
  Don't want to browse around and moo.


MR. S. CRANE:

  Once a man said,
  I never saw a Purple Cow;
  Again he spoke,
  I never hope to see one.
  Then all the people said,
  How noble his humble-mindedness!
  How glorious his meek resignation!
  Now this is the strange part--
  The man has seen hundreds of purple cows,
  Ay, thousands,
  But the man was color blind,
  And the cows seemed to him to be a reddish brown.


MR. D.G. ROSSETTI:

(Second Attempt.)

  The blessed Purple Cow leaned out
    From a pasture lot at even
  One horn was sixteen inches long,
    The other just eleven.
  She had a ruminative face,
    And the teeth in her head were seven.
  She gazed and listened, then she said
    (Less sad of speech than queer),
  "Nobody seems to notice me,
    None knows that I am here.
  And no one wishes to be me!"
    She wept. (I heard a tear.)


MR. A.C. SWINBURNE:

(Second Attempt.)

  Only in dim, drowsy depths of a
    dream do I dare to delight
      in deliciously dreaming
  Cows there may be of a passionate
    purple,--cows of a violent
      violet-hue;
  Ne'er have I seen such a sight, I am
    certain it is but a demi-
      delirious dreaming--
  Ne'er may I happily harbor
    a hesitant hope in my
      heart that my dream
        may come true.
  Sad is my soul, and my senses
    are sobbing, so strong
      is my strenuous spirit
        to see one.
  Dolefully, drearily doomed
    to despair as warily,
      wearily watching I wait;
  Thoughts thickly thronging are thrilling
    and throbbing; to see is a
      glorious gain--but to be one!
  That were a darker and
    direfuller destiny, that
      were a fearfuller,
        frightfuller fate.




At the second meeting of the Re-Echo Club, some of whose proceedings
have already been chronicled in these pages, the question arose whether
the poet was at his best who gave to the world the classic poem about
The Little Girl:

      "There was a little girl
      And she had a little curl
  Right in the middle of her forehead.
      And when she was good,
      She was very, very good,
  And when she was bad she was horrid!"

Some members held that poets had at times risen to sublimer poetic
flights than this, while others contended that the clear-cut decision of
thought it expressed placed the poem above more elaborate works.

When those who criticised it were invited themselves to treat the same
theme in more worthy fashion, they willingly enough agreed, and the
results here subjoined were spread upon the minutes of the club.

With a lady-like air of reserve tempered by self-respect, Mrs. Felicia
Hemans presented her version:

  The Marcel waves dash'd high
    Where the puffs and frizzes crossed;
  And just above a roguish eye
    A little curl was tossed.

  And that little curl hung down
    O'er a brow like a holy saint;
  Her goodness was beyond renown,
    And yet--there was a taint.

  Ay, call it deadly sin,
    The temper that she had;
  But that Little Girl just gloried in
    Freedom to be real bad!

Robert Browning gave the subject much thought and responded at length:

  Who will may hear the poet's story told.
  His story? Who believes me shall behold
  The Little Girl, tricked out with ringolet,
  Or fringe, or pompadour, or what you will,
  Switch, bang, rat, puff--odzooks, man! I know not
  What women call the hanks o' hair they wear!
  But that same curl, beau-catcher, love-lock, frizz.
  (Perchance hot-ironed--perchance 'twas bandolined;
  Mayhap those rubber squirmers gave it shape--
  I wot not.) But that corkscrew of a curl
  Hung plumb, true, straight, accurate, at mid-brow,
  Nor swerved a hair's breadth to the right or left.
  Aught of her other tresses none may know.
  Now go we straitly on. And undertake
  To sound the humor of the Little Girl.
  Ha! what's the note? Hark here. When she was good,
  She was seraphic; hypersuperfine.
  So good she made the saints seem scalawags;
  An angel child; a paramaragon.
  Halt! Turn! When she elected to be bad,
  Black fails to paint the depths of ignomin,
  The fearsome sins, the crimes unspeakable,
  The deep abysses of her evilment.
  Hist! Tell 't wi' bated breath! One day she let
  A rosy tongue-tip from red lips peep forth!
  Can viciousness cap that? Horrid's the word.
  Yet there she is. There is that Little Girl,
  Her goodness and her badness, side by side,
  Like bacon, streak o' fat and streak o' lean.
  Ah, Fatalist, she must be ever so.

Mr. E.A. Poe declared that he wrote his lines without any trouble at
all, as he used to know the Little Girl personally:

  'Twas not very many years ago,
    At Seahurst-By-The-Sea,
  A little girl had a little curl--
    Her name was Annabel Lee.
  And right in the middle of Annabel's brow
    That curl would always be.

  She was so good, oh, she was so good
    At Seahurst-By-The-Sea!
  She was good with a goodness more than good,
    Was beautiful Annabel Lee,
  With such goodness the winged seraphs of heaven
    Coveted her of me.
  But her badness was stronger by far than the good,
    Like many far older than she,
    Like many far wiser than she;
  And neither the angels in heaven above
    Nor the demons down under the sea
  Can ever dissever the good from the bad
    In the soul of Annabel Lee,
    The beautiful Annabel Lee.

Then Mr. Stevenson went out into his own garden and plucked this:

  In winter, I go up at night
  And curl that curl by candle-light;
  In summer, quite the other way,
  I have to curl it twice a day.

  When I am good, I seem to be
  As good as peaches on the tree;
  But when I'm bad I've awful ways,
  I'm horrid, everybody says.

  And does it not seem hard to you,
  I have to choose between the two?
  When I'm not happy, good and glad,
  I have to be so awful bad!

Mr. Kipling took a real interest in the work and produced the following:

  "What is the gas-stove going for?"
    Asked Files-On-Parade.
  "To curl my hair, to curl my hair?"
    His Little Sister said.

  "What makes you curl so tight, so tight?"
    Asked Files-On-Parade.
  "I'm thinkin' 'twill be damp to-night,"
    His Little Sister said.

  "For you know that when I'm good, I'm just as good as I can be.
  And when I'm bad, there's nobody can be as bad as me.
  So I'm thinkin' I'll be very good to-night, because, you see,
  I'm thinkin' I'll be horrid in the morning."

Mr. Hood was in a reminiscent mood, so he looked backward:

  I remember, I remember,
    That curl I used to wear;
  It cost a dollar ninety-eight
    (It was the best of hair).
  It always stayed right in its place,
    It never went astray;
  But now, I sometimes wish the wind
    Had blown that curl away.

  I remember, I remember,
    How good I used to be;
  Why, St. Cecelia at her best
    Was not as good as me.
  I never tore my pinafore,
    Or got my slippers wet;
  I let my brother steal my cake--
    That boy is living yet!

  I remember, I remember,
    How bad I've sometimes been;
  How all my little childish tricks
    Were counted fearful sin.
  I'm glad I cut up, anyway,
    But still 'tis little joy
  To know I could have played worse pranks
    If I had been a boy.

Mr. Wordsworth took it quietly:

  I met a gentle Little Girl,
    She was sixteen years, _she said_;
  Her hair was thick; that same old curl
    Was hanging from her head.

  "You're very, very good, you say;
    And you look good to me,
  Yet you are bad. Tell me, I pray,
    Sweet maid, how that may be?"

  Then did the Little Girl reply
    (The curl bobbed on her forehead),
  "When I am good, I'm good as pie,
    And when I'm bad, I'm horrid."




At the next meeting of the Re-Echo Club there was achieved a
vindication of the limerick. "It has been said," remarked the President
of the Re-Echo Club, "by ignorant and undiscerning would-be critics that
the Limerick is not among the classic and best forms of poetry, and,
indeed, some have gone so far as to say that it is not poetry at all.

"A brief consideration of its claims to preeminence among recognized
forms of verse will soon convince any intelligent reader of its
superlative worth and beauty.

"As a proof of this, let us consider the following Limerick, which in
the opinion of connoisseurs is the best one ever written:

  There was a young lady of Niger,
  Who smiled as she rode on a tiger;
      They came back from the ride
      With the lady inside,
  And the smile on the face of the tiger.

Now let us compare this exquisite bit of real poesy with what Chaucer
has written on the same theme:

  A mayde ther ben, in Niger born and bredde;
  Hire merye smyle went neere aboute hire hedde.
  Uponne a beeste shee rood, a tyger gaye,
  And sikerly shee laughen on hire waye.

  Anon, as it bifel, bak from the ryde
  Ther came, his sadel hangen doone bisyde,
  The tyger. On his countenaunce the whyle
  Ther ben behelde a gladnesse and a smyle.

Again, Austin Dobson chose to throw off the thing in triolet form:

  She went for a ride,
    That young lady of Niger;
  Her smile was quite wide
  As she went for a ride;
  But she came back inside,
    With the smile on the tiger!
  She _went_ for a ride,
    That young lady of Niger.

Rossetti, with his inability to refrain from refrains, turned out this:

  In Niger dwelt a lady fair,
    (Bacon and eggs and a bar o' soap!)
  Who smiled 'neath tangles of her hair,
    As her steed began his steady lope.
    (You like this style, I hope!)

  On and on they sped and on,
    (Bacon and eggs and a bar o' soap!)
  On and on and on and on;
    (You see I've not much scope.)

  E'en ere they loped the second mile,
    The tiger 'gan his mouth to ope;
  Anon he halted for a while;
  Then went on with a pleasant smile,
    (Bacon and eggs and a bar o' soap!)

Omar looked at the situation philosophically, and summed up his views in
such characteristic lines as these.

  Why if the Soul can fling the Dust aside
  And, smiling, on a Tiger blithely ride,
    Were't not a Shame--were't not a Shame for him
  In stupid Niger tamely to abide?

  Strange, is it not? that, of the Myriads who
  Before us rode the Sandy Desert through,
    Not one returns to tell us of the Road
  Which to discover we ride smiling, too.

  We are no other than a moving Row
  Of Magic Niger-shapes that come and go
    Round with the Smile-illumined Tiger held
  In Midnight by the Master of the Show.

Tennyson saw a dramatic opportunity, and gloried in his chance, thus:

  Half a league, half a league,
    On the big tiger,
  Rode with a smiling face
    The lady of Niger.

  Mad rushed the noble steed,
  Smiled she and took no heed;
  Smiled at the breakneck speed
    Of the big tiger.

  Boldly they plunged and swayed,
  Fearlessly and unafraid,--
  Tiger and lovely maid,
    Fair and beguiling;
  Flash'd she her sunny smiles,
  Flash'd o'er the sunlit miles;
  Then they rode back, but not--
    Not the same smiling!

  When can their glory fade?
  O the wild charge they made,
    Riding from Niger!
  Honor the ride they made!
  Honor the smiles displayed,
    Lady and Tiger!

Kipling, of course, seized the theme for a fine and stirring
Barrack-Room Ballad:

  "What is the lady smiling for?"
  Said Files-On-Parade.
  "She's going for a tiger ride,"
  The Color-Sergeant said;
  "What makes her smile so gay, so gay?"
  Said Files-On-Parade;
  "She likes to go for tiger rides,"
  The Color-Sergeant said.

  "For she's riding on the tiger, you can see his stately stride;
  When they're returning home again, she'll take a place inside;
  And on the tiger's face will be the smile so bland and wide,
  But she's riding on the tiger in the morning."

Browning was pleased with the subject and did the best he could with it,
along these lines:


THE LAST RIDE TOGETHER:

  (The Tiger speaks.)
    I said, "Then, Dearest, since 'tis so,
    Since now at length your fate you know,
    Since nothing all your smile avails,
    Since all your life seems meant for fails,
      Henceforth you ride inside."
    Who knows what's best? Ah, who can tell?
    I loved the lady. Therefore,--well,--
    I shuddered. Yet it had to be.
    And so together, I and she
      Ride, ride, forever ride.

Swinburne spread himself thusly:

  O marvellous, mystical maiden,
    With the way of the wind on the wing;
  Low laughter thy lithe lips hath laden,
    Thy smile is a Song of the Spring.
  O typical, tropical tiger,
    With wicked and wheedlesome wiles;
  O lovely lost lady of Niger,
    Our Lady of Smiles.

Edgar Allan Poe put it this way:

  See the lady with a smile,
                Sunny smile!
  Hear her gaysome, gleesome giggle as she rides around in style!
    How the merry laughter trips
    From her red and rosy lips,
  As she smiles, smiles, smiles, smiles, smiles, smiles, smiles,
  While she rides along the dusty, desert miles.

  See the tiger with a smile,
                Happy smile!
  If such a smile means happiness, he's happy quite a pile;
  How contentedly he chuckles as he trots along the miles.
    Oh, he doesn't growl or groan
    As he ambles on alone,
  But he smiles, smiles, smiles, smiles, smiles, smiles, smiles,
  As he homeward goes along the desert miles.

And Longfellow gave it his beautiful and clever "Hiawatha" setting:

  Oh, the fair and lovely lady;
  Oh, the sweet and winsome lady;
  With a smile of gentle goodness
  Like the lovely Laughing Water.
  Oh, the day the lovely lady
  Went to ride upon a tiger.
  Came the tiger, back returning,
  Homeward through the dusky twilight;
  Ever slower, slower, slower,
  Walked the tiger o'er the landscape;
  Ever wider, wider, wider,
  Spread the smile o'er all his features.

"And so," said the President, "after numerous examples and careful
consideration of this matter, we are led to the conclusion that for
certain propositions the Limerick is the best and indeed the only proper
vehicle of expression."




It was at the very next meeting that the President of the club gave the
members another Limerick for their consideration. The Limerick was
anonymous, but the Re-Echoes were not. Here they are:


THE LIMERICK:

  A scholarly person named Finck
  Went mad in the effort to think
    Which were graver misplaced,
    To dip pen in his paste,
  Or dip his paste-brush in the ink.


OMAR KHAYYAM'S VERSION:

  Stay, fellow traveller, let us stop and think,
  Pause and reflect on the abysmal brink;
    Say would you rather thrust your pen in paste,
  Or dip your paste-brush carelessly in ink?


RUDYARD KIPLING'S VERSION:

  Here is a theme that is worthy of our cognizance,
    A theme of great importance and a question for your ken;
  Would you rather--stop and think well--
  Dip your paste-brush in your ink-well,
    Or in your pesky pasting-pot immerse your inky pen?


WALT WHITMAN'S VERSION:

  Hail, Camerados!
  I salute you,
  Also I salute the sewing-machine, and the flour-barrel, and the feather
    duster.
  What is an aborigine, anyhow?
  I see a paste-pot.
  Ay, and a well of ink.
  Well, well!
  Which shall I do?
  Ah, the immortal fog!
  What am I myself
  But a meteor
  In a fog?


CHAUCER'S VERSION:

  A mayde ther ben, a wordy one and wyse,
  Who wore a paire of gogles on her eyes.
  O'er theemes of depest thogt her braine she werked,
  Nor ever any knoty problemme sherked.
  Yette when they askt her if she'd rather sinke
  Her penne in payste, or eke her brushe in inke,
  "Ah," quo' the canny mayde, "now wit ye wel,
  I'm wyse enow to know--too wyse to tel."


HENRY JAMES'S VERSION:

She luminously wavered, and I tentatively inferred that she would soon
perfectly reconsider her not altogether unobvious course. Furiously,
tho' with a tender, ebbing similitude, across her mental consciousness
stole a reculmination of all the truths she had ever known concerning,
or even remotely relating to, the not easily fathomed qualities of paste
and ink. So she stood, focused in an intensity of soul-quivers, and I,
all unrelenting, waited, though of a dim uncertainty whether, after all,
it might not be only a dubitant problem.


SWINBURNE'S VERSION:

  Shall I dip, shall I dip it, Dolores,
    This luminous paste-brush of thine?
  Shall I sully its white-breasted glories,
    Its fair, foam-flecked figure divine?

  O shall I--abstracted, unheeding--
    Swish swirling this pen in my haste,
  And, deaf to thy pitiful pleading,
    Just jab it in paste?


STEPHEN CRANE'S VERSION:

  I stood upon a church spire,
  A slender, pointed spire,
  And I saw
  Ranged in solemn row before me,
  A paste-pot and an ink-pot.
  I held in my either hand
  A pen and a brush.
  Ay, a pen and a brush.
  Now this is the strange part;
  I stood upon a church spire,
  A slender, pointed spire,
  Glad, exultant,
  Because
  The choice was mine!
  Ay, mine!
  As I stood upon a church spire,
  A slender, pointed spire.




Perhaps one of the most enjoyable occasions was the night when the
members of the Re-Echo Club discussed the merits of the classic poem:

  Peter, Peter, Pumpkin Eater,
  Had a wife and couldn't keep her;
  Put her in a pumpkin shell,
  And there he kept her very well.

In many ways this historic narrative called forth admiration. One must
admit Peter's great strength of character, his power of quick decision,
and immediate achievement. Some held that his inability to retain the
lady's affection in the first place argued a defect in his nature; but
remembering the lady's youth and beauty (implied by the spirit of the
whole poem), they could only reiterate their appreciation of the way he
conquered circumstances, and proved himself master of his fate, and
captain of his soul! Truly, the Pumpkin-Eaters must have been a forceful
race, able to defend their rights and rule their people.

The Poets at their symposium unanimously felt that the style of the
poem, though hardly to be called crude, was a little bare, and they took
up with pleasure the somewhat arduous task of rewriting it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Ed Poe opined that there was lack of atmosphere, and that the facts
of the narrative called for a more impressive setting. He therefore
offered:

  The skies, they were ashen and sober,
    The lady was shivering with fear;
    Her shoulders were shud'ring with fear,
  On a dark night in dismal October,
    Of his most Matrimonial Year.
    It was hard by the cornfield of Auber,
    In the musty Mud Meadows of Weir,
  Down by the dank frog-pond of Auber,
    In the ghoul-haunted cornfield of Weir.

  Now, his wife had a temper Satanic,
    And when Peter roamed here with his Soul,
    Through the corn with his conjugal Soul,
  He spied a huge pumpkin Titanic,
    And he popped her right in through a hole.
    Then solemnly sealed up the hole.

  And thus Peter Peter has kept her
    Immured in Mausoleum gloom,
    A moist, humid, damp sort of gloom.
  And, though there's no doubt he bewept her,
    She is still in her yellow-hued tomb,
    Her unhallowed, Hallowe'en tomb
  And ever since Peter side-stepped her,
    He calls her his lost Lulalume,
    His Pumpkin-entombed Lulalume.

This was received with acclaim, but many objected to the mortuary
theory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. Robert Browning was sure that Peter's love for his wife, though
perhaps that of a primitive man, was of the true Portuguese stamp, and
with this view composed the following pleasing Sonnet:

  How do I keep thee? Let me count the ways.
  I bar up every breadth and depth and height
  My hands can reach, while feeling out of sight
  For bolts that stick and hasps that will not raise.
  I keep thee from the public's idle gaze,
  I keep thee in, by sun or candle light.
  I keep thee, rude, as women strive for Right.
  I keep thee boldly, as they seek for praise,
  I keep thee with more effort than I'd use
  To keep a dry-goods shop or big hotel.
  I keep thee with a power I seemed to lose
  With that last cook. I'll keep thee down the well,
  Or up the chimney-place! Or if I choose,
  I shall but keep thee in a Pumpkin shell.

This was, of course, meritorious, though somewhat suggestive of the
cave-men, who, we have never been told, were Pumpkin Eaters.

       *       *       *       *       *

Austin Dobson's version was really more lady-like:


BALLADE OF A PUMPKIN:

  Golden-skinned, delicate, bright,
    Wondrous of texture and hue,
  Bathed in a soft, sunny light,
    Pearled with a silvery dew.
    Fair as a flower to the view,
  Ripened by summer's soft heat,
    Basking beneath Heaven's blue,--
  This is the Pumpkin of Pete.

  Peter consumed day and night,
    Pumpkin in pie or in stew;
  Hinted to Cook that she might
    Can it for winter use, too.
    Pumpkin croquettes, not a few,
  Peter would happily eat;
    Knowing content would ensue,--
  This is the Pumpkin of Pete.

  Everything went along right,
    Just as all things ought to do;
  Till Peter,--unfortunate wight,--
    Married a girl that he knew.
    Each day he had to pursue
  His runaway Bride down the street,--
    So her into prison he threw,--
  This is the Pumpkin of Pete.


L'ENVOI

  Lady, a sad lot, 'tis true,
    Staying your wandering feet;
  But 'tis the best place for you,--
    This is the Pumpkin of Pete.

Like the other women present Dinah Craik felt the pathos of the
situation, and gave vent to her feelings in this tender burst of song:

  Could I come back to you, Peter, Peter,
    From this old pumpkin that I hate;
  I would be so tender, so loving, Peter,--
    Peter, Peter, gracious and great.

  You were not half worthy of me, Peter,
    Not half worthy the like of I;
  Now all men beside are not in it, Peter,--
    Peter, Peter, I feel like a pie.

  Stretch out your hand to me, Peter, Peter,
    Let me out of this Pumpkin, do;
  Peter, my beautiful Pumpkin Eater,
    Peter, Peter, tender and true.

Mr. Hogg took his own graceful view of the matter, thus:

      Lady of wandering,
      Blithesome, meandering,
  Sweet was thy flitting o'er moorland and lea;
      Emblem of restlessness,
      Blest be thy dwelling place,
  Oh, to abide in the Pumpkin with thee.

      Peter, though bland and good,
      Never thee understood,
  Or he had known how thy nature was free;
      Goddess of fickleness,
      Blest be thy dwelling place,
  Oh, to abide in the Pumpkin with thee.

Mr. Kipling grasped at the occasion for a ballad in his best vein. The
plot of the story aroused his old-time enthusiasm, and he transplanted
the pumpkin eater and his wife to the scenes of his earlier powers:

  In a great big Mammoth pumpkin
    Lookin' eastward to the sea,
  There's a wife of mine a-settin'
    And I know she's mad at me.
  For I hear her calling, "Peter!"
    With a wild hysteric shout:
  "Come you back, you Punkin Eater,--
    Come you back and let me out!"
      For she's in a punkin shell,
      I have locked her in her cell;
  But it really is a comfy, well-constructed punkin shell;
      And there she'll have to dwell,
      For she didn't treat me well,
  So I put her in the punkin and I've kept her very well.

Algernon Swinburne was also in one of his early moods, and as a result
he wove the story into this exquisite fabric of words:


IN THE PUMPKIN

  Leave go my hands. Let me catch breath and see,
  What is this confine either side of me?
    Green pumpkin vines about me coil and crawl,
  Seen sidelong, like a 'possum in a tree,--
    Ah me, ah me, that pumpkins are so small!

  Oh, my fair love, I charge thee, let me out
  From this gold lush encircling me about;
    I turn and only meet a pumpkin wall.
  The crescent moon shines slim,--but I am stout,--
    Ah me, ah me, that pumpkins are so small!

  Pumpkin seeds like cold sea blooms bring me dreams;
  Ah, Pete,--too sweet to me,--My Pete, it seems
    Love like a Pumpkin holds me in its thrall;
  And overhead a writhen shadow gleams,--
    Ah me, ah me, that pumpkins are so small!

This intense poesy thrilled the heavens, and it was with a sense of
relief to their throbbing souls that they listened to Mr. Bret Harte's
contribution:

  Which I wish to remark,
    That the lady was plain;
  And for ways that are dark
    And for tricks that are vain
  She had predilections peculiar,
    And drove Peter nearly insane.

  Far off, anywhere,
    She wandered each day;
  And though Peter would swear,
    The lady would stray;
  And whenever he thought he had got her,
    She was sure to be rambling away.

  Said Peter, "My Wife,
    Hereafter you dwell
  For the rest of your life
    In a big Pumpkin Shell."
  He popped her in one that was handy,
    And since then he's kept her quite well.

  Which is why I remark,
    Though the lady was plain,
  For ways that are dark
    And tricks that are vain
  A husband is very peculiar,
    And the same I am free to maintain.

Oscar Wilde, in a poetic fervor and a lily-like kimono, recited with
tremulous intensity this masterpiece of his own:

  Oh, Peter! Pumpkin-fed and proud,
    Ah me; ah me!
    (Sweet squashes, mother!)
  Thy woe knells like a stricken cloud;
    (Ah me; ah me!
      Hurroo, Hurree!)

  Lo! vanisht like an anguisht wraith;
    Ah me; ah me!
    (Sweet squashes, mother!)
  Wan hope a dolorous musing saith;
    (Ah me; ah me!
      Dum diddle dee!)

  Hist! dare we soar? The Pumpkin Shell!
    Ah me; ah me!
    (Sweet squashes, mother!)
  Fast and forever! Sooth, 'tis well.
    (Ah me; ah me!
      Faloodle dee!)

There was little to be said after this, so the meeting closed with a
solo by Lady Arthur Hill, sung with a truly touching touch:

  In the pumpkin, oh, my darling,
    Think not bitterly of me;
  Though I went away in silence,
    Though I couldn't set you free.

  For my heart was filled with longing,
    For another piece of pie;
  It was best to leave you there, dear,
    Best for you and best for I.




At Christmas the members of the Re-Echo Club voiced these pleasant
sentiments:


BY MR. TENNYSON:

  Give me no more! Though worsted slippers be
    The proper gift from woman unto man,
    Component of the universal plan;
  But, oh, too many hast thou given me,
        Give me no more!


BY MR. SHAKESPEARE:

  To give or not to give, that is the question;
  Whether 'tis nobler on the whole to suffer
  The old exchange of trinkets, gauds and kickshaws,
  Or to take arms against this Christmas nuisance,
  And, by opposing, end it? To buy--to give--
  No more; and by that gift to say we end
  The Christmas obligations to our friends
  We all are heir to! To buy--to give;
  To give--perchance to get; ay, there's the rub!
  For in those bundles gay what frights may come
  When we have shuffled off the ribbon bows
  And tissue paper! Who would gifts receive
  Of foolish books and little silver traps,
  That make us rather keep the things we buy,
  Than get these others that we know not of!
  Thus Christmas doth make cowards of us all,
  And, notwithstanding our good resolutions,
  Each year we bandy gifts, and follow out
  The same old Christmas programme!


BY MR. WORDSWORTH:

  It was the very best of pies,
    All plummy, thick and sweet;
  A pie of most prodigious size--
    And very few to eat.

  'Twas passing rich, and few folks know
    How rich mince pie can be;
  But I have eaten it--and, oh,
    The difference to me!


BY MR. DOBSON:

  When she gave me cigars (!)
    I smiled at the present.
  Her eyes were like stars
  When she gave me cigars.
  (I can stand sudden jars.)
    So I looked very pleasant
  When she gave me cigars (!)
    I smiled at the present.


BY MR. SWINBURNE:

  If you eat turkey stuffing,
    And I eat hot mince pie,
  We'll vow that our digestion
  Is quite beyond all question;
  But soon we'll quit our bluffing
    And curl us up to die,
  If you eat turkey stuffing,
    And I eat hot mince pie.


BY MR. LONGFELLOW:

  The day is done, and the darkness
    Falls on our little flat,
  As a feather is wafted downward
    From a lady's mushroom hat.

  I've a feeling of fullness and sorrow
    That is not like being ill,
  And resembles colic only
    As a pillow resembles a pill.

  But the night shall be filled with nightmares,
    And the food that was left to-day
  Shall be given to poor street Arabs,
    Or silently thrown away!


BY MR. MOORE:

  'Twas ever thus, from childhood's bawl,
    I've seen my fondest hopes decay;
  Whatever I want most of all,
    I do not get it Christmas Day!


BY MISS PROCTER:

  Seated one day at the table,
    I was stuffy and ill at ease,
  And my fingers wandered idly
    Over the nuts and cheese.

  I know not what I had eaten,
    Or what I was eating then,
  But I struck a delicious flavor
    That I'd like to taste again.

  It linked all elusive savors
    Into one perfect taste,
  Then faded away on my palate
    Without any undue haste.

  I have sought, but I seek it vainly,
    That one lost taste so fine,
  That came from the head of the kitchen,
    And entered into mine.


BY MR. RILEY:

  There, little girl, don't cry!
  You are awfully broke, I know;
    And of course you've spent
    Far more than you meant,
  And lots of bills you owe.
  But at Christmas time one has to buy--
  There, little girl, don't cry, don't cry!




The Re-Echo Club met in their pleasant rooms at No. 4, Poetic Mews.
Spring had passed, so their fancy was lightly turning to other matters
than Love, and it chanced to turn lightly to the Cubist Movement in Art.

"Of course," mused the President, rolling his eyes in an especially fine
frenzy, "this movement will strike the poets next."

"Ha," said Dan Rossetti, refraining for a moment from the refrain he was
building, "we must be ready for it."

"We must advance to meet it," said Teddy Poe, who was ever of an
adventurous nature. "What's it all about?"

"The principles are simple," observed Rob Browning, glancing from heaven
to earth, from earth to heaven; "in fact, it's much like my own work
always has been. I was born cubic. You see, you just symbolize the
liquefaction of the essence of an idea into its emotional constituents,
and there you are!"

"Dead easy!" declared Lally Tennyson, who went out poeting by the day,
and knew how to do any kind. "What's the subject?"

"That's just the point," said the President; "preeminently and
exclusively it's subjective, and you must keep it so. On no account
allow an object of any kind to creep in. Now, here's one of the Cubist
pictures. They call it 'A Nude Descending the Staircase.' They pick
names at random out of a hat, I believe. Take this, you fellows, and
throw it into poetry."

"Any rules or conditions?" asked Billy Wordsworth.

"Absolutely none. It's the Ruleless School."

Then the Poets opened the aspiration valves, ignited the divine spark
plugs, and whiz! went their motor-meters in a whirring, buzzing melody.

Soon their Cubist emotions were splashed upon paper, and the Poets read
with justifiable pride these symbolic results.

       *       *       *       *       *

Ally Swinburne tossed off this poetic gem without a bit of trouble.

  Square eyelids that hide like a jewel;
    Ten heads,--though I sometimes count more;
  Six mouths that are cubic and cruel;
    Of mixed arms and legs, twenty-four;
  Descending in Symbolic glories
    Of lissome triangles and squares;
  Oh, mystic and subtle Dolores,
    Our Lady of Stairs.

  You descend like an army with banners,
    In a cyclone of wrecked parasols.
  You look like a mob with mad manners
    Or a roystering row of Dutch dolls.
  Oh, Priestess of Cubical passion,
    Oh, Deification of Whim,
  You seem to walk down in the fashion
    That lame lobsters swim.

Here we have Mr. P.B. Shelley's noble lines:

  Hail to thee, blithe spirit!
    Nude thou never wert.
  Not from Heaven nor near it
    Breathed thy cubic heart
  In profuse stairs of unintelligible art.

  What thou art, we know not;
    What is thee most like?
  Snakes tied in a bow-knot?
    Stovepipes on a strike?
  Or Bellevue inmates on a Suffrage hike!

  We look before and after,
    And pine thy face to see;
  Our sincerest laughter
    Is aroused by thee.
  Art thou perchance the sad cube root of 23?

Mr. R. Kipling felt a flash of his old fire, and threw in a high speed:

  On an old symbolic staircase,
    Looking forty ways at once;
  There's a Cubist Nude descending,
    With the queerest sort of stunts.
  For the staircase is a-falling,
    And the Noodle seems to say:
  "Though you hear my soul a-calling,
    You can't see me, anyway!"

  Oh, this symbol balderdash,
  And this post-Impression trash;
    Can't you see their paint a-chunkin in a hotchy-potchy splash?
  Where the motives bold and brash
  Of the Cubist painters clash,
    And the Nude descends like thunder down a staircase gone to smash!

Mr. D.G. Rossetti, ever a sweet singer, warbled thus tunefully:

  The Blessed Nude at eve leaned out
    From the gold staircase rail;
  Her paint was deeper than the depth
    Of waters in a pail.
  She wore three bonnets on her heads,
    And seven coats of mail.

  And still she bowed herself and swayed
    In circling cubic charms.
  And the pigments of her painted soul
    Were loud as war's alarms.
  But the staircase lay as if asleep
    Along her fourteen arms.

  (I saw her move!) But soon her path
    Was cubes instead of spheres;
  And then she disappeared among
    The staircase barriers;
  And, after she was gone, I saw
    She'd wept some large paint tears!

Mr. R. Browning found the subject greatly to his liking:

  Who will may hear the Staircase story told;
  All its blobs, splotches, facets,--what you will;
  The vague Nude, compassed murkily about
  With ravage of six long sad hundred stairs,
  Dizzily plunging with tumultuous glee!
  Whirling the stairdust, hazarding oblique,
  The moon safe in her pocket! See she treads
  Cool citric crystals, fierce pyropus stone;
  While crushing sunbeams in a triple line
  Smirk at the insane roses in her hair,
  And Strojavacca, frowning, looks asquint
  To see that trick of toe,--that dizened heel,--
  As she, the somewhat, hangs 'twixt naught and naught.
  A perfect Then,--a sub-potential Now--
  A facile and slabsided centipede.

And here is Mr. B. Jonson's little jingle:

  Still to be cubed, still to be square,
  As you were going down a stair;
  Still to see lurid pigments sluiced,--
  Lady, it is to be deduced,
  Though art's hid causes are not found,
  All is not square, all is not round.

  Give me a cube, give me a line
  That makes a whirling maze design;
  Robes made of sheet-iron, flowing free,--
  Such sweet device more taketh me
  Than masterpieces by old Rubes
  Which charm not eyes attuned to cubes.

And Mr. J.W. Riley sang in his usual comforting strain:

  There, Little Nude, don't cry!
    You've descended the stairs, I know;
      And the weird wild ways
      Of the Cubist Jays
    Have made you a holy show!
  But Post Impressions will soon pass by.
    There Little Nude, don't cry, don't cry!

Sir A. Tennyson caught the Cubical spirit neatly thus:

  As the staircase is, the Nude is; thou art painted by a freak.
  And I think that he has knocked thee to the middle of next week.
  He will paint thee (till this fashion shall expend its foolish force),
  Something like a rabid dog,--a little larger than a horse.
  Semblance? Likeness? Scorned of Cubists! This th' evangel that he sings;
  Any picture's crown of glory is to look like other things!
  So thou art not seen descending in the ordinary way,
  But, like fifty motor-cycles, breaking speed laws in Cathay.

Mr. C. Kingsley was greatly interested:

  My Cubist Nude, I have no song to give you;
    I could not pipe you, howsoe'er I tried;
  But ere I go, I wish that you would teach me
    That Staircase Slide!

  Be skittish, child, and let who will be graceful,
    Do whizzy whirls whenever you've the chance;
  And so make life, death and that grand old staircase
    One song and dance.

Oscar Wilde was moody and this was his mood:

  Adown the stairs the Nudelet came;
    (Pale pink cats up a purple tree!)
  Hark! to the smitten cubes of flame!
    Ah, me! Ah, jamboree!

  Her soul seethed in emotions sweet;
    (Pale pink cats up a purple tree!)
  Symbolling like a torn-up street;
    Ah, jamboree! Ah, me!

  And still the Nude's soul-cubes are there,--
    (Pale pink cats up a purple tree!)
  In writhen glory of despair,--
    Ah, me! Ah, Hully Gee!

Mr. W. Wordsworth was frankly disdainful:

  She trod among the untrodden maze
    Of Cubists on a spree;
  A Nude whom there were none to praise,
    And very few could see.

  A violet 'neath a mossy stone,
    Quite hidden from the eye,
  Is far more easy to discern
    Than that same Nude to spy.

  She lived unseen. Though some few fakes
    Pretended her to see;
  But if she's on the stairs, it makes
    No difference to me.

Mr. Longfellow fairly let himself go:

  The picture's done! And the staircase
    Falls like the crash of night.
  And the Nude is wafted downward
    Like a catapult in flight.

  There's a feeling of strange emotion
    That is not akin to art;
  And resembles a picture only
    As a Tartar resembles a tart.

  Such art has power to rouse
    Our laughter at any time,
  And comes like electrocution
    That follows after crime.

And Mr. Bunner's poetic gem has a charm all its own:

  It was an old, old, old, old lady,
    On a staircase at half-past three;
  And the way she was painted together
    Was beautiful for to see.

  She wasn't visible any,
    And the staircase, no more was he;
  For it was a Cubist picture
    With a feeling of deep skewgee.

  'Twas a symbol of soul expression,
    Though you'd never have known it to be!
  That emotional old, old lady
    On a staircase at half-past three.

Mr. Wordsworth treated the subject boldly, thus:

  She was a phantom of a fright
  When first she burst upon my sight;
  A Cubist apparition meant
  To symbolize a Nude's descent.
  Her eyes like soft-shell crabs aflare
  Like loads of brick her dusky hair;
  And all things else about her drawn
  As by one coming home at dawn.
  A fearsome shape, an image fierce,
  To haunt, to startle, and to pierce.
  I saw her upon nearer view,
  Like a symbolic oyster stew;
  A countenance in which did meet
  The paving blocks from some old street;
  The staircase, floating fancy-free,
  With steps of Cubic liberty.
  A perfect lady, nobly built,
  Constructed like a crazy quilt.
  Or a volcano on a spree,
  Or herd of elephants at tea.
  The staircase, by a bombshell wrecked,
  With something of a burst effect.

What do you think of A. Dobson's triolet:

  Oh, see the Nude
    Descend the Stair!
  Fear not, oh, prude,
  To see the Nude;
  For by the rood,
    She isn't there!
  Oh, see the Nude
    Descend the Stair!

Of course, no one is a sweeter poetess than Miss A.A. Proctor:

  Seated one day at my easel,
    I was hungry and somewhat faint,
  And my fingers wandered idly
    Over the tubes of paint.

  I know not what I was drawing,
    Or what I was painting there,
  But I splotched a Cubic Symbol!
    Like a Nude Descending a Stair!

  It flooded the crimson canvas
    With the gush of a broken dam;
  And it lay in sticky masses
    Like upset gooseberry jam.

  It rioted blazing color,
    Like love ballyragging strife;
  It seemed the loquacious echo
    Of our discordant wife.

  It linked all Futurist meanings
    Into one perfect cube,
  And broke itself up into facets
    Like a wreck in a Hudson Tube.

  I seek, but I seek it vainly,
    That vast, symbolic line,
  That came from the head of the staircase
    And entered into mine.

  It may be that Pab Picasso
    Has painted the thing before,
  And it may be that only in Bedlam
    I shall paint that Nude some more.

And now the admirers of Mr. Poe will enjoy this:

  It was many and many a year ago,
    In a kingdom made of squares,
  That a Lady lived whom you may know
    As the Nude Descending the Stairs,
  And the lady lived with no other home,
    But those racketty-packetty stairs!

  And the moon never beams
  Without jarring the seams
    Of those cubic triangular stairs;
  And the earth never quakes
  Without bringing the shakes
    To those wigglety-wagglety stairs.

  And neither the artists in circles above,
    Or critics who view the debris,
  Can ever dissever the Nude from the Stairs,
    For both are so hobble-de-gee,
    So hobble-de-wobble-de-gee!

Mr. A. Tennyson is quite frank in his opinions, and it would seem that
he does not altogether admire the lady:

  Lady Clara Stair de Stair,
    Of me you shall not win renown.
  You thought to charm the country's heart
    As you the staircase tumbled down.

  At me you splashed; but unabashed,
    I saw you in your paint attired;
  You daughter of a hundred cubes,
    You are not one to be desired!

  Lady Clara Stair de Stair,
    I care not for these wild etudes;
  A simple Titian in a frame
    Is worth a hundred Staircase Nudes.

  Howe'er it be, it seems to me
    It isn't noble to be fools;
  Fine arts are more than Futurists,
    And simple lines than Cubist Schools.




At one meeting of The Re-Echo Club, it chanced that there was no one
present but Omar Khayyam. He had mistaken the date, and came to the
clubroom, only to find it empty. Absent-mindedly, he picked up paper and
pen, and, on leaving, left behind these additional Rubaiyat:


RUBAIYAT OF WALL STREET

  Now the New Hope reviving dying fires,
  The Thoughtful Soul to speculate aspires;
    And the lean Hand of Shylock and his Kin
  Puts out some Money, which he gladly Hires.

  Myself, when Young, did eagerly Frequent
  Broker and Broke; and heard Great Argument
    About it and about. Yet evermore
  Came out far Shrewder than when in I went.

  With them the Seed of Wisdom did I sow,
  And then I thought I'd sure be in The Know;
    And this is all the Wisdom that I gained:
  If you buy High, Quotations will be Low!

  Some for the Glories of the System; Some
  Sigh for the big Fool's Paradise to come.
    Ah, take the Cash, and let the Profits go,
  Nor heed the Rumble of a Boston Drum!

  The System that with logic absolute
  Both Standard Oil and Copper can confute;
    The Sovereign Alchemist that in a trice
  National Lead can into Gold transmute.

  Indeed, indeed, at Brokers oft Before
  I swore. But was I Cautious when I swore?
    And then Came Gay State Gas and Rise-in-Hand;
  I plunged--and Lost some Fifty Thousand More.

  And then that New Prospectus cast a Spell,
  And robbed me of my Hard-Earned Savings. Well,
    I often wonder what the Magnates buy
  One-Half so precious as the Fools they Sell.

  Ah, My Beloved, all Goes up in Smoke!
  Last week is past Regret; To-day is a joke;
    To-morrow--why, to-morrow I may be
  Myself with Yesterday's Seven Thousand Broke!

  You know, My Friends, with what a Brave Carouse
  I put a Second Mortgage on my House,
    So I could Buy a lot of Copper Shares--
  I even used the Savings of my Spouse!

  I sent my Soul down where the Magnates flock
  To learn the Truth about some Worthless Stock;
    And by and by my Soul returned to me,
  And answered: "I, myself, have Bought a Block!"

  Oh, threats of Curbs, and Hopes of Bucket-shops,
  Whether Industrials, Railroads, Mines or Crops;
    One thing is Certain, and the Rest is Lies--
  The Stock that you have Bought Forever Drops!

  And if, in Vain, down on the Stubborn Floor
  Of the Exchange you Hazard all your Store,
    You Rise to-day--while Crops are up--how then
  To-morrow, when they Fall to Rise no more?

  Waste not your Money on Expected Gain
  Of this or that Provision, Crop or Grain.
    Better be Jocund with Industrials,
  Than sadden just Because it Doesn't Rain!

  Ah, make the most of what we yet may spend
  Before we, too, into the Pit descend!
    Dust unto Dust, and without Dust to Live,
  Sans Stock, sans Bonds, sans Credit and sans Friend.

  The Moving Ticker tells. And, having told,
  Moves on. Nor all your Poverty nor Gold
    Shall lure it back to Raise one-half a Point,
  Nor let you Realize on what you Hold.

  For I remember stopping in the Jam
  To watch a Magnate shearing a Poor Lamb.
    And with an Eager and Excited Tongue
  It murmured: "Oh, how Fortunate I am!"

  No book of verses! But a Ticker Tape,
  Quotation Record and a Daily Pape;
    A yellow-haired stenographer--Perhaps
  That Wilderness might be a Good Escape!

  When You and I are hid within the Tomb,
  The System still shall Lure New Souls to Doom;
    Which of our Coming and Departure heeds
  As Wall Street's Self should heed a Lawson Boom.

  Ah, Love! could you and I lay on the Shelf
  This Sorry Scheme of Ill-begotten Pelf,
    Would we not Shatter it to Bits, and Then
  Remould a System just to suit Ourself?


Transcriber's Note:

Every effort has been made to preserve variant spellings, punctuation,
and poetry layout.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Re-echo Club, by Carolyn Wells

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RE-ECHO CLUB ***

***** This file should be named 24840.txt or 24840.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/4/24840/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Greg Bergquist and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
