The Project Gutenberg EBook of Turned Adrift, by Harry Collingwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Turned Adrift

Author: Harry Collingwood

Illustrator: Edward S. Hodgson

Release Date: March 17, 2008 [EBook #24859]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TURNED ADRIFT ***




Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England




Turned Adrift, by Harry Collingwood.

________________________________________________________________________
This is a very fast-moving book by a master of nautical writing.  You
will enjoy it, and especially so if you listen to it as an audiobook.

________________________________________________________________________
TURNED ADRIFT, BY HARRY COLLINGWOOD.



CHAPTER ONE.

THE SEIZURE OF THE "ZENOBIA".

The _Zenobia_--A1 at Lloyd's--was a beautiful little clipper barque of
376 tons register, and so exquisitely fine were her lines that her
cargo-carrying capacity amounted to but a few tons more than her
register tonnage; in fact, the naval architect who designed her had been
instructed to ignore altogether the question of cargo capacity, and to
give his whole attention to the matter of speed, and most faithfully had
he carried out his instructions.

For the _Zenobia_ had been designed and built to the order of the firm
which owned the famous "Queen" line of sailing clippers trading between
London and Natal; and the aim of the Company was to drive off all
competitors and secure the monopoly of the passenger trade between
London and the Garden Colony.  And there was only one way in which that
aim could be accomplished, namely, by carrying passengers to and fro in
less time and greater comfort than any of the competing lines.  The
question of cargo did not matter so very much, for at that time--that is
to say, about the year 1860--the steam service to South Africa was very
different from what it is to-day.  The steamers were small, slow, and
infrequent; Natal was just then attracting a big influx of well-to-do
people from England; passenger rates were high--as also, for that
matter, was the freight on such special merchandise as was at that time
being carried out to the colony--and those who took credit to themselves
for their foresight believed that there was big money to be made in the
sailing passenger trade.  Needless to say, the competition between the
different lines was exceedingly keen: but the owners of the "Queen" line
were a very rich corporation; they were prepared to sink money in the
effort to secure a monopoly; and the _Zenobia_ was the latest outcome of
their rather speculative policy.

At the moment when this story opens--namely, about two bells of the
middle watch, on the night of 24 January, 1862--or rather in the early
morning of 25 January, to be exact--the barque was somewhere about
latitude 25 degrees south, and longitude 27 degrees west.  I have not
the precise figures by me, nor do they very greatly matter.  The night
was fine, clear, and starlit, with the moon, well advanced in her fourth
quarter, hanging a few degrees above the eastern horizon, and shedding
just enough light to touch the wave crests immediately beneath her with
soft flashes of ruddy golden light.  The wind was piping up fresh from
the south-east, and the little clipper was roaring through it under all
plain sail to her royals, with the yeast slopping in over her starboard
rail at every lee roll and her lee scuppers all afloat; for quick
passages were the order of the day, quick passages meant "carrying on",
and Mr Stephen Bligh, the chief mate and officer of the watch, was
living fully up to the traditions of the service.  This was the
_Zenobia's_ second outward voyage.  Her first trip had been accomplished
in the unprecedentedly brief period of forty-six days; and it was now
the ambition of her skipper and his two mates to beat even that
brilliant record.  And at the moment there seemed an excellent prospect
that this laudable ambition might be achieved, for the morrow would only
be our twenty-fourth day out.  We had been extraordinarily lucky in the
matter of crossing the line, having slid across it with a good breeze,
which had run us into the south-east Trades without the loss of a
moment; and those same south-east Trades--or something remarkably like
them--were still piping up fresh, although we were by this time well
beyond their ordinary southern limits.

Our ship's company amounted to twenty-four all told, namely, Captain
John Roberts, our skipper; Mr Stephen Bligh, our chief mate; Mr Peter
Johnson, our second mate; Dr John Morrison, our surgeon--ours being one
of the few ships in the trade which at that time carried a doctor--the
boatswain, carpenter, sailmaker, cook, two stewards, twelve men--of whom
eight were A.B.'s and four only O.S.--and last, but not least--in our
own estimation--two apprentices, Tom Bainbridge, in his fifth year of
apprenticeship, being one, while I, Mark Temple, just turned seventeen
years of age, and in the third year of my apprenticeship, was the other.
There was not much love lost between Bainbridge and myself, by the way,
for he was of a sullen, sulky temper, and had tried hard to bully me
when I first made his acquaintance in the old _Boadicea_ before joining
the _Zenobia_.  But our mutual ill feeling did not greatly matter, for
he was in the port watch and I in the starboard, so we very rarely met
except when it was a case of "all hands"; consequently we had not very
much opportunity to quarrel.  And in addition to the above we carried
twenty cuddy passengers, of whom six were men, while the remainder
consisted of nine ladies and five children.  I am afraid the above
details are not very interesting, but it is necessary to give them in
order that the reader may fully understand what is to follow.

As I have already mentioned, this story may be said to have had its
beginning about two bells in the middle watch--or about one o'clock in
the morning--on a certain specified date; for until then there had been
nothing out of the ordinary to distinguish the voyage from any other.
But some five minutes after I had struck two bells, in accordance with
the chief mate's instructions, and the lookout on the topgallant
forecastle had responded with the usual cry of "All's well!" one of the
forecastle hands came slouching along aft, and, ascending the poop
ladder with a certain suggestion of haste and trepidation, approached
the mate.

"Will ye mind steppin' for'ard a minute, sir?" he enquired.  "There's a
strong smell o' burnin' down in the fo'c'sle, and--"

"A strong smell of burning?" interrupted Mr Bligh.  "The dickens there
is!  Yes, of course I'll go.  Temple," turning to me, "just keep a
lookout for a minute or two while I'm gone, will ye?"

"Ay, ay, sir," I replied; and the mate dashed down the poop ladder and
went scurrying away forward, regardless of the drenching showers of
spray that came flying in over the weather cathead with every mad plunge
of the overdriven ship.

For the next five minutes I paced anxiously to and fro along the weather
side of the poop, with my ears wide open for any sudden outcry that
might confirm the awful suspicion of fire having broken out below; but I
heard nothing save the continuous hiss and roar of the sea under the lee
bow and along the bends, the heavy slop of water in over the rail with
every lee roll of the ship, and the thunder and piping of the wind
aloft, and I was beginning to hope that it was no worse than a false
alarm, when the man who a few minutes previously had come aft to summon
the mate came running--yes, positively running--along the deck again.
He stumbled up the poop ladder and came to me, puffing and panting, with
every sign of the most extreme agitation, and delivered his message.

"Mr Temple!" he gasped--the skipper always insisted upon the
"midshipmen" apprentices being "Mistered" by the foremast hands, upon
the ground that we were officers, if only in embryo--"Mr Temple, the
mate says will ye please slip below and quietly call Cap'n Roberts
without disturbin' the passengers.  Ye are to tell him that the ship's
afire in the forehold, and that Mr Bligh will be much obliged if he'll
come for'ard to the fo'c'sle at once.  And when ye've done that, ye're
to continue your lookout on the poop until ye're relieved."

"Ay, ay, Mason, I'll do that," I answered.  Then, as we turned together
to leave the poop, I asked: "Is the matter serious, Mason?  Has Mr
Bligh actually found the seat of the fire; and is there a chance of our
being able to master it?"

"Can't say, as yet," answered the man.  "We ain't actually found the
fire; but it's there all right."

I shivered involuntarily, although the night was warm, for I happened to
know that a good deal of the cargo which we were carrying was of a
highly combustible character, such as furniture, pianos, Manchester
goods, and the like, to say nothing of several cases of sporting
ammunition.  I knew that if once the fire happened to get a good hold
upon such material as that the chances were all against our being able
to master it, especially in such a strong breeze as was then blowing.

And if we should be compelled to leave the ship--!

I thought of those poor helpless women and children peacefully sleeping
down below, and of what their plight might be if we were driven to take
to the boats out there in the heart of the South Atlantic, hundreds of
miles from the nearest land.

Tiptoeing my way to the skipper's cabin, I rapped gently with my
knuckles on the panel of the door, and bent my head to listen for a
reply.  I knew that Captain Roberts was a light sleeper, and judged that
it would not take much to awake him.  Nor was I mistaken, for
immediately following upon my low knock came the quiet reply:

"Hillo! who is there, and what is it?"

"It is I--Temple--sir," I replied.  "May I enter?"

For answer I heard the light thud of bare feet inside the cabin as the
skipper sprang from his bunk; and the next instant the door quietly
opened and Captain Roberts stood before me.

"What is it, Temple?" he demanded.  "Anything wrong?"

"Yes, sir, I'm afraid there is," I replied in low tones.  "Mr Bligh is
down in the forecastle, and he has just sent a message aft to me
directing me to call you and say that he is afraid fire has broken out
in the fore hold, and that he will be much obliged if you will kindly go
to him at once."

"Fire!" ejaculated the skipper.  "In the fore hold, you say?  Humph!  I
don't notice any smell of it here," and he started sniffing violently as
he stooped for his slippers and put them on.  "Who gave the alarm?"

"Mason, sir," I replied.  "He came aft, just after two bells, and
reported a strong smell of burning down in the forecastle.  Mr Bligh
went for'ard at once, leaving me to keep a lookout on the poop; and he
had been gone about five minutes when Mason again came aft with a
message directing me to call you."

"I see," answered the skipper.  "Very well," as he emerged from his
cabin and quietly closed the door behind him, "you go back to the poop
and keep an eye upon the ship.  I shall not be long."  And with one
bound, as it seemed to me, he was out on deck and running forward.  As
for me, I returned to my station on the poop, which I anxiously paced
backward and forward in momentary expectation of hearing the call for
"All hands!"

But when I came to look more closely it appeared that any such formal
call would be quite superfluous, for presently a light flashed out from
the windows of the small house just abaft the foremast, in which the
boatswain, carpenter, sailmaker, cook, and the two stewards were
berthed, and by its rather feeble beams I perceived that the fore deck
was full of men crouching under the shelter of the topgallant
forecastle; I presumed, therefore, that upon the first alarm of fire
they had turned out and dressed, and had been sent on deck by the mate
to be out of the way while the investigation below was being made.  It
was about this time that I noticed, with keen satisfaction, the fact
that the wind was not blowing quite as strongly as it had been during
the earlier part of the watch.

I was beginning to think that the skipper was remaining below rather a
long time, and was drawing the most disquieting conclusions from the
circumstance, when one of the crew--a man whom I recognised as Owen
Lloyd, generally known among his messmates as "Welshy"--came aft and
entered the little house abaft the main hatch, where Bainbridge and I
had our lodging.  A few seconds later a small glimmer from the open door
showed that the man was lighting the lamp which illuminated our
snuggery; and a minute or two afterwards Lloyd emerged again and went
forward, while Bainbridge also stepped out on deck and disappeared
beneath the break of the poop.  He was gone some three or four minutes,
then reappeared, accompanied by Mr Johnson, the second mate, whom he
had evidently been directed to call, for the pair immediately proceeded
forward at a trot.  I decided that the matter was assuming a distinctly
serious aspect.  Some five minutes later Bainbridge came aft, and,
ascending to the poop, remarked to me in his usual surly, offhand
manner:

"You're wanted at once in the forecastle, Temple, and I'm to keep the
lookout in your place."

"Right!"  I replied.  "How are they getting on for'ard?  Have they found
the fire yet?"

"Go and look for yourself, sonny, and don't waste valuable time in
stopping to ask silly questions," was the ungracious reply I received;
and I suppose it was the reflection that it served me right for
persisting in my attempts to be civil to the lout that drove out of my
head the thought which had flashed into it for an instant, that it was
rather queer that the skipper should have sent for me at a moment when
Bainbridge was actually on the spot and would serve his purpose quite as
well.  So, all unsuspectingly, I trundled away forward, and, flinging my
legs over the coaming of the fore scuttle, dropped down into the
forecastle, noting _en passant_ that a dozen or more of the hands were
still huddling together under the shelter of the topgallant forecastle.
As I was in the very act of swinging myself down off the coaming I
thought I caught the sound of a subdued chuckle emanating from somebody
among this group; but before I had time to give the matter a thought, or
wonder what might be the cause of such ill-timed mirth, my feet reached
the deck of the forecastle, and I found myself the centre of a group of
some half a dozen of the crew, with the slush lamp swinging violently
with the motion of the ship, and darting its feeble rays hither and
thither as it hung suspended from a smoky beam overhead.  And in that
same instant I caught a momentary glimpse of the forms of Captain
Roberts, Mr Bligh, and Mr Johnson, bound hand and foot, and with gags
in their mouths, huddled up in three of the recently vacated bunks.  As
for the supposed fire, there was neither sight nor smell of it.

"What the--" I began.  But before I could utter another sound I felt my
head dragged violently back and a big gag thrust between my jaws, while
my arms and legs were at the same instant seized by powerful hands and
lashed so securely that I could not have moved either of them by so much
as an inch, no, not to save my life.  The work was done with the speed
and precision that might be expected of men accustomed to the
manipulation of ropes and the tying of knots; and then I was lifted off
my feet and flung with scant ceremony into one of the unoccupied bunks.

"There! that's the last one; the passengers can be left until to-morrer
mornin' to be dealt with," exclaimed a voice which I recognised as that
of "Welshy".  "And now, lads," the voice continued, "let's go on deck
and take some of the `muslin' off her; there's no use in strainin' the
hooker all to pieces, and Bainbridge says as we're quite far enough
south a'ready."

Bainbridge!  Could it be possible that Bainbridge was mixed up with this
vile conspiracy?  For conspiracy it was, clearly enough, to obtain
possession of the ship without the necessity to fight for her; the bound
forms of the skipper and the two mates--to say nothing of myself--proved
it beyond a doubt.  And a very cunningly devised scheme it was, too,
ably planned and most efficiently executed--the enticement of the mate
into the forecastle by the suggestion of fire; then, after just the
right lapse of time, the fictitious message to the skipper through me,
followed by the summons of the second mate, and, finally, the capture of
my insignificant self.  It was much too subtle a scheme to be evolved by
the uninventive brain of the average British shellback, and I fancied
that I recognised a certain Bainbridge-like neatness of touch and finish
in it all.  But perhaps I was prejudiced, for I never liked the fellow.
Yet, if he was not in it, why was he still free, instead of being down
in the forecastle, a captive, like the rest of us?  I remembered now
that on several occasions I had seen him fraternising with the men
for'ard during the dog-watches; but I had thought nothing of it at the
time beyond reflecting that to me it seemed to be rather bad form on his
part, and not by any means conducive to good discipline.

As I recalled these occasions to mind, while I lay there in that close,
evil-smelling bunk, I idly wondered whether he had used them for the
purpose of seducing the men from their duty and allegiance and
persuading them to join him in this outrageous act of unprovoked mutiny.
For unprovoked it most assuredly was: the owners were most liberal
providers, the food was the best obtainable, and the allowance of it far
exceeded the Board of Trade scale; the men had grog as well as lime
juice served out to them regularly every day; the skipper was easy-going
with them to a degree; and neither of the mates could, by the wildest
stretch of imagination, be termed a slave-driver, although of course
both exacted a certain amount of daily work; and, finally, the afternoon
watch below was never called upon except when necessity demanded it; in
short, the _Zenobia_ was as comfortable a ship as any sailor need wish
to go to sea in.  No; I was certain that this atrocious seizure of the
ship had not originated in discontent on the part of the men, who were
neither better nor worse than the average British seaman.  They had been
played upon by skilful hands; their baser passions had been so strongly
appealed to that their better judgment had been blinded; and I felt
morally convinced that there was not a man among the legitimate
occupants of the forecastle who possessed the ability to do this thing.

Then, I asked myself, who was the master spirit who had contrived so
effectually to blind and mislead those simple-minded men, and so
powerfully to influence them that they had eventually permitted
themselves to be betrayed into an act that converted them into outlaws,
with every man's hand against them?  And why had they done it?  They had
no grievance, real or imaginary, against any of their officers: that
fact was patent from the manner in which the seizure of the ship had
been effected; there had been none of the brutal violence, the
bloodshed, which usually accompanies a mutiny upon the high seas.  Then
why, I mentally repeated, had the men mutinied at all?

And the answer that came to my mind was--Bainbridge!  Yes, prejudice and
ill feeling apart, I could think of no other individual in the ship with
the will and the disposition to concoct and carry out such a scheme.  To
begin with, he was the only discontented person, so far as I knew, on
the ship.  And his discontent was of that dangerous kind which is
dissatisfied not with any one particular thing, but with everything.  He
was poor and--as I understood--practically friendless, except for an
uncle who had apprenticed him to the sea in order to get rid of him; he
was restive under discipline, his character being strongly imbued with
that false pride which chafes at a subordinate position.  I had often
heard him declare that he was born to be a leader of men, and had
laughed at what seemed to me to be his inordinate conceit.  He hated
work as heartily as he loved trashy, sensational literature; and he
displayed a quite childish love of dainty food and showy clothes.  And
these were not his only faults: he was an unblushing liar; he scoffed at
such old-fashioned virtues as honesty and truth and godliness; he
sneered at me every time that he found me on my knees offering up my
morning and nightly petitions to my Maker; he was cruel when he had the
chance to be so; and, in short, he seemed surcharged with gall and
bitterness.

He possessed only one redeeming point, so far as I could ever discover,
and that was that he was a splendid navigator.  He prided himself upon
his skill with the sextant, and often used to assert--in that cynical
way of his that might be either jest or earnest, one could never tell
which--that some day he would become a pirate king and establish himself
magnificently on some fair island of the Pacific!  Heavens! thought I,
could it be possible that the fellow had actually been in earnest, and
that this mutiny was the outcome of his evil ambition?  It certainly
looked very much like it.

Meanwhile, during the time that these thoughts and speculations had been
running through my head, the hands on deck had been noisily engaged in
shortening sail, and from the time that they took about the job, and the
easier, more buoyant movements of the ship, I conjectured that they had
taken in not only the royals, but also the topgallantsails, together
with, probably, the flying jib and a few of the lighter staysails.
Then, when the mutineers had done all that they deemed necessary in the
way of shortening sail, four of them came down into the forecastle, and
with the aid of a rope, the bight of which was passed round our bodies,
the skipper, the mates, and I were hauled up on deck and carried into
the fore house, where we found the boatswain, Chips, and Sails as
securely trussed up as ourselves.  And there, still gagged and bound
helplessly hand and foot, we were left to our meditations until, after a
very eternity, as it seemed, of extreme discomfort, first came the
daylight and finally eight bells of the morning watch, when the sliding
door of the house was thrust open and one of the men entered--a fellow
named Adams.

After looking at us meditatively for a moment, and carefully examining
our lashings to assure himself that they still held firmly, he removed
the gags from our mouths--for which I, for one, was profoundly
thankful--and informed us that breakfast was about to be brought to us,
and that our hands would be loosed to enable us to partake of it.  But
he warned us that his instructions were to shoot at the slightest sign
of an attempt on our part to break out of the house, or the slightest
uplifting of our voices, and to give point to the statement he exhibited
a fully loaded revolver, which Captain Roberts at once recognised as his
own personal property.

"And pray, who gave you those instructions, Adams?" demanded the
skipper.

"I ain't allowed to say," answered the man.  "But I was to tell you," he
continued, "that you ain't none of yer permitted to talk to any of us
men, or to ask us any questions; and if you persist in doin' so you're
to be gagged again."

"Very well," agreed the skipper artfully; "then we will not ask you
anything that you feel you ought not to tell.  But I suppose you will
have no objection to tell me, without asking, what has been done with
regard to the passengers?"

"The gen'lemen have been lashed up, same as yourselves, and locked away,
two in a cabin; while the women folk and the kids is locked up all safe
in the other cabins; so there ain't no chancet of none of 'em bein' able
to slip for'ard and help yer anyways.  And now, don't you ask me nothin'
more, because I ain't goin' to answer yer," replied Adams, with some
show of testiness.

"But I suppose you can tell us, if you choose, what your new skipper,
Bainbridge, is going to do with us," I insinuated.  "He is not going to
keep us cooped up here until a man-o'-war comes along and captures the
ship, is he?"

"Now, look 'e here, Mister Temple, don't you go for to try to pump me,
or it'll be the worse for yer," expostulated Adams.  "I ain't got
nothin' against you, and I don't want to hurt yer if I can help it, but
s'help me!  I'll have to shove that there gag back into yer mouth if you
don't clap a stopper on that tongue of yours.  Ah, here comes cooky with
the grub!" he announced, with a sigh of relief, as the "Doctor" made his
appearance at the door with a well-loaded tray.

The picture which that tray presented was conclusive evidence that,
whatever might be the ultimate intentions of the mutineers toward us,
they did not mean to starve us to death, for the breakfast that was
placed before us consisted of the best that the steward's pantry could
produce.  And we all did the fullest justice to it, even the skipper
making a hearty meal, although I believe it was not so much because he
had a good appetite as that he had a very shrewd suspicion of what lay
before him, and was exceedingly doubtful as to when he would next have
the opportunity to sit down to a good, well-cooked meal.  As for me, I
was healthily hungry, and was altogether too young and of too sanguine a
temperament to feel very anxious as to what was to be the outcome of the
adventure; moreover, I was unburdened by responsibility of any sort, and
I therefore ate and drank until I was fully satisfied.

We were still busy with our breakfasts when an alteration in the motion
of the ship apprised us all of the fact that the helm had been put up,
and that we were now running off with the wind on our port quarter; and
the next moment we heard a voice, which I instantly recognised as
Bainbridge's, summoning the men to the braces.  The yards were trimmed
very nearly square, then came an order to loose, sheet home, and hoist
away the topgallantsails and royals; next the men who had gone aloft to
loose those sails were ordered to rig out the port studdingsail-booms
and to set the royal and topgallant studdingsails on their way down; and
finally the topmast and lower studdingsails were set, and the _Zenobia_
went rolling and wallowing away to the westward under every rag that
could be packed upon her.

No remark was made upon this so long as the man Adams remained with us;
but when at length we had finished our breakfast, had reluctantly
submitted to be trussed up again--because we could not help ourselves,
and nothing could be gained by offering an unavailing resistance--and
were once more shut in and left to ourselves, the skipper turned to Mr
Bligh and remarked:

"Now, what does the scoundrel mean by this shift of helm, think you?  We
are only about four or five degrees to the southward of Rio at this
moment.  Can the man be such a fool as to think of running in until he
sights the coast and then turning us adrift to get ashore as best we
can?  Because, if he does, we'll have a British man-o'-war after him in
no time."

"I don't believe the boy is quite such an ass as that; indeed, I regard
him as being very far from an ass--except in this one particular
instance of organising this mutiny," answered Bligh.  "I haven't the
slightest notion of what he intends to be after, but I think we may be
quite certain that Bainbridge won't give us much of a chance to report
him until he has had time to get well out of the neighbourhood.  What
say you, Johnson?  He was in your watch, and you should know him a good
deal better than I do."

"If you are speaking of Bainbridge," answered the second mate, "I fully
agree with you that he is very far from being a fool--quite the other
way about, indeed; and from what I know of the young villain I should
say that he may be depended upon to give us the smallest possible chance
of reporting him quickly.  My opinion is this.  So far, and up to the
moment of shifting her helm, the _Zenobia_ has been following the usual
ship track to the south'ard and round the Cape; hence we have been
liable to fall in at any moment with other ships, which would not
exactly suit Bainbridge's book.  Therefore he has shifted his helm and
is now running off the track far enough to avoid meeting with other
ships.  In my opinion he will continue so to run until he considers
himself quite out of danger; but what he will do afterward, and how he
will dispose of us, I'll leave it to a better guesser than myself to
imagine.  The only thing that I feel at all certain about is that he
will not murder us; if he had intended to do that he would not have
taken such elaborate pains to get us alive and uninjured into his
power."

"Quite so; I fully agree with you there," returned the skipper.  "The
thing that I can't fathom is the young scoundrel's motive for taking the
ship, and what he proposes to do with her now that he has her.  By the
way, Mr Temple, it was you, I think, who first named Bainbridge as the
ringleader of this rascally job; what led you to fix it upon him so
pat?"

"Well, sir," said I, "the fact is that after they brought us in here and
left us, bound hand and foot and gagged, so that we could neither move
nor talk, I endeavoured to beguile the time by asking myself who was
responsible for the seizure of the ship, and then trying to find an
answer to the question."  And forthwith I proceeded to give a resume of
the cogitations which had ultimately led to my fixing the blame for the
affair upon Bainbridge's shoulders.  In the course of my remarks I
happened to mention that at first I had been inclined to suspect the man
nicknamed "Welshy", but that I had soon come to the conclusion that the
fellow had not the brains necessary to plan such a _coup_ and carry it
out to a successful conclusion in the masterly manner which had
distinguished the actual operation.

"Ah! but `Welshy' was in it, though," cut in the boatswain.  "I know he
was; for he and Bainbridge was for ever gettin' away together by
theirselves and talkin' by the fathom.  `Welshy' is one of these here
Socialist buckos who's got the notion that all hands ought to be on the
same level, and that nobody ought to have more of anything than anybody
else; he's a rare hand at preachin' about equality and the rights o'
man, is `Welshy', and I wouldn't be a bit surprised if it turned out
that 'twas he as first give Mr Bainbridge the idee of seizin' the ship.
And even if he wasn't, I know that he is pretty well mixed up in it,
for he was everlastin'ly yarnin' about the hardships and wrongs of
sailormen, and throwin' out hints, like.  I didn't take no notice of 'em
at the time--in fac' Chips and I used to argufy with and laugh at him;
but now, since this here mutiny job have happened, I seem to see that
all his talk had a purpose, and that he was feelin' around, like, with
the idee of findin' out how many of us might be depended upon to back up
him and Bainbridge in the seizure of the ship."

"And it would appear that he was successful in winning over all hands
except you three," remarked the skipper.  "Did he ever attempt to sound
either of you?"

"Ay, that he did, sir; lots o' times, now that I comes to think of it,"
answered the boatswain.  "But nothin' what you might call definite, you
understand.  I s'pose he pretty soon saw that Chips and Sails and me
weren't likely to have any truck wi' such an idee as mutiny and seizin'
the ship, so he soon knocked off talkin' to us about it.  I reckon that
he used to report to Bainbridge pretty often, tellin' him what he had
said, and how we had took it; and I expect it was Mr B. who told him
not to say anything more to us about it."

"Yes," agreed the skipper, "I fancy you have got the hang of the thing
pretty accurately, bos'n; but it was a pity that it never occurred to
either of you to mention the matter to me or Mr Bligh.  It would have
given us a notion of what was brewing, and put us on our guard."

But Murdock, Parsons, and Simpson all vehemently protested that Lloyd's
remarks were of so very general a character, and bore so striking a
resemblance to the ordinary "grousing" universally met with in a ship's
forecastle, which really means nothing, that it never occurred to either
of them to attach any especial significance to what unfortunately had
proved to be an exceptional case.  A great deal more was said upon the
matter before it was dropped; but the remarks were mostly of a desultory
character, and as they have no particular bearing upon the thread of
this story it is unnecessary to repeat them.



CHAPTER TWO.

TURNED ADRIFT.

The _Zenobia_ continued to run to the westward during the whole of that
day before a wind that steadily softened down, hour after hour, until by
two bells in the first dog-watch it was little more than a mere
breathing, scarcely strong enough to keep the heavy courses filled.  And
we could tell by the motion of the ship that the sea as well as the wind
was going down, for by the time that the above-named hour arrived we
were bowing and swaying upon the fast-subsiding swell as easily and
gently as though the ship had been a cradle rocked by a mother's hand.

Things had been tolerably quiet out on deck during the forenoon, but
later on, when the men had turned-to after their dinner, we heard sounds
outside the house which indicated a considerable amount of activity on
the part of the mutineers; the booms and planks which were stowed on the
roof of our prison were overhauled, and several of them were flung down
on deck; then "Welshy" came in and cast loose the carpenter, ordering
him to bring his chest of tools outside.  This was presently followed by
the sounds of sawing and hammering; later on we heard certain orders
being given which indicated that the mast and yard tackles were being
sent aloft; and finally there was a great commotion and laughing out on
deck, intermingled with the alarmed bleatings of some sheep, which were
housed in the longboat.

"Ah," ejaculated the skipper as these last-named sounds reached our
ears, "I know what that means!  They are clearing out the longboat
preparatory to getting her over the side, and mean to turn us adrift in
her.  And not us only, but also the unfortunate passengers; for if they
had not intended to send them as well as ourselves away, they would have
kept the longboat and given us one of the quarter boats, which would
have been amply big enough to have accommodated us seven--or six, if
they mean to keep Chips with them."

"He won't stay, sir, you may take my word for that," observed the
boatswain.  "Parsons is a straight chap--as straight as they make 'em;
and you'll find that he's not the sort of man to have no truck wi'
mutineers--not he!"

"But they may compel him to stay," objected the skipper.  "He would be a
very useful sort of man for them to have with them, and they may not
give him the choice of going or staying."

"Yes, that's very true," agreed Murdock.  "But if they asks him to stay
he'll say `No', and likewise give 'em to understand that if they keep
him by force he won't do no work for 'em.  And they knows Chips, and
understands that if he says a thing like that he'll stick to it, if it's
only to spite 'em.  No, I don't believe as they'll want to keep any man
against his will, because that always means trouble, sooner or later,
and Muster Bainbridge is far too 'cute to run the risk of anything of
that sort.  Besides, there's Joe Caton--he says as he sarved his time in
a shipbuilder's yard, and is as good a ship's carpenter as you'll find
goin'; he's stoppin' with 'em of his own accord, I reckon, and
Bainbridge will be satisfied with him."

"Well, perhaps it may be so; we shall soon know," agreed the skipper.
"But," he continued, with a sigh of anxiety, "if they mean to turn the
passengers as well as ourselves adrift--and I feel assured that they
do--I wish Bainbridge would let me advise him in the matter of fixing up
the longboat for the reception of the women and children.  They will
need many little comforts that an inexperienced lad, such as he is, will
never think of; and it will be bad enough for the poor souls, even if
everything that is possible is done for their welfare.  And the longboat
alone will not be big enough to take us all with any degree of safety,
to say nothing of comfort."

"We must watch for an opportunity, and give him our views upon the
matter," said the chief mate.  "I wonder whether--"

At that moment the sliding door of the house in which we were confined
was thrust back, and Lloyd--otherwise "Welshy"--entered.  And behind
him, ranged up athwart the deck outside, were to be seen a number of the
seamen, each with a rifle in his hand and a cutlass girt about his
waist.  It was evident that the mutineers had lost no time in hunting up
the ship's arm chest--at that time an almost obsolete item of a ship's
equipment--and providing themselves with the means of effectually
suppressing anything in the nature of resistance on our part, or an
attempt to recapture the ship.

"Good a'ternoon, gen'lemen," observed "Welshy", with a grin that might
indicate either triumph or an attempt at ingratiation; "splendid weather
for a boat trip, ain't it?  I'm come to cast yer loose, and I dare say
ye'll be much obliged to me--for it can't be very comfortable to sit
there, hour a'ter hour, with your feet lashed together and your hands
tied behind your backs; but, ye see, we agreed as it was best to take no
risks, and then there'd be no call for bloodshed--I dare say you all
understands what I means.  Yes,"--as he proceeded to cast off the
skipper's lashings--"I've come to cast ye all adrift.  But let me warn
ye all not to dream of attemptin' anything foolish, for we've got the
ship and we means to keep her; and them rifles is all loaded with ball
cartridge, and the men as carries 'em'll shoot to kill if e'er a one of
'em sees any of you doin' what you didn't ought to do.  You understand,
Cap'n?  And you, Mr Mate?  And the rest of yer?"

At these pointed questions we severally intimated that we understood,
for indeed we could do nothing else.  Whereupon the glowering scoundrel
resumed:

"That's all right, and just as it should be.  We ain't none of us got
nothin' against e'er a one of yer, and we don't want to have no
vi'lence, if it can be helped--and there won't be none onless you
yourselves brings it about.  But if you does--well, stand clear, that's
all I got to say.  Now, we bein' all agreed that we don't want no
vi'lence nor bloodshed nor nothin' in any ways disagreeable, and also
bein' agreed that we prefers to have this here ship all to our own
selves, it have been decided to send you gents, and the ladies and
gen'lemen aft, away in the longboat, to go just exac'ly where you
bloomin' well likes.  There's twenty-eight of yer, all told, includin'
the women and kids; and the longboat'll just comfortably hold yer all,
with provisions and water for three weeks.  Our new skipper, Cap'n
Bainbridge, says that in this weather, and wi' this purty little breeze,
you ought to be able to make the South American coast in ten days,
easy."

"Ten days!" exploded the skipper.  "Yes, no doubt--if this wind holds
and the fine weather lasts.  But suppose that it doesn't, what then?"
He pulled himself up short, panting and breathless with anger, got a
pull upon himself, recovered his self-control, and then said, in a
perfectly quiet and steady voice:

"Look here, Lloyd, you are a seaman of experience, and ought to
understand--and do understand, I have no doubt--that to send a heavily
loaded open boat away upon a ten days' voyage with only three weeks'
provisions and water is--well--practically downright murder.  I must see
your--er--Mr Bainbridge about this, I really must; and you must arrange
that I have an opportunity to do so.  I cannot and will not undertake
the responsibility of such a voyage as that which is proposed, nor, I am
sure, will Mr Bligh or Mr Johnson.  I shall simply refuse to go in the
boat."

"And I too," added the chief mate.

"Ditto," tersely added Johnson.

"You'll refuse to go, eh?" snarled Lloyd.  "And suppose we makes yer;
suppose--"

"There is no use in supposing anything," interrupted the skipper.  "You
profess to be anxious to avoid anything in the nature of force or
bloodshed.  Very well; I tell you that there will be both if you
scoundrels persist in turning us all adrift under such circumstances as
you have named.  No, stand back; don't attempt violence with me, my fine
fellow.  I am free now, and if you dare to lay your filthy hands upon me
I will kill you with this," and he shook his clenched fist savagely in
Lloyd's face.  "Now," he continued authoritatively, "go aft and tell
Bainbridge that I want to see him--that I must and will speak to him
before I leave this ship."

To my great surprise the man obediently turned away, and, with a
low-spoken word or two to the armed men who remained on guard outside
the door, swung round the end of the house and walked aft, as we could
tell by the sound of his receding footsteps.

He was absent about a quarter of an hour, during which Captain Roberts
quietly cast off the chief mate's lashings, then the pair of them
released Mr Johnson and the boatswain, who in turn released the
sailmaker and myself, all being done under the eyes of the armed guard
before the door, who looked stolidly on without protest by word or deed.
We had scarcely done this when we became aware that the ship was being
brought to the wind; and presently the order was given to man the
braces.  There were the usual "Yo-ho! yo-hip! round with her, boys!" and
the like cries, which the British merchant seaman deems it necessary to
indulge in when he is pulling and hauling; and presently we understood
that the ship was hove-to on the starboard tack, with her head to the
northward.  Then the order was given to man the capstan; and the men
were heaving round when Lloyd returned, and, with a grin of
comprehension at finding us all released from our bonds, informed the
skipper that Bainbridge was willing to see him.  Whereupon Captain
Roberts left us, and, escorted by "Welshy", went aft.

Meanwhile, we who were left behind in the forward house gathered from
the various sounds which reached us that the longboat was now being
hoisted out; and presently we heard the heavy splash of her as she was
dropped into the water alongside.  This was followed by an order to
overhaul and unhook the yard tackles; and in the comparative silence
that then ensued we occasionally caught the alternate murmur of the
skipper's and Bainbridge's voices: but they were speaking in ordinary
conversational tones, and the multitudinous sounds of the ship--the
faint rustle of canvas aloft, the patter of reef-points, the creaking of
the yards and timbers, the wash of water alongside, and the subdued hum
of many voices on deck--prevented us from catching a word of what was
being said.  However, we gathered that Captain Roberts had been
protesting against turning so many people adrift in the longboat alone,
for presently we heard Bainbridge shout an order to lower away the
captain's gig, which, next to the dinghy and jollyboat, was the smallest
boat belonging to the ship.  But she was roomy enough to accommodate ten
people comfortably, without ballast, or seven with provisions and water
enough to last her crew for three weeks; and I considered that if
Bainbridge was indeed going to give us the gig as well as the longboat,
with, of course, an adequate supply of provisions and water, we should
be able to manage tolerably well in anything short of a gale.

Presently Lloyd, who appeared to be acting as Bainbridge's lieutenant,
came forward again and entered the house.  "Now, then, gen'lemen," he
remarked, with the grin which he seemed to think it necessary to assume
when addressing us, "the longboat's all ready, and the passengers is
waitin' to go down into her, so you'd better come along and see to the
stowin' of 'em.  And Mr Bainbridge have agreed to let you have the gig
also; so you ought to be as happy and comfortable as sandboys.  But
don't forget what I told yer about our not wantin' to have no trouble
nor bloodshed.  The ship's ours, and we means to keep her, so if you
wants to go away with whole skins, what you've got to do is to get from
alongside as quick as possible, and without makin' no trouble; for as
sure as any of ye attempts to make trouble there'll be bloodshed, and
don't you forget it.  Mr Bligh, you and Mr Johnson be to go first and
see to the stowin' of the passengers; and when the longboat's got her
complement the rest of yer can foller."

"You are not taking any chances, Lloyd, are you?" laughed Mr Bligh
sarcastically, as he rose to his feet.  "Although all hands of you
appear to be armed, you are not going to run the risk of having too many
of us loose out on deck at once, for fear of what we might do, eh?
Well, you are a fine, courageous lot of mutineers, I must say!  You
wouldn't even chance a fight with a single one of us when you started
out to take the ship, but must needs entice us for'ard, one man at a
time, upon the pretence that fire had broken out in the hold.  Ugh!  I
don't envy Bainbridge his crew of bold buccaneers--not a little bit!"
and with a scornful laugh he swaggered out on deck, followed by the
second mate.

A minute later we heard his voice speaking to the passengers and calling
upon them by name, one by one, to pass down the side, the women and
children first.  And it was pitiful to hear the low moaning and sobbing
of some of the poor creatures as they reluctantly left the firm,
spacious deck of the ship and fearfully clambered down the side ladder
into the dancing longboat, which looked so small and dangerous a refuge
in comparison with the bulk of the barque.  The embarkation of the
passengers proceeded slowly, because of the women and children among
them, all of whom were frightened, while many of them were weeping
bitterly, despite the best efforts of husbands, fathers, brothers, and
male friends to encourage them.  But at length the last passenger went
down over the side and was assigned his place in the longboat, and then
Lloyd again came forward and summoned those of us who remained in the
house to follow him; and as we passed out on deck and started to walk
aft to the gangway, the five armed seamen who had mounted guard over us
followed at our heels.

As we cleared the galley, which formed part of the structure in which we
had all been confined, the whole of the after part of the ship, from the
fore end of the main hatchway, came into view, and we saw that the
vessel was indeed, as we had supposed, hove-to on the starboard tack,
with her mainyard laid almost square, the mainsail brailed up, and the
remainder of her canvas set; and the fabric was full of the sound of a
gentle creaking of timbers, trusses, and parrals, and the soft rustling
of the white cloths overhead.  She had no way on her, but was curtsying
and rolling gently on a long, sluggish swell that came creeping up from
the eastward.  Apart from the swell, the sea was quite smooth, its
surface being scarcely wrinkled into a pure, delicate blue tint by the
easterly breeze, which had died down to so gentle a zephyr, that the
lighter canvas and even the topsails flapped to the masts with every
heave and dip of the hull.  The sky was cloudless, save away down toward
the west, where a great mass of vapour, broken up into small patches,
blazed crimson and gold in the rays of the declining sun, and gilded and
reddened the sleepy undulations beneath it.

Bainbridge, with his peaked cap thrust aggressively to the back of his
head, his brass-buttoned blue serge jacket opening to display his white
shirt and flowing black silk necktie, and also, incidentally, a brace of
revolvers, suggestively stuck in the broad elastic belt which girt his
waist, and with a smile of insolent triumph upon his dark, saturnine,
but otherwise rather good-looking face, stood alone at the break of the
poop, with both hands thrust deep into his trousers pockets and his
white-canvas-shod feet planted wide apart, watchfully regarding the
proceedings on the main deck beneath him; while the whole of the crew,
with the exception of the cook and the five men who constituted our
especial bodyguard, were drawn up athwart the deck and along the face of
the poop structure, each man armed with a rifle, and with a sheathed
cutlass girt about his waist.  Captain Roberts and Mr Bligh stood
together at the open lee gangway, through which and above the lee rail
could be seen the tossing masts of the longboat.

As our little party approached him the skipper turned, and, after
running his eye over us for a moment, said:

"Mr Temple, I shall be obliged to ask you, the carpenter, and Sails to
go with Mr Johnson in the gig.  The longboat is already pretty well
crowded, considering that part of her complement consists of women and
children.  You will find that the gig already has four breakers of fresh
water in her, which will serve for ballast, but you will have to
provision her from the longboat, as Bainbridge absolutely refuses to
give us so much as another biscuit.  You will find Mr Johnson already
in her.  Just jump down and lend him a hand, if you please."

The gig, with her mast already stepped, was lying outside the longboat,
with Mr Johnson in her, while Chips, in the longboat, was overhauling
the stock of provisions in the latter and passing a certain portion into
the gig according to the second mate's instructions.  It was a bit of a
job to get to her across the crowded longboat, but I had just stepped
into her and was about to address Johnson when I stopped short, for I
heard Captain Roberts's voice raised in a final appeal to the men.

"My lads," he said in a loud, clear voice, "before I quit the ship I
want to give you a last chance to undo the evil that you have this day
done, and to avert from yourselves the punishment that most surely
awaits you if you persist in following the path into which you have been
beguiled by a plausible young scoundrel--"

"Meaning me, eh, Skipper?" jeered Bainbridge, with a harsh laugh, from
the poop above.

"Even now, men," continued the captain, ignoring Bainbridge's
interruption, "at this last moment, it is not too late for you to
withdraw from your unholy compact and return to your duty.  You are not
to blame for what has happened; you have simply been deceived and led
astray by one who ought to have known better than to tempt you to a step
which can only end in your destruction.  I ask you to lay down those
arms and place yourselves at my mercy; and I promise you, upon my honour
as a seaman and a gentleman, that if you will do so not one of you
except your ringleader shall ever hear another word about the matter--"

"Stop!  Shut up!  Not another word, as you value your life!" yelled
Bainbridge, suddenly flying into a fury and whipping a revolver out of
his belt.  "So that is your little game, is it?  You would bribe those
men to betray me, to put me into your power!  Very well!  Now you jump
down into that longboat at once; and if you dare to open your mouth
again and speak another word of temptation to the men, I'll blow your
head off," and he wound up with an oath.

But Captain Roberts was not to be deterred so easily from seizing the
only opportunity that had thus far presented itself by which he might
make an effort to regain the command of the ship and his ascendancy over
her crew, nor was he at all the sort of man to be frightened from his
duty by the flourishing of a pistol before his eyes.  It was his duty to
nullify this mutiny if he could, and therefore he turned to the men
again.

"Lads," he said, "bethink yourselves.  What sort of a future is to be
yours if you persist--?"

Crack!  Bainbridge's pistol barked out from the poop, and poor Captain
Roberts reeled back, clutching his breast, from which the red blood was
spouting, into the arms of Mr Bligh, who was standing close by him.
And Bainbridge, startled perhaps at what he had done--for the skipper
had always behaved like a father to him--lost the last vestige of his
self-control, and became in a moment the very personification of a
raving, bloodthirsty maniac.  Levelling his still smoking revolver at
Bligh, he commanded the latter, with a very tornado of curses, instantly
to place the body of the captain in the longboat and shove off from the
ship's side forthwith, unless he wished to share the skipper's fate.

Still supporting the swooning body of the captain in his arms, Bligh
allowed his gaze to search in turn the face of each of the armed men who
now clustered round him, and seeing nothing to justify the hope that a
further appeal would meet with the least success, replied:

"All right, my lad, I'm going--worse luck for you!  Here, one of you,"--
to the crew--"just drop your shooting-iron for a minute, if you're not
afraid of me, and lend me a hand to lower the skipper over the side,
will ye?"  Then, as one of the men mechanically obeyed, the mate
murmured in his ear: "I'm sorry for you silly buckos, for this means the
hang-man's noose for all hands of you.  But there's time for you yet.
If you repent before we're out of sight, all you have to do is to bear
up in chase of us and run the ensign up to the fore royal-mast-head.  I
shall know what that means, and you'll have no reason to regret it.  Now
then," aloud, as the two took the skipper's body between them,
"handsomely does it.  Below there, boatswain, just ease the captain
down, and lay him in the main sheets where the doctor can get to work
upon him."

Between them they somehow contrived to get the unfortunate skipper's
body down the side and into the sternsheets of the longboat, where Dr
Morrison at once proceeded to examine the wound; and the moment that
this was done Mr Bligh scrambled down the side ladder, made his way aft
among the women and children, who were huddled together, most of them
sobbing quietly with their faces buried in their hands, seized the
tiller, and, thrusting it hard-over, gave the word to shove off and make
sail.  The order was promptly obeyed, and five minutes later the
longboat, with the gig towing astern, was running off to leeward, with
both standing lugs and her jib set; while those of us who were watching
the barque saw her head sheets trimmed aft and her mainyard swung as she
slowly gathered way and stood to the nor'ard and eastward, close-hauled
on the starboard tack.

We had been under way about ten minutes when Mr Bligh hailed Mr
Johnson to haul up alongside; and when we had done so he said:

"Mr Johnson, now that Captain Roberts is so seriously hurt I shall want
you to come into the longboat with me, because I am the only one at
present capable of navigating her, and--you understand me, I'm sure.
Temple, you will have to take command of the gig, and do the best you
can with her.  That young scoundrel has not permitted any of us to bring
our sextants with us; he has not even given us a chart, or so much as a
boat compass, so we shall have to do the best we can without them.  But
I have been considering the situation, and have come to the conclusion
that our best plan will be to make for Rio, which, according to my rough
reckoning, bears about west and by no'th, true; distant, say, twelve
hundred miles: and we shall have to shape our course for it, as nearly
as we can, by the sun and stars.  This plan has the advantage that by
continuing to steer a westerly course we are bound to hit the South
American coast somewhere, even if we should miss Rio; and we also stand
a very good chance of falling in with and being picked up by something
bound round the Horn.  So much for that part of the business.  Next, as
we are a bit crowded here, and the boat is rather deeper than I like,
you will have to take the boatswain in exchange for Mr Johnson; and--"
he paused and ran his eye speculatively over the crowd in the longboat.
Then, addressing them generally, he said, "I wonder whether one of you
gentlemen would care to go in the gig with Mr Temple?  As you can all
see and feel for yourselves, we are rather uncomfortably crowded aboard
here, and the boat would be all the safer if she were relieved of the
weight of even one of you, while there is plenty of room in the gig, and
she is just as safe as the longboat.  I suppose I need not tell you that
Temple is an excellent seaman and navigator, while the gig is the faster
boat of the two and will probably arrive at least a couple of days ahead
of us."

A pause of a few seconds' duration followed this appeal, and then a Mr
Cunningham--who happened to be the only unattached male passenger among
the party--arose and said:

"If you consider the change desirable I shall be very pleased to go in
the gig; in fact, I am the only male passenger who has no `encumbrance'
with him in the shape of wife or child, therefore it will make no
difference at all to me which boat I happen to be in."

"That being the case, we will make the exchange at once, and then you,
Temple, had better make sail and get over the ground as fast as you
can," said Mr Bligh.

And therewith the gig was hauled up close alongside the longboat and the
transfer at once effected, Mr Johnson turning over to the bigger boat
while the boatswain and Mr Cunningham joined us in the gig.  The
transfer was not a lengthy process, for Bainbridge had not permitted any
of us to bring away any of our belongings, and at that moment the
richest of us had only what he or she happened to be wearing in the way
of clothing.  Then, as the chief mate cast off our painter and thrust
the two boats apart, he said:

"Make sail, Temple, and crack on for all you are worth.  And, as soon as
you get in, report the mutiny, get the British Consul to send out a tug
or something, with provisions and water, to look for us; and see that he
reports the matter at once to the nearest naval station within reach, so
that the men-o'-war may be dispatched to seek the _Zenobia_, and get
hold of her before she has time to do very much mischief.  And don't
forget that your course is west and by no'th--or, as near as may be, in
the eye of the setting sun when he reaches the horizon.  Goodbye, and a
quick passage to you!"

"Goodbye, sir," I returned; "and the same to you!  I trust that the
doctor will be able to put the captain on his feet again by the time
that you get in.  I will remember all your instructions, and lose not a
moment in carrying them out directly we arrive.  Goodbye, all!  Hoist
away, bos'n; and, Simpson, boom out the sheet with that boathook."

The sun was by this time within ten minutes of his setting, and glowed,
a great, palpitating disk of incandescent red, through a thin veil of
innumerable small, closely clustering clouds that stretched in gorgeous
tints of gold, crimson, and purple against a background of very pale
green, right athwart the horizon ahead, their colours being brilliantly
reflected in the softly rippling, slowly moving undulations that came
creeping up after us, heaving us gently up on their ample breasts and
then sweeping on ahead of us straight toward the sinking luminary.  The
wind had just strength enough in it to keep the sheet of our single lug
from sagging into the water, and the gig was sliding smoothly along,
with the small sound of lapping, gurgling water under her, at the rate
of about three knots in the hour, leaving behind her a thin, swirling
wake of small bubbles and tiny whirlpools that vanished upon the breast
of the next on-coming swell.  The longboat, under fore and main standing
lugs and a small jib, deeply loaded as she was, was doing a knot less
than ourselves, and we soon passed and slid ahead of her; while away
down in the north-eastern board, broad on our starboard quarter, the
topsails and upper canvas of the barque shone primrose-yellow above the
ridges of the swell as she stood away from us, heading about
nor'-north-east, close-hauled on the starboard tack.

There was every prospect that we were about to have a fine night, almost
too fine, in fact, to suit us: for although light winds meant smooth
water, which in its turn meant safety for deeply laden open boats, we
had a long road before us and not too many provisions or too much water
for our sustenance during our journey; and for my own part, if I could
have had my choice, I would have preferred a little more wind, provided
that it was fair--even although it involved a somewhat heavier sea--to
help us on our way.



CHAPTER THREE.

WE START OUR VOYAGE IN THE GIG.

The first matter to which I gave consideration, after we were fairly
under way, and had parted company with the longboat, was that of food
and drink; and I began by taking stock roughly of what we had, and
jotting down the items in my pocket-book.  To begin with, we had four
five-gallon breakers of fresh water--twenty gallons in all.  Then we had
two sacks of cabin bread, which, by a partial count, I estimated to
contain about three hundred biscuits altogether.  And in addition to
these we had one dozen tins of ox tongue; six small tins of potted
meats; four jars of marmalade and two of jam; two bottles of pickles;
four bottles of lime juice; one bottle of brandy; and two bottles of
rum.  When I had jotted everything down I made a few calculations, and
then I spoke.

"Shipmates," I said,--"and I include you, Mr Cunningham, in the term,
for this misfortune puts us all upon the same footing--you no doubt
heard Mr Bligh say, a little while ago, that according to his reckoning
we are somewhere about twelve hundred miles from Rio, which is our
nearest port.  That means a twelve days' voyage, with a fair wind all
the time, blowing fresh enough to keep us going, hour after hour, at the
rate of five knots.  Now, those of us who have used the sea don't need
to be told that such a favourable condition of affairs is so exceedingly
unlikely that it is scarcely worth talking about.  To begin with, we are
making a bad start, for instead of doing our five knots we are doing
little if anything more than half that, with every prospect of a flat
calm within the next three or four hours.  Therefore I think it will be
wise of us to recognise, at the outset, that our voyage is a good deal
more likely to take twenty days than it is to be accomplished in ten.

"Of course, in saying this I am regarding the matter from its most
unfavourable point of view.  I remember that we have had easterly winds
without a break ever since we crossed the line, and it may be that the
Trades are extending unusually far south just now, and that we are still
on the southerly fringe of them.  If this should prove to be the case we
shall be all right, for by steering a west and by no'th course we shall
be edging to the nor'ard and working our way back into the permanent
trade winds.  But, on the other hand, this easterly wind may not be the
trade wind at all--and my own opinion is that it is not--in which case
we may expect a westerly breeze--that is to say, a foul wind--at any
moment; and I think we should only be acting with common prudence to
take such a probability into consideration.

"Now, this brings me to the question of food and water.  As you have
seen, I have been taking stock of what we have, and making a few
calculations, with the following result.  First, with regard to the
fresh water.  We have just twenty gallons of it, or one hundred and
sixty pints.  If we could be certain of making our voyage in ten days
that amount of water would afford sixteen pints per day to be equally
divided between the five of us, which is a fraction over three pints per
day per man, or, say, half a pint at each of three meals and another
half-pint at three intervals between meals.  Little enough, you will
say.  Very true; yet I think we must endeavour to do with less.  We must
try to be satisfied with four half-pints per day of twenty-four hours
per man, by which means we shall be able to make our water last sixteen
days, and in sixteen days many things may happen: we may end our voyage,
if we have luck; or we may be picked up; or we may have rain enough to
enable us to replenish our water supply.  But since neither of these
things may happen, we ought, in common prudence, to determine at the
outset not to drink more than four half-pints per man per day; and I
think we may be able to manage upon that without any very great
hardship.  What say you?"

"I think we can manage it, if we set our minds to do it," at once
answered Mr Cunningham, and after a little further talk the boatswain,
carpenter, and sailmaker also agreed to make the attempt.  In the same
way we arrived at a determination to be satisfied with four biscuits per
day each, with a suitable proportion of tongue, potted meat, jam, and
what not; and we also agreed upon the quantity of spirits which was to
constitute each man's daily allowance, Cunningham being of opinion that
a very small allowance of stimulant would be almost a necessity, seeing
that our food was to be so restricted in quantity.  And then, having
settled this important question, we piped to supper, each man receiving
the exact quantity of food agreed upon; and when we had finished we were
all of the one opinion, namely, that although our appetites were far
from being satisfied, it would be quite possible for us to sustain life
under such conditions for a fortnight or three weeks without serious
deterioration of either health or strength.

By the time supper was over it had fallen dark, and we had lost sight of
both the longboat and the barque.  It was a magnificent night, the sky a
deep indigo cloudless blue, studded with myriads of stars, the water
perfectly smooth, save for the long, low undulations of the swell; and
the only fault that I had to find with the weather was that there was
too little wind, the breeze having died down until we were making
scarcely two knots in the hour.  Fortunately we had no difficulty in the
matter of determining our course, for it happened that Mr Cunningham
wore a small compass attached to his watch chain as a charm; and after I
had made the necessary allowance for variation we soon managed, with the
assistance of this miniature compass and a match, to pick upon a star
low down on the horizon by which we could steer a fairly straight course
for at least a couple of hours, at the expiration of which it would, of
course, be easy to pick another.

Then we arranged the matter of watches.  There were four of us in the
boat who were sailors, and my first proposal was that each of us should
take a watch of three hours; but Mr Cunningham would not hear of this.
He was, it appeared, a civil engineer by profession, but he had a
natural love of the sea and all matters pertaining to sea life, and was
quite an enthusiastic amateur yachtsman, with a sufficient knowledge of
the way to handle a boat to justify me fully in entrusting him with
temporary charge of the gig, at least in fine weather; and he insisted
on taking his fair share of whatever work there might be to do.  We
therefore decided that he also should be allowed to stand a watch.  I
undertook to stand the first watch, from six o'clock to nine; and, this
being arranged, the boatswain, carpenter, and sailmaker at once disposed
themselves for sleep, two upon the thwarts and the third coiled up in
the eyes of the boat, while Cunningham, who declared that he had no
inclination for sleep, placed himself beside me in the sternsheets and
began to chat in a low tone of voice, so that he might not disturb the
others.

Naturally the subject uppermost in our minds was the mutiny, and we
began to talk about it.  I happened to express some surprise that
Bainbridge had allowed the doctor to leave the ship, upon which
Cunningham gave vent to a low chuckle of amusement.

"My dear chap," he said, "Bainbridge didn't dare to keep him.  He fully
intended to do so at first, and acquainted Morrison with the fact, but
the doctor wouldn't have it at any price--swore that if he were not
allowed to leave with the rest of us he would poison all hands within a
week!  After that, Bainbridge was only too glad to let him go."

We continued to chat for some time upon the subject, wondering what
possible motive Bainbridge could have for proceeding to such an extreme
as that of capturing the ship; by what means he had contrived to win the
men over; and how he had managed to do it without exciting the slightest
suspicion, and so on: and then Cunningham began to speak of himself.  He
was, it appeared, an orphan, twenty-eight years of age, without a single
friend in the world who felt enough interest in him to care what might
become of him.  He had already explained, a little earlier in the
evening, that he was by profession a civil engineer; and he now went on
to tell me that, entirely without friends or influence as he was, he had
found it so difficult to make headway in England that he had at last
determined upon going out to Natal, in which colony, it being
comparatively speaking a new country, he had hoped to find some scope
for his professional knowledge.  "But that," he added, "is all knocked
on the head by that young villain, Bainbridge, who has not only
prevented me from reaching Natal, but has actually turned me adrift in
an open boat to fetch up who knows where, with only the clothes I stand
in.  And yet, not exactly that either," he corrected himself with a
quiet chuckle of amusement; "for although my expensive surveying
instruments and all my kit are on board the _Zenobia_, I contrived to
get at my trunks this morning and extract therefrom a bag containing one
hundred and forty sovereigns, as well as my telescope and half a dozen
sticks of tobacco, all of which I carefully secreted about my person and
have with me now."

"Well," returned I, "if that is the case you may call yourself lucky,
for you will find a hundred and forty British sovereigns exceedingly
useful when we get ashore; as for your telescope, it may prove of the
utmost value to us before this trip is over.  You are considerably
better off than I am, for I was allowed to leave the ship with literally
only the clothes that I am wearing.  The remainder of my clothes,
together with my sextant, nautical and other books, and some sixteen
pounds odd in cash, are still in my berth aboard the barque, if that
swab has not already seized them.  But of course I am hoping to find a
ship at Rio, aboard which I may be able to work my passage home; and
once back in London the owners are bound to find me another berth."

"But supposing there shouldn't happen to be a ship at Rio in which you
can work your passage home.  What will you do in that case?" asked
Cunningham.

"Oh," I said, "I should simply have to take the first berth I could
find, irrespective of where the vessel might happen to be bound for!
Or, in the last resort, I can place myself in the hands of the British
Consul, and be sent home as a shipwrecked seaman."

"I see," said Cunningham thoughtfully.  "But," he resumed, after a
moment's silence, "there is no need for you to adopt either of these
courses, you know, old chap.  My hundred and forty sovereigns will be
quite sufficient to see us both comfortably home from Rio, and you can
repay me whenever you happen to be able."

I very heartily thanked the young civil engineer for his exceedingly
generous offer, but protested that I could not possibly accept it--that,
in fact, there was not the least likelihood that things would turn out
so badly in Rio as to compel me to avail myself of his generosity; but
nothing would satisfy my companion short of a definite promise that I
would accept his help should matters result awkwardly upon our arrival.
Eventually I very reluctantly yielded to his importunities and gave him
the required promise, and thus began a sincere friendship between us
that was only further strengthened by the long series of remarkable
adventures that lay ahead of us both, although at that moment we little
dreamed that anything out of the ordinary run of events was to befall
either of us.

Toward the end of my watch the breeze evinced a slight tendency to
freshen, and when at nine o'clock I handed over the charge of the boat
to the boatswain, and Cunningham and I disposed ourselves to secure such
sleep as might come to us, we were slipping along through the water at
the rate of a good honest four knots in the hour.

As may be imagined, my sleep that night was of a somewhat intermittent
character, for a boat's thwart is not the most comfortable bed in the
world, and I was fully conscious of the responsibility that had been
laid upon me to guide the gig, and the lives which had been entrusted to
her, over the trackless ocean, without the aid of chart or nautical
instruments of any kind save the toy compass attached to Cunningham's
watch chain.  I was well aware that my only hope of success lay in the
keeping of the most accurate account possible of the boat's progress and
direction, and, therefore, was up and looking about me at least half a
dozen times during the night.

The fine weather continued all through the hours of darkness, and during
the boatswain's and carpenter's watches the wind gradually freshened up,
until by three o'clock, when Chips called the sailmaker to relieve him,
the boat was buzzing merrily along at a speed of between six and seven
knots; but after that the wind began to soften rapidly away again, until
at length, when the sun swept into view above the eastern horizon, we
scarcely had steerage way, and half an hour later it fell a flat calm.
We accordingly lowered the sail, and, this done, I directed Simpson, the
sailmaker--who was the lightest of us, and therefore the least likely to
capsize the boat--to shin up to the masthead and see if he could detect
any sign of the longboat or the barque, and incidentally take a good
look round the entire horizon upon the off-chance of there being a sail
anywhere in sight; but he reported the horizon bare in every direction
except in the eastern board, where he fancied he could occasionally
detect a faint something that might possibly be the sails of the
longboat, although he was by no means sure even as to that, opining that
what he had seen, if indeed he had seen anything at all, might be the
distant fin of a prowling shark.

The mention of sharks gave me an idea, and I asked my companions whether
perchance any of them happened to have any small stuff about them out of
which we might contrive to make a fishing line; whereupon Chips, with a
smile, requested me to vacate my seat in the sternsheets for a moment,
and, opening the locker in the after thwart of the boat, produced an
excellent cod line, with hooks and sinker all complete, explaining that
as soon as he gathered an inkling of what Bainbridge intended on the
previous day, he contrived, while engaged in knocking up a temporary pen
for the sheep, to filch the said line out of the cook's galley and to
secrete it, afterward seizing an opportunity to transfer it to the gig's
locker when he learned that she was about to be turned over to us.
There happened to be a piece of dry shrivelled bait still transfixed
upon one of the hooks; we therefore dropped it over the side, paid out
the line, made fast the inner end to one of the thwarts, and forthwith
forgot all about it in the small bustle of getting breakfast.

But while we were still engaged upon the meal we suddenly became aware
that our fishing line was being violently agitated, and upon hauling it
in found that we had been fortunate enough to hook a young dolphin about
two feet long.  Now, raw dolphin is not exactly an appetising dish,
especially to those who, like ourselves, possessed nothing keener than a
really strong, healthy hunger; still, there was the fish, so much to the
good as supplementary to our rather meagre breakfast allowance, and--
well, in short we--at least the boatswain, carpenter, sailmaker, and
myself--managed to eat nearly half of him.  Cunningham had not yet
arrived at the starvation-point where raw fish could be devoured with a
relish, and he declined to share our banquet, for which I did not blame
him; but really, after I had succeeded in so far conquering my prejudice
against raw food as to nibble cautiously at my portion, I found that it
was by no means so repulsive as I had imagined.  And although it was
certainly not at all inviting it was undoubtedly nutritious; and when at
length I finished my breakfast, not only was my hunger completely
satisfied, but I felt refreshed and invigorated after my meal.

Breakfast disposed of, Simpson once more shinned aloft and took another
look round; but there was still nothing in sight--indeed, how should
there be, seeing that there was no wind to fan anything into our ken?
He could not now even discern the faint appearance to the eastward which
he had imagined might indicate the position of the longboat, but that of
course might be due to the fact that, like ourselves, they had lowered
their now useless canvas.  With not a breath of air stirring it was
intensely hot, the rays of the unclouded sun beating down upon us
fiercely as the breath of a furnace, and I inwardly execrated that
scoundrel Bainbridge and his lawless crew as I thought of the crowded
longboat and the hapless women and children--to say nothing of the
wounded skipper--pent up in her, with nothing to protect them from the
pitiless heat and glare.

"Well, shipmates," I said, "we shall do ourselves no good by lying here
idly sweltering.  This calm may last for a week, for aught that we can
tell; there is not the slightest sign of a breeze springing up, so far
as I can see.  I propose, therefore, that instead of doing nothing we
strike the mast, out oars, and go in search of a wind.  There is no
need," I continued, seeing signs of a protest on the faces of my
companions, "for us to exert ourselves very greatly; and we can scarcely
make ourselves hotter than we are, do what we will.  I therefore suggest
that we throw out the oars and paddle quietly ahead upon our proper
course.  We ought to be able to get three knots out of the boat with
little exertion, and every mile of progress means so much to the good:
moreover, I want you all to remember that we cannot afford to lie idly
here; our stock of provisions will only last a certain time, and just
picture to yourselves what our condition will be if, through suffering
ourselves to be delayed by calms, these provisions--and our water--
should become exhausted before we reach land or are picked up.  My idea
is that four of us should pull while the fifth steers, and that at the
end of one hour by the watch he who steers should relieve one of us at
the oars, so that every four hours each of us will get one hour's rest.
Now, what say you, lads?  It is Mr Cunningham's watch, therefore let
him take the first spell at the yoke lines."

It was easy enough to see that the others did not like the idea of
working at the oars in that blistering sun, nor was that to be wondered
at; but my reminder to them of the possibilities in store for us should
our provisions and water be exhausted before relief in some shape or
other came to us had its effect.  With many grumblings and imprecations
at the inopportune calm, they set to work to strike the mast, ship the
rowlocks, and get out the oars; and five minutes later, myself pulling
stroke, and Cunningham in the sternsheets with the yoke lines in his
hands and his compass charm on the seat beside him, we were moving
quietly and easily to the westward at a speed of quite three knots.

Fortunately for us the gig was a particularly good boat of the whaleboat
type, built for speed, long and flat on the floor, with beautiful lines;
and apart from the low swell, which did not trouble us at all, the water
was smooth as oil.  When, therefore, we had once got way upon the boat
it was an easy matter to keep her going without very much exertion.  But
hot!  Only those who have been exposed in an open boat at sea in a
tropical calm can in the least understand or appreciate what we
suffered.  The sun's rays, striking almost vertically down upon our
heads, and reflected upward again from the shining surface of the water,
scorched us like fire, and before the first hour had passed my face was
_so_ painful that I scarcely dared touch it.  And oh, how we perspired!
In less than ten minutes my singlet and drawers--which were all that I
had on, having like the rest stripped off all the rest of my clothing--
were as wet as though I had been overboard.  And the natural result of
such profuse perspiration was that we soon became intolerably thirsty.
I don't know which of us was the first to suffer from this cause, but I
know that I had not been at my oar more than twenty minutes when I began
to feel that I would willingly give everything I possessed for a good
long cooling draught of spring water.  However, I clenched my teeth and
said nothing, for I knew perfectly well that if the word "thirst" were
once mentioned all hands would instantly begin to clamour for water, and
I might have the greatest difficulty in restraining the others from
making a raid upon the breakers, regardless of consequences.

But, after all, my self-restraint was of little practical value, for
presently the carpenter flung the loom of his oar athwart the boat until
it rested upon the gunwale, and, tossing his clenched fists above his
head, cried in a husky, unnatural tone of voice:

"Great jumpin' Gehosophat, how thirsty I am!  Mr Temple, I votes we
knock off long enough to have a drink all round.  I'm as dry as a
limekiln inside; my tongue's beginnin' to rattle again' my teeth, an'--"

"The more reason why you should keep it quiet, Chips," I retorted
sharply.  "Thirsty!  Of course you are; so are we all, for that matter:
but there is no reason why we should yelp about it.  And as for having a
drink, you know as well as I do that, with the small quantity of water
which we have in the boat, it has been necessary for us to pledge
ourselves solemnly to take no more than a certain quantity daily, and we
must wait for our next drink until dinner-time comes along--"

"But, Mr Temple," interrupted the sailmaker, who with the others,
myself included, had now cocked his oar, "our proper 'lowance of water
is 'alf a pint at each meal, and another 'alf a pint at some other time.
Can't we 'ave that there hextry 'alf pint now?"

"No, you certainly cannot," I answered, as well as I was able to speak
for the saliva that gathered in my mouth at the mere thought of that
nectar-like half-pint of water.  "If you did, you would be as thirsty as
ever within the next half-hour, and then you would be sorry enough that
there was no more water coming to you, except at meal times, for the
rest of the day.  But I'll tell you what I'll do.  It is now," glancing
at my watch, "within three minutes of nine o'clock.  At ten we will take
a spell of ten minutes, and each man shall then have the third part of
half a pint of water, with a suspicion of rum in it as a pick-me-up.
Then at twelve we shall dine, and each man shall have his half-pint; at
three o'clock we will have another third of half a pint; at six we shall
have supper; and at nine o'clock, if we find that we really require it,
we will have the remaining third of half a pint.  Now, that is the best
I can do; it is the only thing that we dare do, and we must just make
the best of it."

"Yes," agreed Cunningham, "you are quite right, Mr Temple; we must be
satisfied with our strict allowance, and ask for no more.  But there is
one thing we may do to ease our thirst, and it is wonderfully
efficacious.  Let each man take off his clothes, saturate them with salt
water, and put them on again soaking wet.  If we do this, say, once
every half-hour, we shall find ourselves marvellously refreshed, and
quite able to wait for a drink until the proper time for it arrives."

"Ay," said I, "I have heard of that trick before, and a splendid one it
is, too, I believe, although I have never had occasion to try it until
now.  Let us test it at once, lads.  I remember once hearing a man say
that if shipwrecked people would only keep their clothes thoroughly
saturated with salt water, they could practically manage to do without
drinking at all."  And without further ado I stripped off my singlet and
pants, wrung the perspiration out of them, plunged them over the side,
and put them on again, my example being immediately followed by the
others.  Then, the time having arrived for Cunningham to take a spell at
the oar, he exchanged places with the sailmaker, and we again proceeded.

The sensation of coolness imparted by the contact of our wet clothing
with our bodies was very refreshing, and as long as it lasted we were
able to pull a quick, steady stroke that put us along at the rate of
about three knots with little or no fatigue.  The worst of it was that
it did not last long, for within ten minutes the sun had dried our
clothes again, and we began to perspire once more.  But we soon found a
simple remedy for this by ceasing work just long enough to enable us to
pour two or three buckets of water over each other, and then getting to
work again; and although these frequent stoppages no doubt had the
effect of retarding our progress to some extent, I do not think our
actual loss of speed was very great, for the refreshment derived from
these often-repeated sousings was such that we were able to put a good
deal more life and vigour into our work than would otherwise have been
possible.  As regards the alleged abatement of thirst, although I did
not experience any perceptible relief during the first half-hour of the
experiment, I certainly did afterwards, and so did the others; and
although at ten o'clock we each avidly took our third of half a pint of
water, there were no further complaints of thirst.  And here let me
mention, for the benefit of any reader who may be so unfortunate as to
find himself at any time in a similar predicament, that I then made the
important discovery that the most effectual method of assuaging thirst
with a very limited quantity of water is not to gulp it down and have
done with it, but to sip it slowly, about a teaspoonful at a time, and
retain each sip in the mouth at least half a minute before swallowing
it.  The amount of comfort--not to say enjoyment--relief, and
refreshment thus obtainable is nothing short of marvellous.

But, despite every device that we could think of to obtain relief, our
sufferings during that day were terrible; for although, by assiduously
sousing each other with salt water at frequent intervals, we contrived
to avoid the worst torments of thirst, our faces, arms, and hands--in
fact all the exposed portions of our bodies, were so frightfully
scorched by the sun that even before knocking-off work to take our
midday meal we had begun to blister, and by nightfall our faces and arms
were covered with blisters.  And all through that interminable day we
toiled on and on at the oars, with not a shred of cloud to be seen in
any direction, the blazing sun scorching us remorselessly, and the sea
all round us a polished, shining, gently undulating, colourless plain,
unbroken by so much as a solitary ripple, save those created by our oar
blades, the passage of the gig through the water, the occasional dash of
half a dozen flying-fish out of the sea under the boat's stem, and once
or twice the thin wake cut by the dorsal fin of a cruising shark.

But about three-quarters of an hour before sunset the carpenter, who was
then steering the boat, shouted: "Hurrah, my bullies, there's a change
of some sort comin' at last!  See the edge of that there cloud liftin'
over the sea line ahead?  That means wind, or I'll eat my hat; ay, and
p'rhaps rain too.  What do you think, Mr Temple?"

With one accord we all cocked our oars, and, standing up, I took a good
long look ahead, secretly welcoming, I will confess, the excuse to cease
pulling for a minute or two; for my back was by this time aching
frightfully, and the skin of my thumbs, just where they joined the
hands, was so completely chafed away that the flesh was red, raw, and
bleeding.  Yes, there was the edge of a cloud, distinct enough, the
white, clean-cut, sharp-edged upper portion of a big thunder cloud,
unless I was greatly mistaken.  And it was rising fast, too, so fast
that, even as I stood gazing at it, it fully doubled its area and
permitted us a glimpse of the soft, slaty-blue tint merging into the
white.

"Yes," I agreed, replying to Parsons' question, "the change is coming
all right, and it will not be very long before it is here.  Lay in your
oars, men.  I think, in prospect of what that cloud promises, that we
may venture to spare ourselves any further ash-flourishing to-day, for
we shall have a breeze before very long, with thunder, lightning, and
rain as well, unless I am greatly mistaken.  And we will pipe to supper
at once, so that we may be able to get our meal in peace and quietness,
and have it over and done with before the breeze comes.  We are likely
enough to have plenty of other matters than eating and drinking to think
about and attend to when that happens."

The oars were laid in, willingly enough, for the other four were in just
as bad a plight as I was.  Cunningham, indeed, was far worse, for,
unlike ours, his hands were soft and tender, and when, after the oars
had been laid in, he stretched out his hands, palms upwards, and showed
them to me, they presented a positively sickening sight.  But when I
murmured my regret and commiseration he only smiled and expressed the
conviction that they would be all right again in a week, for he was one
of the pluckiest men I ever met, grit all through, straight as a die,
and with not a bad spot anywhere in him; he was, in fact, everything
that we are apt to think a typical Briton should be.

We lost no time in getting the meal that we called by courtesy "supper";
and within half an hour had disposed of it, and were waiting patiently
for whatever was to come.  But while it was still calm and light I had
the mast stepped, and sent the sailmaker aloft to take a good,
comprehensive look round and see whether he could discover any sign of a
sail; and no sooner had he, with much pain and tribulation, climbed to
the top of his precarious perch than he sang out that he could just see,
in the northern board, what looked like the heads of a ship's royals.
Of course he could not tell in which direction she was bound, for, like
ourselves, she was becalmed, and slowly "boxing the compass," that is to
say, her head was pointing first one way and then another; but while he
was aloft, clinging to the boat's masthead, and watching the stranger in
the hope of being able to make some further discovery concerning her,
her people started to clew up and furl her royals, which circumstance
Simpson duly reported.  It served as a hint to us in the gig, for if the
stranger had detected symptoms that her royals would presently be too
much for her, it was high time for us to look after ourselves; and we
accordingly proceeded forthwith to close-reef our lug, and otherwise
make such preparations as were possible to enable us effectively to meet
the onslaught of the threatened squall.



CHAPTER FOUR.

AT THE MERCY OF WIND AND SEA.

That a squall was indeed brewing was by this time perfectly evident; for
while we had been getting our supper the cloud which had made its
appearance on the western horizon had rapidly risen, and now hung, an
enormous lowering mass of livid purple vapour, in the western heavens,
covering an arc of the horizon of fully a hundred degrees, completely
hiding the setting sun, and towering aloft until its upper edge was
nearly overhead.  Yet so far there was not a breath of wind, and the
surface of the sea remained an unbroken, polished mirror, perfectly
reflecting the hues of the overhanging cloud to the westward and the
deep rich azure of the sky away down toward the east; and when Simpson
again climbed the boat's mast to take a final look at the stranger, he
reported her naked mastheads as standing up black, sharp, and motionless
against the soft primrose tones of the northern sky.

Some ten minutes later, and just as the brief twilight of that region
had begun to veil the scene, we saw a faint glimmer of lightning in the
heart of the now slowly advancing cloud, and a few seconds after the low
mutter of thunder reached our ears.  And before the rumble of this had
died away there suddenly darted from the bosom of the cloud a long,
vivid, baleful, sun-bright flash that seemed to strike into the sea
within a quarter of a mile of us, immediately followed by so stupendous
a crash that it caused the very timbers of our boat to vibrate and
tremble--or so I verily believed.  And as though that flash had been a
signal, the great cloud seemed suddenly to burst apart, and the next
moment we were enveloped in a very deluge of rain, which fairly roared
as it threshed the surface of the sea all round us.

"The bread! the bread!"  I shouted.  "Cover it with the tarpaulin and
keep it dry.  If we let it get wet it will be spoiled," and immediately
we all made a dash for the two bags of biscuits and hastily enveloped
them in a small sheet of tarpaulin that Chips had had the forethought to
toss into the gig while she was being lowered from the davits.

"Now," said I, as soon as we had taken such precautions as were possible
for the preservation of our bread, "spread out the sail, from gunwale to
gunwale, right across the boat.  This rain is far too precious to be
wasted.  That's your sort, bos'n, make a good deep sag in the middle of
the sail--it will soon fill at this rate; and then we can all drink as
much as we please, and put what more we can catch into the broached
breaker, filling it until it overflows.  Find the pannikin, one of you;
there is enough for a drink round already."

The hollow sail filled with the sweet, tepid rainwater faster than we
could drink it; and before the rain ceased we had each emptied the pint
pannikin twice and had filled the broached breaker right up to the edge
of its bung-hole.  Then we had another drink all round, after which we
bathed our smarting, blistered hands in the cooling liquid before
emptying it into the sea.  The downpour lasted for perhaps twelve
minutes; then it ceased as suddenly as it had begun--as suddenly as
though a tap had been turned off up aloft--and we had an opportunity
once more to look around us.  And, glancing instinctively to the
westward in the first instance--for that was where we expected the wind
to come from--the first thing we saw, in the fast-deepening twilight,
was a broad belt of dark water, flecked here and there with white, about
a mile distant, and advancing in our direction.

"Hurrah, lads!"  I exclaimed, "here comes the breeze--a foul one it is
true, but even a foul wind, so long as there is not too much of it, is
better than none at all.  Set the lug for a board on the port tack;
since we can't go straight to our port I'll make a board to the nor'ard,
which will at least be going in the right direction.  Yes, bos'n," in
reply to a question from that functionary, "keep the sail close-reefed;
we shall have all the wind we want, and a little over, before very long,
unless I am greatly mistaken."

The wind swooped down upon us in a fierce little flurry that careened
the gig to her gunwale, despite the careful tending of the sheet by the
boatswain; then, with all hands of us sitting well up to windward, the
boat gathered way and darted off upon a course that was as nearly as
might be due north-west, lying well down to it, with the spray from the
short, choppy seas that the squall instantly whipped up showering in
over her sharp weather bow at every plunge, and quickly drenching us to
the skin.  But there was worse to come, for the wind was freshening
every moment and rapidly kicking up a short, steep, choppy sea, the
surges of which smothered us with spray as the gig leaped viciously at
them under the steadily increasing pressure of the wind upon her
close-reefed lugsail; so that within a very few minutes it was taking
one hand all his time to keep the boat free of water by continually
baling with the bucket, although we eased the craft as much as possible
by keeping the weather-leech of the sail ashiver most of the time.

"Just our luck!" growled the boatswain, as he slacked the sheet to a
still fiercer puff.  "If this had been a fair wind, now, we could have
shown whole canvas to it, and would have been reelin' off our seven, or
even eight knots as easily as possible.  But, as it is, we can't make no
headway agin it; and the time ain't far off, in my opinion, when we'll
have to up stick and run afore it."

"We'll not do that until we are obliged," said I.  "I don't feel at all
like losing, in the course of two or three hours, the ground that we
have made by the hardest day's work that I ever did in my life.  No,
Murdock, when we can't face it any longer we will lash the oars together
and ride to them as a sea anchor at the full scope of our painter.  They
will keep the boat head-on to wind and sea, and we shall ride as
comfortably that way as any other; while, although our drift will
probably amount to as much as three knots every hour, we shall not lose
nearly as much ground as we should by scudding before--"

I was interrupted by the sailmaker, who was sitting far enough forward
to be able to see some distance past the luff of the sail.  Seaman-like,
he was instinctively keeping a lookout, and he now suddenly turned and
yelled:

"Sail ho! close aboard on the lee bow.  Hard up, Mr Temple; hard up,
sir, and keep her broad away, or that chap'll run us down."

There was an urgency and imperativeness in the man's tones which made it
clear enough that there was no time for investigation.  I therefore did
the only thing that remained to be done under the circumstances, namely,
trusted to the correctness of Sails's judgment and implicitly followed
his directions, dragging the tiller hard up, and at the same time
calling upon the boatswain to ease off the sheet still further.  Under
the pressure of her weather helm the boat at once fell broad off; and as
she did so I saw, through the rapidly deepening darkness, a great black
blotch swing into view past the luff of our sail, which the next instant
resolved itself into the shape of a big, hulking brigantine, wallowing
along down toward us with her topsail-yard down on the cap, her reef
tackles bowsed up, and eight men on her yard busily engaged in reefing
her topsail.  It was not yet so dark but that those men must have seen
us distinctly--in fact one of them paused in his work to flourish his
hand at us; yet, but for the sailmaker's watchfulness, the craft would
have driven right over us!  There could be no doubt of the fact that her
crew had seen us, for, in addition to the man who waved to us from the
yard, there were two men pacing her monkey poop aft who paused in their
march to look at us as we drove past each other; yet, although we yelled
to them frantically to heave-to and pick us up, they made no movement to
do anything of the sort, and ten minutes later the craft vanished in the
darkness.  The light was too poor to enable us to read the name on her
stern as she swept past us, but she had all the look of a
Portuguese-built craft; and, justly or unjustly, the Portuguese have
gained rather a sinister reputation for callousness and inhumanity in
their behaviour toward people circumstanced as we were at that moment.

"I s'pose they thinks we're out here in a hopen boat for pleasure and
the fun o' the thing," was the boatswain's sarcastic comment upon their
behaviour, prefaced by a stream of profanity, as the vessel disappeared
from our view.

As soon as we realised that the crew of the brigantine had no intention
of heaving-to and picking us up we again brought the gig to the wind.
But we soon found that this would not do: the wind and sea were both
rapidly becoming too much for us, and to continue fighting against them
meant the speedy swamping or capsizal of the boat.  We therefore adopted
the plan which I had been expounding to the boatswain when the
brigantine hove into view, securely lashing the four oars of the boat
together in a bundle, bending the extreme end of our painter to the
middle of the bundle, and launching the whole overboard, at the same
time lowering the sail and striking the mast, when the drag of the boat
upon the oars brought her head to wind and sea, and enabled her to ride
in comparative safety and comfort, although a breaking sea occasionally
slopped in over her bows, necessitating the frequent employment of the
bucket as a baler.

There was very little sleep for any of us that night, for within an hour
it was blowing really hard, with a heavy, steep sea that frequently
broke aboard us, causing us intense discomfort as the water rushed aft
and surged about our feet and legs to the wild plunging of the boat, and
keeping one or another of us constantly busy baling to prevent the boat
from being swamped.  We were thankful that we had not the added
discomfort of cold to contend with, for, hard though it blew, the wind
was quite warm; yet, even so, it was unpleasant enough, since we were in
the greatest peril every moment of that long, weary night, our utmost
efforts being continually required to keep the boat above water.  But,
notwithstanding everything, it was a fine, exhilarating experience; for,
added to the joy of battle with the elements, there was the wild
grandeur of the scene, the great masses of black cloud scurrying athwart
the sky, with little patches of starlit blue winking in and out between,
the roar and swoop of the wind, and the menacing hiss of the
phosphorescent foam-caps as they came rushing down upon the boat in
endless succession, all combining together to form a picture the like of
which, as viewed from a wildly leaping, half-swamped, spray-smothered
open boat, it is given to comparatively few men to look upon.

The gale lasted all through the night, breaking at sunrise; but although
the sky cleared with the coming of the dawn, the wind continued to blow
so strongly that it was not until the sun had crossed the meridian that
it again became possible for us to make sail upon the boat: and
meanwhile we found that during the night it had hauled round from the
north-west, and was therefore still practically dead in our teeth.  But
the moment that the sea had gone down enough to render sailing once more
possible, we got under way and headed westward close-hauled upon the
starboard tack, under a double-reefed sail; and I took fresh heart when
presently I saw that, even under the exceedingly unfavourable conditions
then prevailing--and they were about as unfavourable as they could
possibly be--the boat was keeping a good luff, hanging well to windward,
thanks to an exceptionally deep keel, and making about four knots of
headway every hour.

My hopes rose high that even yet, despite the delays which we had
already experienced, we might be able to cover the distance to the coast
before our provisions gave out; for if we were doing well under almost
the worst conditions that could possibly befall us, what might we not do
when those conditions improved?  And they certainly did improve as the
afternoon wore on, for the wind eventually dropped sufficiently to
permit us to shake out our reefs and sail the boat under whole canvas,
while with the moderating of the wind the sea also went down and ceased
to break, although the swell still ran very high.  But it was only the
heavily breaking seas that were really dangerous to us; and now that we
no longer had them to fear we drove the gig for all that she was worth,
luffing her through the fresher puffs, hawsing her up to windward fathom
by fathom, and generally handling her as though we were sailing her in a
race, as indeed we were in a sense--a race against time.

We continued to do exceedingly well all through that afternoon, and
indeed up to about midnight; but the wind was softening all the time,
and shortly after midnight our speed began to slacken, until by daylight
of the next morning it had once more fallen to less than three knots.
Moreover, the weather was by no means satisfactory in appearance; there
were no actual clouds to be seen in the sky, but instead of being a
clear, deep, rich blue, as it ought to have been, and as it no doubt
would have been had there been fine weather in prospect, the entire
vault of heaven was veiled in a thick, steamy, colourless haze, through
which the sun showed as a feeble, shapeless blotch of white.  There was
barely enough wind, still dead against us, to fan us along at a bare two
knots; but I did not like the look of the sea, which, despite the almost
total absence of wind, was in a strange state of unrest, the long heave
of the swell being overrun by small, short, choppy miniature seas, which
seemed to leap up at brief intervals without visible cause, and then
curled over and fell in a casual, sloppy manner that suggested the idea
that they would have liked to break but could not summon up the energy
to do so.

But whatever else they may have failed to do, these sloppy seas managed
to retard the way of the boat through the water very considerably, and
to fill our souls with exasperation; for they were distinctly hindering
our progress, while we could see no valid reason why they should exist
at all.  They had the appearance of having sprung up solely to delay us,
and for no other purpose whatever.  More than once, when I felt
exceptionally impatient at our miserably slow rate of progress, I had it
on the tip of my tongue to propose that we should again take to the
oars; but I did not actually speak the words, for in the first place I
doubted whether the gain in speed would be sufficient to justify the
expenditure of strength, and in the next place our hands were by this
time in such a frightful condition of rawness that the idea of proposing
what would make them very much worse seemed to smack of downright
cruelty, unless I could urge some more valid reason than the mere desire
to get ahead a little faster.  And our situation just then was scarcely
desperate enough for that.

It was very shortly after midday, and we were all gathered aft partaking
of the meal that we dignified with the name of dinner, when the
boatswain, who was sitting on the after thwart, facing me, suddenly
paused in the act of conveying a piece of biscuit to his mouth, stared
intently over my shoulder for a moment, and then sprang to his feet,
shading his eyes with his hand.

"What is it, Murdock?"  I asked, turning as I spoke in the direction
toward which he was gazing, "do you--?"

"Sail ho!" interrupted the boatswain, pointing eagerly with his hand.
"Do ye see her, Mr Temple, sir?"

"Ay, I do," I answered, as I caught sight of a faint pearly gleam afar
off on the north-eastern horizon.  "Mr Cunningham, will you kindly lend
me your telescope for a moment?"

"Certainly, with pleasure," answered Cunningham, producing the
instrument from his pocket.  It was not a very big affair, being only
about six inches long by perhaps an inch and a half in diameter, but it
was a three-draw tube, measuring about one foot nine inches long when
fully extended, and, for its size, was the most splendid instrument I
had ever used.  I quickly brought it to bear upon the distant gleam,
which the lenses instantly resolved into the heads of the fore and main
royals of a craft--either a barque or a brig--standing to the southward.
When I had finished with the instrument the boatswain took a squint
through it, and after him the carpenter and the sailmaker; and when they
had had their turn Cunningham applied it to his eye.  As the boatswain
passed the telescope over to Chips he turned to me eagerly and looked at
me hard with _so_ expressive an eye that I instantly read what was in
his mind.  I shook my head.

"We could never do it, Murdock," I said.  "She's too far to the
south'ard.  Had she borne three, or even a couple of points farther to
the nor'ard I might have felt inclined to risk it; but--"

"What are you talking about?" demanded Cunningham.  "Is it a question of
whether we can or cannot intercept that ship?  Because if it is, I am
most emphatically in favour of our making the attempt.  Mind you, I do
not say that we can actually intercept her; but I believe we might
manage to get close enough to her to be seen, for she is almost certain
to have a man or two aloft at work upon her rigging."

"Yes, ye're right, Mr Cunnin'ham; that's exactly my notion," eagerly
agreed the boatswain.  "I believe that by runnin' away off in about this
here direction," pointing away toward the south--east, "we ought to lift
her pretty nigh to her rail by the time that she draws up abreast of us;
and if we can do that we stands a very good chance of bein' seen.  I
haven't no great faith in our prospec's of fetchin' Rio; and if we gets
half a chance of bein' picked up by a ship, we ought to take it.
Moreover than that, I don't like the look of the weather none too well;
and I'd a deal rather spend the comin' night aboard that ship than in
this here gig."

There was certainly good, sound reason and common sense in Murdock's
words, and particularly in what he said about the weather; so I turned
to the carpenter, to ascertain his view of the matter.

"What do you say, Chips?"  I asked.  "Are you of opinion that we shall
be justified in losing ten or fifteen miles of ground upon the
off-chance of being able to close with yonder craft near enough to be
seen?"

"Why, yes, Mr Temple, I certainly am," answered Chips.  "I won't go so
far as to say that we'll be actually able to manage it; but I think it's
our dooty to have a good try for it.  I'm like the bos'n, I've got a
sort of feelin' that we ain't goin' to fetch Rio this trip--"

"All right, then," I said; "you three constitute the majority, even if
Sails happens to think as I do--"

"Ah, but I don't, Mr Temple!" interrupted Simpson.  "I agrees with the
bos'n--"

"Then round we go," I interrupted in my turn; and, putting the helm hard
up, I bore away, the sail jibed over, and off we went almost dead before
the wind, heading about south-east, and bringing the stranger about a
point and a half abaft our port beam.

Sailing before the wind was a very different matter from plugging to
windward with the sheet flattened well in, and although our shift of
helm had the effect of making it seem that the wind had suddenly died
away almost to nothing, there was no longer that heart-breaking
smack-smack of the small seas against our weather bow which had seemed
to retard our way in such an exasperating fashion.  On the contrary,
with the sheet eased well off and the lug boomed out with the boathook
so that the yard swung square across the length of the boat, we went
sliding smoothly away to leeward with a long, easy, buoyant motion, a
pleasant, musical gurgling of water along our bottom planking, and a
swift gliding past us of tiny air bubbles and occasional morsels of weed
that told us we were now travelling at the rate of quite four knots.

For the first half-hour the stranger did not appreciably alter her
bearing relative to the boat, which seemed to indicate that we were
practically holding our own with her, and our hopes soared high,
especially as within that brief period we had raised her royals and the
heads of her topgallantsails above the horizon.  But when this latter
circumstance enabled us to see that she had her starboard topgallant
studdingsails set, my enthusiasm flagged again, for I argued that she
must be a slow-coach indeed if, with the breeze then blowing and
studdingsails set, she could not do any better than four knots.  I held
my peace, however, for there was no use in damping the hopes of the
others, while there was always the possibility that if any of her hands
happened to be employed aloft, the eye of one or another of them might
chance upon our sail, which, small though it was, ought to be perfectly
visible at a distance of five or six miles, even in that somewhat hazy
atmosphere.  But by the end of the first hour after we had begun our
chase it became apparent that she had the heels of us, for although we
were still steering exactly the same course as at first, she had drawn
up square abeam of us.  And there it was imperatively necessary that we
should keep her if we did not wish her to slip past us, even although
the keeping of her there should entail upon us the necessity to edge
gradually away, thus bringing our own course ever more nearly parallel
to hers, instead of causing the two steadily to converge.  Then, about
the end of the second hour of the chase, by which time we had lifted the
stranger's main topsail-yard above the horizon, and had discovered that
she was barque-rigged, the breeze suddenly freshened up sufficiently to
add an extra knot and a half to our speed.  But this was a misfortune
rather than otherwise for us: for although it increased our speed, it
also increased that of the stranger, when it reached her, which it did
about ten minutes later; and whereas it added only about a knot and a
half to our rate of travel, it probably quickened up her pace by more
than double that amount, as was painfully apparent from the increased
frequency with which we were obliged to edge away to keep her square
abeam.  And now the anxiety which I had all along felt began to be
shared by the others, one or another of whom kept Cunningham's telescope
continually bearing upon the barque.  They began to fidget where they
sat, to mutter and grumble under their breath, and to cast frequent
looks at the sky astern, which had not materially altered its aspect
since the morning, except that the haze had thickened somewhat.  At last
the boatswain could restrain himself no longer.

"If this here humbuggin' breeze'd only drop," he grumbled, "we'd out
oars and pull to her.  But it ain't goin' to drop, that's the worst of
it, it's agoin' to freshen still furder; and that cussed old hooker's
goin' to run away from us, that's what she's agoin' to do.  Let's have a
look at that there glass again, Mr Cunnin'ham," he continued.  "I can't
make out what they're a-thinkin' about aboard her.  It's fine weather,
and surely there ought to be some work to be done aloft."  Here he got
the telescope to bear upon her for at least the tenth time since the
chase had begun, and relapsed into temporary silence, while he subjected
every visible part of her to a most searching scrutiny.  Presently he
resumed, with animation: "Ah!  I thought it'd be strange if her bos'n
couldn't find somethin' that wanted doin' aloft in such fine weather as
this.  Just you take this here glass, Mr Temple--Chips'll catch hold of
the tiller for a minute or two--and see if there ain't a man sittin'
astride of her weather main tawps'l-yardarm doin' somethin' or other."

I handed over the tiller to Chips, took the telescope, and raised the
eyepiece to my eye.  Instantly I had a small but exquisitely clear
picture of the three masts of the distant barque, from the level of the
second reef-band of her main topsail upward, with every rope and piece
of rigging and gear, even to the reef-points of the topsail, rising and
falling upon the horizon line with the lift of the ship upon the swell.
And there, sure enough, at the point named by the boatswain, but tucked
away in the shadow of the weather clew of the topgallantsail, so that it
was not very easy to make him out, I saw what I certainly took to be the
figure of a man.  And that the boatswain and I were not mistaken
presently became apparent, for, while I still looked, the fellow
leisurely swung himself on to the foot rope and began to lay in along
the yard.

"Quick!"  I exclaimed, "we must attract his attention somehow, for he
has finished his job and is laying in off the yard.  Off with your
jacket, Sails, and jump up on the thwart and wave it for all you are
worth!"

The sailmaker tore off his white canvas jacket, and, grasping it by one
arm, sprang up on the mast thwart and waved it furiously, while I kept
the telescope focused upon the slowly moving figure of the distant
seaman.  But the man worked his way steadily in, swung himself off the
yard to the topmast rigging, and, with the merchant sailor's usual
deliberation, descended until he vanished below the horizon line,
seemingly without giving a single glance at the widespreading surface of
sea that stretched away for miles on either side of him.

"That will do, Sails," I said; "you may belay your flourishing, and get
down off the thwart.  That shellback has gone down on deck without so
much as a glance in our direction."

"Laid down, have he, without stoppin' so much as to take a look round?"
snarled the boatswain savagely, dashing his clenched fist down on the
gunwale.  "I'll be jiggered if I can understan' what's comin' to the
sailorman as sails these here seas.  Fust there was that there Portugee,
as went past without stoppin' to pick us up, although they see'd us, and
must 'ave knowed that we was castaways; and now here's this here
bloomin' barque, manned by chaps as don't seem to think it worth while
to give a look round while they're aloft, to see whether there's any
poor sailormen washin' about in distress.  But she ain't British, I'll
take my Bible oath o' that; the British shellback don't do that there
sort o' thing.  Why, when I first went to sea we was never ordered aloft
but what the skipper used to say: `Take a good look round, men, afore
you comes down again.  We never knows when we may be passin' within
sight of some poor unfortunate, perishin' of hunger and thirst, and
prayin' to be sighted and picked up!'"

"Well," said I, "I am afraid it is all up with us, so far as that barque
is concerned.  Nevertheless, we will stick to her as long as she remains
in sight.  Another hand may be sent aloft aboard her before she
disappears; or the wind may drop--although I confess I see no sign of it
at present.  And in any case it is comforting, in a way, to know that we
are in the track of the south-bound ships; we are certain to sight
others within the next day or two, and it will be pretty poor luck if we
cannot intercept one or another of them."

But although I spoke so confidently I am afraid that I was not very
successful in cheering up my companions in misfortune.  This second
disappointment was producing its effect upon them; they were becoming
depressed and pessimistic; and although they all agreed that the proper
thing to do was to hang on to the distant barque, in the hope of
eventually attracting the attention of somebody aboard her, I could see
that we were all fully convinced that the attempt would result in
failure.

And so it did.  We chased that barque until the sun set and the shades
of night hid her from our sight; and although about mid-afternoon we got
so close to her that her lower yards showed above the horizon when she
lifted on the swell, and kept the telescope bearing upon her all the
time, no more hands were sent aloft, and as the afternoon progressed she
steadily drew away from us again, until when at length we lost sight of
her in the gathering darkness only her royals and the upper halves of
her topgallantsails were showing above the horizon.  And all this time
so absorbed were we in the chase that we were scarcely conscious of the
fact that the wind was steadily freshening every minute, the result
being that, when at length we were compelled to abandon the hope of
being seen and picked up, we suddenly awoke to the fact that it was
blowing quite a strong breeze, and that it had kicked up such a high,
steep sea that it was no longer possible for us to round-to and ride to
a sea anchor as we had done on the night but one before.  We were
therefore obliged to scud before the wind all night under whole canvas,
to avoid being pooped and swamped by the breaking seas that
remorselessly chased us.

That was a harassing, anxious night for all hands of us, for by midnight
it was blowing what is generally termed a fresh gale, that is, a breeze
strong enough to compel a ship of, say, a thousand tons to reduce canvas
to single-reefed topsails; and that, to us, in a small open boat, was
about equivalent to what a hurricane would be to the bigger craft.
There was no sleep for any of us, for we were in constant, imminent
danger, and it taxed the resources of all hands to their utmost limit
all through the night to keep the boat from being overwhelmed.  The
chief danger to an open boat under such circumstances arises from the
fact that, lying so low in the water as she does, her sail becomes
becalmed every time that she settles into the trough of a sea, and she
gradually loses way.  Then, as she is hove up on the breast of the next
following sea, her sail suddenly fills again, and those in her have to
be careful that, in filling, it does not jibe over, for if it did so it
would certainly capsize the boat.  But in guarding against that danger
another of equal magnitude is incurred, for unless the boat is kept dead
stern-on to the sea the chances are that she will broach-to and be
filled by the breaking head of the sea when it overtakes her.  When it
comes to be remembered that this twofold peril threatens an open boat
about twice a minute hour after hour, as long as the gale continues,
some faint idea may be gained of the anxiety and discomfort we were
called upon to endure on the occasion which I am now attempting to
describe.  And while the anxiety of all is sufficiently acute, the man
who is most worried is the one who is at the helm, for the behaviour of
a craft under such circumstances is in one respect distinctly and
harassingly peculiar: at the most perilous moment of all, which is the
moment before she is actually overtaken by the breaking crest of the
wave, she is apt to refuse to answer her helm, and he who is steering
her loses all control over her; she seems to be seized with a perverse
determination to take a broad sheer one way or the other, with
disastrous results, despite a hard-over helm, and then the only thing to
be done to retrieve the situation is to effect a lightning shift of helm
against all your past experience and your better judgment.  But
notwithstanding this, it generally has the desired effect, the reason
commonly assigned being that, contrary to what is usually supposed, the
body of water constituting the head of a sea actually has a quick
forward motion, and when this overtakes a craft, large or small, which
is only beginning to gather fresh headway, the result is practically the
same as though she were going astern instead of ahead, and the helm must
be manipulated accordingly.  Whether this is really the true explanation
of the curiously awkward phenomenon of which I have spoken I cannot say;
but I know that the phenomenon occurs, and that it placed us in
the direst peril at least half a hundred times during that
never-to-be-forgotten night, a peril from which, it appeared to me, we
each time escaped by the very skin of our teeth, and by what seemed to
be nothing short of a series of miracles.  True, we are told that the
days of miracles are long past; but, after all, who knows?



CHAPTER FIVE.

THE "MARTHA BROWN" OF BALTIMORE.

All through the night, and until nearly noon next day, were we compelled
to continue scudding before the gale; and a pretty crew of scarecrows we
looked when the morning at length dawned and disclosed us to each
other's vision, drenched to the skin with flying spray, haggard and
red-eyed with fatigue and the want of sleep, and each wearing that
peculiar and indescribable expression of countenance that marks the man
who has been face to face for hours with imminent death.  But about four
bells in the forenoon watch the gale suddenly broke, the sky cleared,
and the wind moderated so rapidly that just before noon, by carefully
watching our opportunity, we were at length able to round-to and once
more ride to our makeshift sea anchor.  Then, the boat riding dry--that
is to say, shipping no water--we baled her out, and next proceeded to
overhaul our stock of provisions, with the object of ascertaining what
damage, if any, it had sustained through the constant drenching of the
seas to which we had been exposed.  Our bread--or biscuit--and water
were all that we were really anxious about, the remainder being packed
in tins, jars, or bottles, and it was a great relief to us to find that,
thanks to the precautions which we had taken, nothing had suffered to
any very serious extent.

Then I went to work to calculate our position as nearly as I could,
although the roughness of my data rendered it exceedingly difficult to
arrive anywhere near the mark; but at length, by patient and careful
figuring, I reached the exceedingly unsatisfactory conclusion that not
only had we lost all the ground previously gained, but we were somewhere
about thirty miles south of the spot where Bainbridge had sent us
adrift!

And then our thoughts turned to the longboat, and we began to ask
ourselves and each other how she had fared.  We were still afloat, it is
true, but only because of our long-continued and almost superhuman
exertions, while our boat was an exceptionally good one and by no means
overloaded.  How it would be with our consort, overcrowded with
helpless, terror-stricken women and children, and perilously deep in the
water, we scarcely dared to think; for, with the recollection of what we
had recently passed through still vivid in our minds, we had little
difficulty in conjuring up a very graphic picture of what would be the
state of affairs aboard the longboat under the same circumstances.  Of
course there was the possibility that, more fortunate than ourselves,
she had been seen and her party rescued by a passing ship; but, failing
that, we felt that we dared not entertain the slightest hope that she
still survived.  No good end, however, was to be served by speculating
upon the possibilities of disaster to our friends.  We therefore
proceeded to get a meal as soon as we had straightened up matters as far
as was possible; and while we ate and drank we discussed the important
question of what we should do next.  Our recent experiences had been of
such a character as to convince us that our prospects of reaching Rio
before our stock of provisions should be consumed--if ever--were
exceedingly slight.  On the other hand, we had already had ocular
demonstration of the fact that we were not far from the track of
south-bound craft; we therefore eventually arrived unanimously at the
conclusion that, taking all things into consideration, the best thing we
could do was to cruise to the northward, in the hope that within the
next few days we should be fortunate enough to fall in with some vessel
the skipper of which would be humane enough to pick us up and perhaps
land us at the nearest port.

It was so near sunset before the sea moderated sufficiently to enable us
again to make sail that we ultimately determined to remain as we were,
riding to our sea anchor all night, in order that all hands might have
the opportunity to secure a good night's rest before resuming our battle
with wind and sea.  For after all, now that we had definitely abandoned
the idea of attempting to make Rio, or indeed any part of the South
American coast, it did not greatly matter whether we were under way or
not; a ship was just as likely to come along and find us where we then
were as anywhere else.  And although we had resolved to take a night's
rest before resuming our struggle, we of course intended to keep an
anchor watch of one hand, who would look after the weather and the boat
and also otherwise maintain a sharp lookout, so that, in the event of a
sail heaving in sight, she should not be permitted to slip past us
without an effort on our part to intercept her.

The night passed uneventfully, wind and sea gradually moderating all
through the hours of darkness, until, by the dawn of the following day,
both had so far gone down that we could once more make sail upon the gig
with perfect safety.  It is true that there was still a rather heavy
swell running, but even that was fast diminishing, and there was no sea
to speak of, the wind being of the strength known to sailors as a
"royal" breeze, that is to say, a wind of so moderate a force that a
ship of ordinary size could show her royals to it.

The sailmaker's watch ended a few minutes after sunrise, and when he
called the rest of us our first business was to wash the sleep out of
our eyes by dipping our heads into a bucket of clear, sparkling salt
water, dipped up from over the side; after which we proceeded to perform
our toilets as well as our very limited resources permitted, the next
thing in order being breakfast.  And while this was being prepared--the
preparation consisting merely in the apportioning to each individual of
his just and proper allowance of food--Simpson shinned up to the
masthead to take a look round the horizon, and thus enable us to get the
earliest possible intimation of the approach of a ship, should one
chance to be in our neighbourhood.

The man had scarcely reached his perch--which, after all, was only about
six feet above our heads when we stood up--when he emitted a joyous yell
of:

"Sail ho!  Hurrah, my bullies, here she comes, pretty nigh straight down
for us, if these eyes of mine ain't deceivin' of me!"

"What do you make her out to be, Sails?"  I demanded.

"Can't tell yet, sir," answered Simpson.  "All as I can see just at
present is the head of a--well, it may be a royal, or it may be the head
of the to'garns'l of a schooner.  And I'm inclined to think it's a
schooner, because it looks sharp and clear like, as though it wasn't so
very far off.  Yes, I reckon that there blessed bit of white ain't much
more'n ten mile away."

"And how does she bear?"  I asked.

"Dead to wind'ard as ever she can be," was the cheering reply.  "And
headin' for us just as straight as she can come.  Hurrah, my buckos!
There's no mistake about it this time; she's boun' to pick us up, unless
she happens to be another of them there puddin'-headed Portugees what
don't seem to believe in pickin' up pore shipwrecked mariners," Sails
ended, with a sudden note of disgust in his voice.

"Portugee or no Portugee, she will pick us up; I'll see to that," said
I.  "We'll not give her the chance to refuse; we'll just lie doggo where
we are until she is within a mile or two of us, and then we'll up lug
and run her aboard, whether her people like it or not."

"Ay, ay, that's your sort, Mr Temple," agreed the boatswain.  "No more
slippin' past and wavin' hands for me; if they don't want to pick us up,
we'll just have to make 'em, that's all.  I've had enough of boat
sailin' to last me for the rest of me bloomin' life, and enough of
sleepin' on thwarts, too.  I means to sleep in a dry fo'c'sle to-night
in spite of all the Portugee swines in creation."

"All right, Simpson," I hailed.  "You had better come down now and get
your breakfast.  By the time that we have finished, yonder craft will be
visible to all of us, and then we shall be able to judge what is best to
be done."

We made a good hearty breakfast that morning, both eating and drinking a
little more than our strict allowance, I am afraid, for we all seemed to
be possessed of the same undoubted conviction that, with the appearance
of the stranger to windward, our troubles were now all over, and that
therefore the necessity to husband our limited resources carefully no
longer existed.

The strange sail appeared to be a fairly fast craft, for before we had
quite finished our breakfast the head of her canvas appeared above the
horizon to us, even though we were still sitting upon the thwarts, and
we immediately brought Cunningham's telescope to bear upon her.  The
first glimpse that I caught of her through the lenses satisfied me that
she was a small vessel, the quickness and violence of her movements--for
she was rolling heavily--bearing unmistakable evidence of that fact; and
ten minutes later we discovered her to be topsail-schooner rigged.  She
was evidently making the utmost of the fair wind, for she had topmast
and lower studdingsails set on both sides; and she was coming dead down
the wind direct for us.  We waited patiently where we were until she had
risen hull-up, revealing herself through the telescope as a very
handsome, smart-looking little schooner, with very white sails, which
looked as though made of cotton canvas; and then we got our sea anchor
inboard, cast the oars adrift in readiness for instant use should we
need them, and got under way, working the boat to and fro in short tacks
immediately athwart the schooner's hawse, while Simpson stood on a
thwart to windward, waving a rag to attract attention, the boatswain
meanwhile keeping the telescope steadfastly bearing upon the approaching
craft.

We had just tacked for the second time when Murdock, with his eyes still
glued to the telescope, shouted:

"They see us! they see us!  There's a couple of chaps standin' by her
starboard cathead lookin' at us under the sharp of their hands.  And now
one of 'em has turned round and is looking aft; he's reportin' of us to
the hofficer of the watch, he is--I can see him hollerin' with one hand
to the side of his mouth while he p'ints with the other.  Yes; and now
there's another chap runnin' for'ard to join the first two; he'll be the
mate, I reckon--or p'rhaps the skipper.  And now the third man's lookin'
at us too.  Keep on wavin', Sails; don't let there be no mistake about
what we wants.  The third man's runnin' aft again.  He's goin' to call
the Old Man, I reckon."  A pause of about half a minute ensued, and then
the boatswain resumed:

"No, he ain't; he's gone aft to get his glass.  Yes, that's it; and now
he's bringin' it to bear upon us.  Wave, Sails, wave, you skowbank, for
all you're worth.  Yes; that's--Hurrah! it's all right, bullies, they're
not agoin' to leave us behind; they're chaps of the right sort, they
are!  See that, Mr Temple?  There's in stuns'ls; they're agoin' to
shorten sail and round-to, to pick us up.  But they seem to be
thunderin' short-handed.  They'll be past us and away to loo'ard long
afore they can get them stuns'ls in.  Better bear up and run down afore
it, hadn't we, sir, so's not to keep 'em waitin'?"

The suggestion was a good one, for they had at least two studdingsails--
those set on the starboard side--to take in before they could round-to,
and from the rate at which they were getting the first in I could see
that, as Murdock had said, the little vessel would run past us before
they could get in the other.  So I put up the helm and bore away, easing
off the sheet, and when we were running off square before the wind I
began to edge the boat gradually in toward the line of the schooner's
course.  By this manoeuvre we gave them a little more time to shorten
sail, since we were still about a mile ahead of them and were now
travelling in the same direction as themselves, although the schooner
was fast overhauling us.  But by the time that she was abreast of us,
and only about a hundred feet distant, both her starboard studdingsails
were in, and she was ready to round-to.  Then a man came to the rail and
hailed us.

"Boat ahoy!" he shouted.  "I guess you're shipwrecked, ain't you, and
want to be picked up."

"Ay, ay, sir," I answered; "that is so.  May we run alongside?"

"Sure!" he replied heartily.  "I'll come to the wind on the starboard
tack, when you can pass under my starn and come alongside at the lee
gangway."

I waved my hand by way of thanks and to show that I understood, and let
run the sheet of the lug to allow him to draw ahead and take room to
round-to; and presently he eased down his helm and brought the schooner
to the wind, keeping his yards square and hauling his jib sheets over to
windward to check the little vessel's way.  We were thus afforded an
excellent view of the craft, and a little beauty she was, as clean built
and finely modelled as a yacht--for which, indeed, she might easily have
been mistaken, except for the fact that her sails were not big enough.
She was painted all black from her rail to her copper, with the bust of
a woman, painted white, for a figurehead, and the name _Martha Brown_,
with the word Baltimore--her port of registry--painted in white letters
on her stern.  She appeared to be in little more than deep-ballast trim,
and I began to wonder whither she was bound even before we got alongside
her.

The getting alongside required a little management, for there was a fair
amount of swell running, and the schooner was rolling heavily; but we
managed it all right, and were met at the gangway, upon boarding the
little vessel, by the individual who had hailed us.  He was a typical
Yankee, tall, thin, and somewhat cadaverous-looking as to features, with
a clean-shaven upper lip, a short goatee beard, and light hair, slightly
touched with grey, worn so long that it came down over the collar of his
coat, which was of faded blue cloth, adorned with brass buttons.  His
trousers were braced up high enough to reveal his ankles, and he wore a
pair of ancient red morocco slippers upon his otherwise naked feet.  His
head was adorned with a peakless cap of what looked like wolfskin,
fitted with a pair of flaps to tie down over the ears, but now fastened
together at the crown.

Although the man presented a distinctly quaint ensemble, there was a
genial, kindly twinkle in his eyes that caused me to take to him on the
spot as he extended his hand and said, with a slight drawl and a strong
Yankee accent:

"Walcome, strangers, to the _Marthy Brown_.  I guess you've been havin'
a rough time by the looks of you.  How long, now, have ye been knockin'
about in that boat?"

"This is our fifth day in her, Mr--er--er--" I answered.

"I reckon you're gropin' around after my name, Mister," he interrupted.
"It's Ephraim Brown--very ginerally razeed down to Eph by my friends--
and I'm master and owner of this here schooner, named a'ter my old woman
away back to Baltimore.  I guess your name is--"

"Mark Temple," I hastened to reply.  "My companions are respectively Mr
Edward Cunningham, late a cuddy passenger aboard the British barque
_Zenobia_--of which vessel I was one of the apprentices; William
Murdock, boatswain; Joseph Parsons, carpenter; and James Simpson,
sailmaker, all of the same ship."

"I'm downright glad to meet you all," replied Mr Ephraim Brown, shaking
hands all round again with much cordiality.  Then he stepped to the
taffrail and looked down at the gig, which had been passed astern.

"I guess that's a very tidy-lookin' boat of yourn, and there don't seem
to be nothin' partic'lar the matter with her.  I reckon she's quite
worth hoistin' in, ain't she, Mister?" he remarked.

"Yes, indeed she is," I replied.  "She has brought us safely through
some pretty heavy weather, and I should be very sorry to see her cast
adrift."

"Cast adrift nothin'!  That ain't old Eph Brown's way," retorted the
skipper briskly.  "Is she very heavy?"

"On the contrary, she is an exceedingly light boat when empty," I
replied.

"Ah!" remarked my interlocutor.  "Then I guess we'll have all that
stuff--your stock of provisions, I reckon--out of her, and then we'll
unship the lee gangway and run her inboard fisherman fashion.  It'll be
quicker than riggin' tackles; and I'm in an almighty big hurry."  He
faced forward and hailed a couple of his men.  "You, Sam and Pete, lay
aft here and lend a hand to get the stuff out of this boat."

"But there is no need to trouble your people, Captain," I interrupted.
"We will empty her ourselves in a brace of shakes.  Murdock and Chips,
just jump down into the gig and pass those things out of her.  Haul her
close up under the counter, and we will pass you down a rope's end over
the taffrail to sling them to."

"Yes, I guess that'll do the trick," agreed the skipper.  "And you, Sam
and Pete," he continued, turning to the two men who still lingered,
"turn-to and unship the lee gangway, ready to run the boat inboard when
she's cleared.  We'll stow her, right side up, alongside of the
longboat."

A quarter of an hour later saw the gig hauled inboard and snugly stowed,
after which the _Martha Brown_ was kept away upon her course and the
studdingsails were rehoisted, our boatswain, carpenter, and sailmaker
lending a hand, while Cunningham and I remained aft, chatting with our
new friend.  As the last rope was belayed the skipper stepped to the
skylight, peered down through it, and then turned and struck eight
bells.  Almost immediately afterward a lad emerged from the cabin
companion, went forward to the little galley, and presently reappeared
bearing a large covered dish in one hand and a capacious coffee-pot in
the other.

"Aha!" exclaimed Brown, smacking his lips in anticipation, "breakfast;
and I guess it smells good.  Now I reckon that you 'uns have been upon
pretty short commons this last few days, and'll be in good shape to
enj'y a square meal.  I guess you two'll have to mess in the cabin along
o' me; the hands for'ard'll look a'ter the rest of your crowd."

At the skipper's invitation Cunningham and I forthwith followed him
below to an exceeding small but very comfortable cabin, upon the tiny
table of which was set out a quite unexpectedly enticing meal, to which
Brown helped us both with most hospitable liberality.  For a little
while we ate and drank in silence; but presently, when we had taken the
keen edge off our appetites, our kindly host asked for details of the
circumstances under which we had come to be knocking about in mid-ocean
in an open boat.

"Waal, I'll be sugared!" he ejaculated, after I had related to him in
detail the incidents connected with the seizure of the _Zenobia_ by her
crew, under the leadership of Bainbridge; "if that don't beat
everything!  And you say that the skunk means to set up in business as a
pirate?  But is this here barque of yourn armed?  Do she mount any guns?
Because, if she don't, how do that crowd of toughs reckon they're goin'
to hold up and rob a ship?"

I shrugged my shoulders.  "I haven't the slightest notion," I replied;
"but, knowing Bainbridge so well as I do, I have no doubt that he has a
scheme of some sort in his head."

"Waal," agreed the skipper, "if he's pretty cute he may p'rhaps bluff a
skipper or two; but I guess he'll very soon be euchred--a man-o'-war'll
nab him afore he can say `Jack Robinson'.  And now," he continued,
"about you 'uns.  From things said while you was spinnin' that yarn of
the mutiny I seemed to get a sort of notion that you'd like me to put ye
ashore as soon as possible.  Is that the idee?"

"Precisely," I said.  "Mr Cunningham, here, naturally wishes to return
to England with as little delay as may be; and as for myself, I am
equally anxious, because, until I can get into touch with the owners of
the _Zenobia_, and be placed by them in another ship, I am losing time."

"I see," commented the skipper meditatively; "yes, I reckon I kinder
understand the situation.  By the by, did you say, just now, that you
was a purty good navigator, or did I only fancy it?"

"I don't remember having exactly said such a thing," I replied; "but
possibly I may have implied as much.  Anyhow, I think I am justified in
saying that I am navigator enough to take a ship from any one part of
the world to any other."

"Ah!" returned the skipper; "I had an idee that I'd understood as much.
Now, then, just listen to me.  I guess I can't put ye ashore until we
arrives at Punta Arenas, away down there in the Magellan Straits,
because the solid fact is that I'm in a most tarnation, all-fired hurry
to get into the Pacific.  Of course I'll be very willin' to tranship ye
into a homeward-bounder, if we happens to fall in with one--and you
really wants to go.  But I've been thinkin' matters over a bit while
we've been talkin', and I've a proposition to make that maybe'll suit ye
just as well as goin' back to the old country.  I s'pose you've noticed
that I haven't got nary a mate with me?"

"Well," I confessed, "to tell you the truth, I've been wondering how it
is that I have not yet seen him."

"You ha'n't seen him because I guess he ain't here to see," remarked the
skipper.  "I been unfort'nit in the matter o' mates this trip," he
continued.  "My reg'lar mate what always sails with me is my nevvy,
Abr'am Brown, as slick a youngster as ever I wish to see.  But he met
with an accident the day before we sailed; trod on a banana peel, fell
awk'ardly, broke his right leg, had to go to the hospital, and I had to
look round in a hurry for somebody to take his place.  Got a chap that
looked all right; but we hadn't been to sea above forty-eight hours when
he made a bad break--got so tarnation drunk that I couldn't get him out
of his bunk for a night and a day.  And a'ter that he kept on soakin' on
the sly--though where he got the liquor from I couldn't find out to save
my life--until things come to such a pass that if it hadn't been that I
was in such a tarnation hurry I'd have put in somewhere and fired him.
Wisht I had, now.  But I didn't; and the end of it was that he went
crazy, jumped overboard, and was drowned, one dark night when we'd been
out just three weeks.

"Now, my proposition is this.  You look real smart, and are a good
navigator, while I'm short of a mate.  If you care to accept the
position I'll sign ye on at the same rate of pay--namely, thirty dollars
a month--that the other chap was gettin'.  Now, what d'ye say?"

"But I don't even know yet where you are bound for, or what is the
probable duration of the voyage," I objected.  "Naturally I should like
to know these particulars before binding myself."

"Sure," agreed the skipper, in nowise offended at my apparent
hesitation.  "Well then," he continued, "I'm boun' for a certain spot in
the Pacific, for a certain very partic'lar reason: and if you agree to
sign on I'll tell ye the reason, and just exactly where the spot is; but
if you don't sign on it won't matter to you where I'm goin', or what I'm
out after.  That's one of the reasons for this here v'yage.  T'other is
to trade off a lot of truck what I've got down below, for sandalwood.
And when I've got a full cargo of the wood I propose to go on to Canton,
sell it, and buy tea with the proceeds; said tea to be sold in due
course at New York, where the v'yage will end.  And I reckon that the
trip'll run into all of eight or nine months."

"And a jolly fine trip it will be," remarked Cunningham.  "I wish I had
your chance, Temple; I would take it like a shot."

"You don't say?" remarked the skipper, eyeing Cunningham earnestly.
"But then, you see, you ain't a sailor," he observed.

"No, that is very true," returned Cunningham.  "By profession I am a
civil engineer.  But I am also a keen yachtsman; and I know something
more than the rudiments of navigation.  But of course," he added
hastily, "I have not the qualifications which would fit me for the berth
that you are offering to Temple."

"N-o; I reckon not," agreed the skipper meditatively.  "Still--p'rhaps I
might be able to find a use for ye--if ye cared to come along--upon such
terms as I could see my way to offer ye."

"Well," remarked Cunningham, with a laugh, "we can discuss that later
on--if Temple accepts your offer."

Meanwhile I had been thinking rapidly.  There was no very especial
reason why I should return to England at once, for I had no relatives to
be anxious over my disappearance, the only individuals who were in the
least interested in me being my late father's trustees, to whom I could
write from Punta Arenas.  Then the voyage of the _Martha Brown_, as
sketched by her skipper, rather appealed to me; sandalwood collecting
meant a call at several of the South Sea Islands, and the South Sea
Islands and romance were synonymous terms with me at that time.  Also,
the pay was good, exceptionally good for such a berth as that of mate of
a ninety-ton schooner; and although I should probably sacrifice my
indentures, that was a matter that gave me very little concern.
Altogether I felt very strongly disposed to close with Brown's offer,
the only really serious obstacle in the way being the fact that I felt I
had a duty to perform to the three seamen who had formed part of our
little company in the gig.  First-rate fellows they were, all three of
them, knowing their vocation to its smallest detail, and thoroughly at
home aboard a ship in blue water, though ashore they were as guileless
and helpless as babes, ready to fall an easy prey to the first land
shark that got scent of them.  If I could be sure of arranging at Punta
Arenas for their conveyance to England, either as shipwrecked seamen or
otherwise, and thus discharging my responsibility so far as they were
concerned, I would not hesitate for a moment.  I decided to put the
matter to the skipper, and did so, there and then.

"Ah!" he said, "I was goin' to speak to you about them there men of
yourn.  D'ye think they'd be inclined to sign on with me for this here
v'yage?"

"Really, I do not know in the least," I replied, regarding him with
astonishment.  "If you like I will--"

"It's like this, you see," he interrupted me, no doubt observing my look
of surprise.  "There's six hands in this here schooner's fo'c'sle--three
to each watch; and when I shipped 'em I reckoned that with me, the mate,
the cook, and the cabin boy there'd be plenty of us for all the work
we'd have to do.  But just when we was startin'--we was actually castin'
off the warps at the time--a letter was handed to me that, bein' busy
just then, I put into my pocket and forgot all about until a couple of
days a'terwards, when we'd cleared Cape Henry and was fairly out to sea.
Then, while I was goin' through my pockets, huntin' for something else,
I comes across this here letter, and opened it.  And I tell you, Mister,
that there was news in it that made me sit up and feel mighty anxious
all of a sudden to get away round to the Pacific as quick as possible.
And it made me feel, too, that I wisht I had three or four more men
along.  So if your chaps are willin' to sign on with me I'll be glad to
have 'em.  Pay--well, they're good men, you tell me--say, twenty a
month."

I glanced forward and saw that all three of the men were on deck,
smoking, and chatting with the two hands who, with the man at the wheel,
constituted the watch.

"They are on deck, I see," said I.  "If you like I will mention your
proposal to them, and see how they take it."

"I'll take it very kindly if you will, Mister," answered the skipper;
and without more ado I beckoned them to join me in the waist, where I
laid the skipper's offer before them, while the Old Man himself and
Cunningham remained chatting animatedly together close by the companion,
where much of the foregoing conversation had taken place upon our
adjournment from the breakfast table.

I soon found that, with the careless, happy-go-lucky temperament of the
British merchant sailor, all three men were perfectly willing to ship
for the voyage--about which they had already heard something from the
forecastle hands with whom they had been fraternising--especially when I
told them that I had been offered the position of mate and felt strongly
disposed to accept it; and accordingly I led them aft there and then,
and informed the skipper that we all accepted his offer, and without
further ado we went below and signed articles.

When, after signing, we all returned to the deck, and the three English
seamen had gone forward, Cunningham came up to me and said, laughingly:

"You will be interested to learn, Temple, that our worthy friend here,
Captain Brown, has also offered me a post, which I have accepted.  As
nearly as I can define it, the position is that of honorary second mate;
it carries with it no pay, but in lieu of that I am to be perfectly free
to leave the schooner whenever I please, and am to live in the cabin,
receive cabin rations, and obtain, free of cost, an entirely new outfit
of clothes from the slop chest.  What do you think of my bargain?"

"I consider it a very fair one," said I, "with perhaps a slight
advantage in favour of the skipper.  For although of course he could
doubtless do perfectly well without you, your grub and a new rig-out
will not cost him very much; and in return for that he will get--as long
as you choose to remain with us--the ability to sleep in all night with
a perfectly easy mind: for I can assure the captain," and I here turned
to that individual, who was standing by, intently listening to all that
was said, "that although you are not a professional seaman you are quite
sailor enough to take care of this schooner during your watch.  Also you
are a man of intellect and education, well-read, musical, and with an
inexhaustible fund of intensely interesting conversation, so that I
think Captain Brown will find in you a very agreeable companion."

"Ay, ay, you've just hit it, Temple," cut in the skipper.  "That's just
what I thought when I was listenin' to you two fellers talkin' at
breakfast-time.  Says I to myself: `Now, here's two chaps with the
speech and manners of gentlefolks, chaps as can hold their own with
anybody when it comes to talkin', and yet they're sailors too--at least
one of 'em is; and if you, Eph Brown, what have never had no more
eddication than what you could pick up, could only persuade them two to
jine yer in this here v'yage, you'd have such a chance as you've never
had before to learn gentlefolks' manners, to talk proper, and ginerally
to comport yourself in such a fashion as'd make your dear old Marthy fit
to bust herself with pride to see and hear ye when ye get back home
again, 'specially as you hopes to strike it rich this trip.'  So there
you are, gents: you can call me Cap'n as often as you likes--it sounds
good, and makes me feel as though I was some punkins--but otherwise I'd
like you to talk to me and behave to me just as if we was all eq'als;
and whenever you hear me makin' a bad slip up in the matter of language,
I'll take it very kindly of ye if you'll just pull me up with a round
turn and p'int out where I've gone wrong."

It was rather an amusing proposal, certainly, for a shipmaster to make
to his officers, but the old fellow was so transparently frank in
recognising his shortcomings, and so earnestly anxious to have them
remedied, that both Cunningham and I entered quite heartily into the
spirit of the thing, and readily undertook to do everything that lay in
our power to polish up his manners and speech in readiness for the
surprise which he proposed to spring upon his "dear old Marthy" upon his
return to Baltimore.



CHAPTER SIX.

SKIPPER BROWN RELATES A REMARKABLE STORY.

"And now, gents," said the skipper, when we had satisfactorily arranged
the important and rather delicate matter referring to the improvement of
his speech and deportment, "I'm sorter hankerin' to have a talk with you
both about that there letter I was tellin' you of a while ago--the
letter that was handed to me just as we was makin' a start from
Baltimore, and that I forgot all about until we was fairly out to sea.

"This here letter told me--But stop a bit; if I want you to understand
the thing properly, and I surely do, I guess I'll have to give you the
whole history of it from the very beginnin'.  Along about three months
ago, just after I'd got home from my last v'yage, I happened to have a
bit of business to attend to that called for a trip over to New York;
and when I'd got through with what I had to do, the fancy took me to
stay over for a day or two and have a look round, me not havin' been in
New York for quite a number of years before, you'll understand.  And
while I was doin' my lookin' around I must needs go nosin', like a fool,
down into the Bowery.  And down there I runs up agin a ragged skeleton
that looks me hard in the face and hails me with: `Hello, Eph Brown,
what cheer?  Blamed if you ain't the very chap that I've been most
wantin' to see.'

"I guess I was pretty well struck of a heap, for I didn't reckernise the
chap from Adam; all I noticed was that he didn't seem to ha' had a bath
since his mother give him one as a baby, that he was dressed in clo'es
that ought by rights to have belonged to a scarecrow, that he was that
thin and cadaverous he might have just escaped from the Morgue, and that
his breath was reekin' of cheap whisky.

"`Now, who in Tom Hawkins may you be?' says I; for, you see, the feller
knowed my name all right, yet, seein' where we was, and what the man
looked like, I sorter suspicioned that he wasn't exactly square, and was
tryin' to get at me.

"`What!' he says; `d'ye mean to say as ye don't remember me--Abe
Johnson--what used to play with yer in the old days when we was boys
together away in dear old Nantucket?'--Nantucket, you'll understand,
gents, bein' the place where I was born.

"`No,' says I, `I don't, and that's the cold, solid truth.  But if
you're really Abe Johnson you'll remember the names of a few people in
Nantucket, and a few of the things that we done together.  Where, f'r
instance, did I live when you knew me?'

"Well, he told me where I lived, give me the names of a lot of people
that we both used to know, and reminded me of a good many things that we
done together that I'd clean forgot all about until he mentioned 'em.
Oh yes, he was Abe, sure; and when he see that he'd satisfied me upon
that p'int, he told me a real downright pitiful tale, and struck me for
ten dollars.  He was right away down on his luck, he said; and I guess
he was speakin' the truth, if looks went for anything.

"Now, Abe never had amounted to much when I knew him; he was just a
low-down, ornery cuss every way that you looked at him.  But I was
al'ays a bit tender-hearted, and I sorter pitied the feller; so a'ter I
passed over the ten-spot to him I took him into a restyrong and filled
him up with a good square meal.  And while we was eatin' he told me a
long yarn about what he'd been doin'; how he'd tried fust one thing and
then another, and had finally took to the sea.  And it seemed that his
bad luck had follered him there, for he'd ended up by bein' shipwrecked
upon one of them uncharted reefs that you runs up agin sometimes in the
Pacific, he bein' the only survivor out of the whole crowd.  If he was
tellin' me the truth he must ha' had a pretty rough time on that reef,
for he described it as bein' as bare as the back of your hand, with
nothin' to eat but birds' eggs and clams, and only a small, tricklin'
stream of brackish, scarcely drinkable water to quench his thirst with.
And he was on that there reef five solid months afore a whaler comed
along and, seein' his signals, took him off, and later transferred him
to another ship that brought him home.

"Now when Abe had got this far with his yarn he begun to get mysterious,
sunk his voice to a whisper, and asked if he could trust me.  I told him
that he best knew whether he could or not, and that anyway, if the thing
was a secret, I didn't want to hear anything about it.

"`Ah, but,' says he, `there's a fortune in it--a fortune for both of us,
Eph, if I can only trust you.'

"`Well,' I says, `as I told ye before, that's for you to decide.  But if
you're agoin' to trust me, get along with your trustin', for I reckon
I've had about enough of this 'ere place; I don't like the looks of the
folks I sees around me, not a little bit, and I'm growin' sorter keen to
get out of it.'

"`All right,' he says, `let's git.'  So we got, and made our way to
Central Park, where we found a seat in a quiet, secluded spot, and sat
ourselves down.  And there, a'ter sayin' as he'd got a secret that he
must share with somebody if he was to get any good out of it, and that I
was the only reely honest feller he knowed, Abe up and told me how,
a'ter he'd built a bit of a raft out of some of the wreckage of the
ship, so's he could go off fishin' in her, he one day happened to hit
upon a big bed of pearl-oysters, thousan's--millions of 'em!  He sorter
guessed what they was when he first set eyes on 'em, as he looked down
through the clear green water, and tried to get down to 'em by divin'.
But that wa'n't no good; the water was too deep--a good five fathom he
said there was over 'em--and then there was sharks about too.  So he
unlaid a bit o' rope from the wreckage, knocked some nails out o' some
o' the timber that had druv ashore, and fixed up a sorter small grapple,
with which he went gropin' out on this here oyster bed.  But the thing
wasn't of much account, accordin' to what Abe himself said.  First he'd
got to git it just so over a oyster afore it'd take holt; and then, when
he'd hooked one, as often as not the blamed thing'd let go agin afore he
got the oyster up out o' water: consequently it come to this, that with
all his gropin' he only managed to land four oysters altogether.  But
out of them four two had pearls in 'em, one bein' as big as a small
marble, while the others was little 'uns--three of 'em--'bout the size
of cherry stones.

"Well, he took care of them there pearls, and managed to bring 'em home
with him.  And then, 'stead of takin' of 'em to a respectable jeweller,
he must needs try to trade 'em off to a Chinaman!  Of course you can
guess what happened.  The Chink purtended that he was game to buy, took
Abe to his house--leastways the Chink said it was his--doped Abe, stole
the pearls, and vamoosed!

"Then, a few days a'terwards, along comes I; and when Abe reckernised me
he made up his mind in a minute what he'd do.  First of all he offered
to sell me the secret of the whereabouts of the oyster bed for fifty
thousand dollars!  Only fifty thousand, mind yer, and nothin' but his
bare word for it that there was so much as a single oyster in the place!
I got up to go away and leave him; and then he asked me if I was game
to go shares with him--he to give me the secret, I to go out to the
Pacific and fish up the pearls, and the two of us to divide equally when
I got back home again.  Well, that was somethin' more like a business
proposition, and after a lot o' talk I agreed; and he give me the
latitood and longitood of the place right there, afore I left him, I
givin' him a hundred dollars on account, to carry him along a bit until
he could get a job.  Then I went back home to Baltimore and began to
figure upon the best way to work the scheme.  I wa'n't rich enough to
make the trip purely as a speculation, so at last I hit upon the
sandalwood idea, which I reckon'll pay the expenses of the v'yage and
return me a profit, even if I don't find nary a pearl, although I've a
very good notion that they're where Abe said they was.  The next thing I
did was to get a few p'ints upon the ins-and-outs of sandalwood tradin';
and when I'd done that I started out to get my stock of notions,
overhaul the schooner and make her ready for the v'yage, and look about
for a crew of men that I could be sure wouldn't play no tricks after
we'd got hold of the pearls.

"We sailed from Baltimore the day a'ter Christmas, and, as we was
castin' off, this here letter that I told ye about was handed aboard.
And when I come to open it, what d'ye think was the news in it?  Reckon
you'll never guess.  I've got a cousin 'way over in Nantucket--he's
pretty well-to-do--and findin' myself runnin' a bit short o' money when
it come to fittin' out the schooner, I went over to him, told him all
about Abe and the pearls, and asked him to lend me a thousand dollars to
leave with my old Marthy, to keep her goin' while I was away.  He knows
me, and let me have the dollars straight away.  Well, this here letter
was from him; and what it said was that he was writin' in a hurry to
tell me that he'd just heard, quite by accident, that Abe was dead--died
in hospital in New York, havin' been run over and fatally injured by an
express wagon two days a'ter I'd left him.  And--this is where the
trouble comes in--afore he died he sent post-haste for his
brother-in-law, Abner Slocum, to go to him to oncet, as he had somethin'
most terrible partic'lar to tell him.  Abner went; and although my
cousin don't know what Abe told him, he guesses it had somethin' to do
with the pearls, because when Abner got back after buryin' Abe he went
to work in a most tremenjous hurry to get his schooner, the
_Kingfisher_, ready for sea, observin' the greatest secrecy about it,
and refusin' to say what the hurry was, or where he was boun' to.  But
he was layin' in such a big stock of provisions and water that people
got talkin' about it; and that was how my cousin got to hear what was
goin' on.  But he didn't get to hear of it until just at the very last,
which was on the day that the _Kingfisher_ went to sea, which was two
days before Christmas!  So, you see, this Abner Slocum was in such a
tarnation hurry to git away that he wouldn't even wait to spend
Christmas with his wife and kiddies.  Now, what d'ye make of that yarn?"

"Well," said Cunningham, "I am bound to admit, Captain, that it looks
very much as though your friend Abe, finding himself upon his deathbed,
had sent for his brother-in-law and divulged to him the secret of the
oyster bed.  Probably when he found himself dying, and realised that he
could derive no personal benefit from his discovery, he wished that the
wealth should go to his own family."

"That's how I figure it out," agreed the skipper.  "But I reckon that my
claim's just as good as Abner's, Abe havin' entered into a business
agreement with me.  Besides, it isn't as though Abner'd make good use of
the money when he'd got it.  I know Abner Slocum through and through,
and I tell you, gents, that he's out-and-out the very worst character in
all Nantucket--a real, downright hard case, and--well, everything that's
bad; and if he happens to get any o' them pearls he'll just drink
hisself to death in three months, and most likely kill his wife into the
bargain."

"Then in that case," said I, "it seems to me that it will be a great
deal better that he should not have any of them."

"Well, that's just my view of it too," agreed the skipper.  "But I guess
he's goin' to do his level best to get hold of 'em," he continued.  "I
reckon that Abe must ha' told him that he'd parted with his secret to
me, and that I was fittin' out to go in search of them there oysters,
and that's the reason why he was so all-fired anxious to get to sea
before me.  And as a matter o' fact he did it; he sailed three clear
days ahead of me, and must ha' been just about off Cape Henry when we
cleared it.  So it's a race between the two schooners which'll get there
fust, and, barrin' accidents, I reckon it's goin' to be a neck-and-neck
one, for the _Kingfisher's_ the smartest schooner sailin' out o'
Nantucket; and although Abner Slocum's such a downright `bad man' I'll
say this for him--there ain't a better seaman sailin' under `Old Glory'
than what he is.

"Now, gents, this here is my idee.  I'm agoin' to carry on, night and
day, to get to that there spot in the Pacific where them pearls be; and
when I gets there I'm goin' to scrape up as many oysters as ever I can
lay hands on.  And when I've got 'em, and have realised upon 'em, I
shall look upon half of the proceeds as belongin' to Abe, or--he bein'
dead--his heirs.  But I mean to take partic'ler care that, let the heirs
be who they may, that skunk Abner don't touch a penny of the money.  If
it turns out that Abner's children is the heirs, then I'm goin' to
app'int trustees to look a'ter the money for 'em until a'ter Abner's
dead, and then they can have it."

"Bravo, Captain!" exclaimed Cunningham, patting the skipper approvingly
on the back.  "A most wise and honourable decision to have arrived at, I
call it; and, so far as I am concerned, I'll do all I can to help you to
carry it out.  By the way, how do you propose to obtain the oysters when
you arrive at the spot where, according to your friend Abe, they are to
be found?"

"How do I intend to get 'em?" repeated the skipper.  "Why, with a trawl,
of course.  I've got some specially strong trawlin' gear aboard, made o'
purpose for the job."

"I see," commented Cunningham.  "It did not occur to you to get any
diving gear, I suppose?"

"Well--no, it didn't, and that's a fact," answered the skipper.  "But I
guess we'll find that the trawl'll work all right," he added cheerfully.

"Yes, no doubt," agreed Cunningham.  "But of course," he added, "the
diving system would have worked very much more rapidly, because, you
see, if you had happened to possess a set of diving gear you could have
anchored the schooner right over the bed, sent your diver down with two
large sacks, or nets, and while he filled one you could have hauled up
the other and emptied it into the bins or barrels ranged round the decks
in readiness to be conveyed ashore and emptied after the day's work on
the bed was over.  In that manner you could have secured several
thousands of oysters daily."

"Ay, I reckon we could.  But I guess we'll have to be content to work
with the trawl, seein' that we've neither divin' gear nor diver aboard,"
replied the skipper, rather regretfully.

"Well, I am not quite so sure about that," observed Cunningham
thoughtfully.  "I have the germ of an idea in my head, and will see if I
cannot develop it.  Do you happen to have any rubber hose on board?"

"Sure!" replied the skipper.  "Got a hundred feet of brand new hose for
washin' decks with.  It's a bit extravagant, I know, but I 'low it'll
pay in the long run."

"It most certainly will, and very handsomely too, if I can put my idea
into shape.  Have you used the hose at all yet?" asked Cunningham.

"Used it every mornin' since we left Baltimore," replied the skipper.

"Then let me earnestly beg you not to use it any more, just for the
present at least," entreated the engineer.

"Just as you say," answered the skipper cheerfully.  "We've got our old
canvas hose stowed away somewhere.  I'll have it routed out."

"Right," agreed Cunningham.  "And while I'm keeping my watch on deck
I'll think over this scheme of mine.  I should rather like you to get
the better of that man--what is his name?--oh yes, Slocum!"

"Yes, that's all right," assented the skipper.  "But--look here, if that
there scheme of yourn has to do with divin', Mister, who's goin' to do
the divin'?  I don't know nothin' about it."

"But I do," remarked Cunningham cheerfully.  "I'll do the diving if I
can only work out this idea that has come to me.  And I believe I can."

From this point the conversation drifted away into generalities, and
finally the skipper went below, leaving me in charge of the deck and of
the forenoon watch.  Later on Brown informed me that the late mate's
cabin was entirely at my service, while Cunningham was inducted into a
small spare stateroom which was in use as a sort of extra sail-room, but
which the skipper ordered to be cleared out for the engineer's
accommodation.  Also, it appeared that when the late mate went overboard
he left behind him a very fine sextant, which the skipper had purchased
at the auction of the effects of the deceased, and this instrument he
allowed me to use.

We, the new arrivals aboard the _Martha Brown_, shook down into our
positions with a degree of promptitude that excited the liveliest
admiration of the skipper.  He was a shrewd old fellow, however, and for
the first two days after our arrival he remained on deck all day, and
was frequently up and down during the night, frankly confessing that he
was anxious to observe the manner in which his new officers performed
their duties; but after that he announced his intention to sleep in all
night, laughingly declaring that as he was now employing two mates he
saw no reason why he should not leave them to do the work and take his
ease like a gentleman.  He was good enough to express his complete
satisfaction with my abilities as a navigator, and opened his eyes in
astonishment when he saw that I was not content with a mere daily
observation of the meridian altitude of the sun, but used as well such
comparatively intricate problems as those of the double altitudes,
lunars, altitudes of the stars, and Great Circle sailing.  But what
gratified him most of all, I think, was the fact that before we had been
aboard two days I had got Simpson, the sailmaker, at work upon an
enormous jack-yard gaff-topsail for use in light winds, the only
gaff-topsail that the schooner had hitherto possessed being a trumpery
little jib-headed affair which she could carry in quite a strong breeze.
I also caused a set of preventer backstays to be fitted, which enabled
us to carry an amount of canvas in a breeze that would otherwise have
been impossible.

We certainly did carry on in a manner that sometimes made the old man
gasp with astonishment, for hitherto he had been in the habit of sailing
his schooner in a very jog-trot fashion; but now we handled her as we
would have done a racer, and it was surprising to see how, day after
day, her mileage increased, and how rapidly her track on the chart
stretched southward.  The skipper, in his groping, cautious way, had
fully intended to make sure of his position by heading for and sighting
the Falklands before attempting to make the Straits, but I told him I
regarded that as an utterly useless waste of time, and worked out a
Great Circle track direct for Cape Virgins, at the entrance to the
Straits, to his mingled consternation and delight.  "If you don't cast
the schooner away between you," he said, "I guess we'll get to that
there oyster bank early enough to clean it out before the _Kingfisher_
arrives; for, smart seaman as Slocum thinks hisself, I reckon he ain't a
patch on you for carryin' on."

For the first three or four days after our arrival on board the _Martha
Brown_, Cunningham devoted his energies entirely to the task of
qualifying himself to take charge of a watch, looking after the ship,
and generally polishing up his somewhat rusty seamanship; but he very
quickly settled into his place, and then, whenever he had a spare
moment, he got to work with a pencil and paper, making sketches and
calculations.  Then, one evening in the second dog-watch, he brought to
me a sheet of paper on which he had sketched the outline of a human
figure; he first showed me this, and then, producing a tape measure, he
desired me to measure him very accurately, jotting down upon the diagram
the several measurements as I called them out.

Then, a day or two afterwards, I found him busily at work with a
quantity of light, thin, iron rod, which he had routed out from among
the ship's stores.  This rod he cut up into carefully measured lengths,
and he welded and riveted these together, with the aid of a portable
forge which he had rigged up on the lee side of the fore deck, until, in
the course of a week, he had constructed some half a dozen light but
strong skeleton frames.  Having tried and proved these to his
satisfaction, he procured an empty oak barrel, and, taking it carefully
to pieces, set the carpenter to work to saw, cut out, and carefully
plane up a number of thin strips from the staves.  Then, when he had got
as many of these strips as he required, he had small holes bored in them
in certain positions, and, by means of a quantity of fine wire,
proceeded to bind them carefully and strongly to the skeleton frames
which he had previously made.  And when he had done that, to my
amazement he calmly proceeded to induct himself into them, with my
assistance, and I then saw that the whole affair constituted a complete
body armour of a kind, helmet and all.  But, even then, I had no idea of
what he was driving at until he condescended to explain.

"This," he said, "is the foundation of my diving suit, which will be
complete when I have covered it with a double thickness of well-oiled
canvas.  The framework of thin rod will keep the water pressure off my
body; the battens will support the outer covering of canvas and prevent
it from bursting; and you will see that by the arrangement which I have
adopted I secure ample flexibility for my purpose.  Then, as soon as we
arrive at our destination, I intend to have one of the screw deck-lights
bodily removed and temporarily fixed in my helmet, which will enable me
to see what I am doing when under water.  Of course I shall need weights
to hold me down; and my air will come down to me through the rubber deck
hose, one end of which will be let into the back of my helmet, while the
other will be firmly secured to some portion of the schooner where it
will be out of the way.  Of course it will be a very rough-and-ready,
makeshift affair, but I believe it will prove fairly efficient for the
purpose."

Cunningham's next business was to cut out and have sewn together for
himself a single garment which combined the functions of stockings,
trousers, and shirt.  This was made of a double thickness of stout
canvas, each thickness being well coated on both sides with two coats of
boiled oil.  It was a weird-looking garment, as it was intended to fit
on outside the armour arrangement which he called his diving suit; but
it was merely intended to exclude the water, and when it was finished
and fitted I saw that it would serve its purpose perfectly well, and
there seemed to be no reason why he should not be able to work in it at
the bottom of the sea perfectly well.  And he completed the whole affair
by firmly attaching one end of the rubber hose pipe to the back of his
helmet.

We made Cape Virgins on the day and at the hour, and almost the minute,
which I had predicted, to the intense admiration and delight of the
skipper; and reached Punta Arenas, in the Strait of Magellan, on the
afternoon of the same day.  Here we came to an anchor, and Brown,
Cunningham, and I went ashore, the skipper's business being to arrange
for the refilling of our water tanks and the supply of a quantity of
fresh meat, Cunningham's just to take a look round and stretch his long
legs a bit, and mine to report the seizure of the _Zenobia_ by
Bainbridge and the crew, and to post to the owners a letter upon the
same subject which I had prepared at my leisure.  Our first enquiry was
as to whether the _Kingfisher_ had passed, and Brown's delight was great
when he learned that thus far nothing had been seen of her.

We left Punta Arenas shortly after noon on the day following that of our
arrival, still with no sign of the _Kingfisher_, and, being lucky enough
to get a fine little slant of wind, safely accomplished the dangerous
passage and entered the Pacific on the evening of the succeeding day.
The slant of wind held long enough to enable us to gain an offing of a
trifle over a hundred miles, and then it died away and left us becalmed
and rolling gunwale under on the long Pacific swell.

Yes, there could be no doubt that the _Martha Brown_ knew how to roll;
it was my first experience of her in a flat calm and a heavy swell, and
had we not hastily rigged rolling tackles I verily believe that she
would have rolled the masts out of her.  Even the skipper, proud as he
was of her, felt obliged to make some sort of apology for her, which he
wound up by saying: "But some day a smarty'll come along and invent some
way of turnin' this here rollin' to account as a means of propulsion,
and then you'll see that builders'll fashion all ships upon the model of
the _Marthy_."

"Eh?  What's that?  Just say that again, Captain," remarked Cunningham,
who, it being the second dog-watch, happened to be on deck.

The skipper said it again.

"Y-e-es," agreed Cunningham, thoughtfully, "y-e-es, I shouldn't wonder;"
and he walked away contemplatively.

"Now I wouldn't be so very powerful surprised if he was to turn out to
be the smarty that I just mentioned," observed the skipper, jerking his
thumb toward where Cunningham stood gazing abstractedly over the
taffrail, with his feet wide apart and his hands locked behind him,
balancing himself to the violent movements of the little vessel.

"Possibly," I agreed.  "Cunningham is of a very inventive turn of mind.
But to convert the rolling motion of a ship into a forward movement is a
pretty tall order, and would probably require exceedingly complicated
machinery.  The idea is by no means new, and I believe several inventors
have had a turn at it; but nothing practical seems to have come of it as
yet."

Nothing further was said upon the subject just then; but, the calm
continuing all night and all the next day, I several times caught
Cunningham with paper before him and a pencil in his hand, sketching and
calculating.  And when the next day also proved calm, and our
observations showed that we had not progressed a couple of miles upon
our journey, the skipper again addressed Cunningham upon the subject,
asking him half-jestingly if he had not yet been able to devise some
scheme to turn the eternal rolling to account.

"Oh yes!" answered Cunningham; "I dare say I could rig up some sort of
an arrangement, if it were worth while.  But it would be rather a
cumbersome contrivance to ship and unship, and I would not recommend it
unless there is likely to be much of this sort of thing between here and
our destination."

"Well," said the skipper, "I reckon we may depend pretty certainly upon
at least a fortnight of ca'ms afore we arrive at that there oyster bed;
and it'd be worth a whole lot to me to get there a fortnight ahead of
the _Kingfisher_.  What's the thing like that you've invented, Mister,
and could we knock it up out o' the stuff as we've got aboard?"

"Oh yes!" answered Cunningham, "I have kept strictly in mind our
capabilities in the preparation of my sketch.  I could easily devise a
much better and more efficient concern, I am sure; but that would be
quite useless to you, because we have neither the materials nor the
skilled labour aboard to produce it.  But," he continued, producing a
pencil and paper and beginning to sketch rapidly, "I think we might
manage to knock together a contrivance of this sort.  There would be two
of them, you understand, one on each side of the ship.  This represents
a stout timber frame, which would be secured in place by short lengths
of chain bowsed taut by tackles, so that it would remain rigidly in
position.  It would reach from the rail down to about three feet below
the surface of the water.  This outrigger arrangement, which should be
about nine feet long, will serve as the attachment for what we may call
a fin, made of flexible planking securely fixed at its fore end to the
outrigger, but quite free to move at the other end.  Now this fin, being
submerged when the frame is fixed in place, will be acted upon by the
pressure of the water as the ship rolls, and will bend alternately
upward and downward at an angle, the effect being that every time the
ship rolls the bent fin will force backward a considerable quantity of
water, or, what is the same thing, will have a tendency to thrust the
ship forward at a rate which I estimate at--well, say about three knots
per hour."

"Three knots an hour," repeated the skipper.  "'Tain't very much, is it?
I thought, maybe, that you'd be able to fix up somethin' that 'd shove
her along at about ten or twelve knots."

Cunningham laughed as he shook his head.  "Come, come, Captain!" he
protested, "be reasonable.  To get ten or twelve knots out of this
schooner you would require a steam engine of some eighty to a hundred
horse power."

"Ay," admitted the skipper, rather unwillingly, "I s'pose I should.
Three knots an hour.  That's, in round figures, seventy miles from noon
to noon.  And that, for, say, fourteen days, is--how much?"

"Nine hundred and eighty miles; call it a thousand," answered
Cunningham.

"A thousand miles.  Jings!  It mounts up when you come to look at it
that way," averred the skipper.  "Look here, Mister," he continued,
after thinking for a minute, "how long do you reckon it would take you
to fix up that concarn of yours?"

"Oh, not very long," answered Cunningham.  "The very roughest of
workmanship would do, so long as it was strong.  I dare say Chips and I
could put it together in--well--say four days."

"Four days," repeated the skipper; "four days.  Then I reckon you better
go ahead straight away; and turn it out as quick as ever you can, for
this here ca'm looks as though it meant to last a goodish while yet.
The glass is high an' steady, with an upward tendency, if anything, and
I don't see no sign of wind anywheres about."

Within an hour Cunningham and Chips were hard at work upon the
contrivance for circumventing the "ca'ms", and before knocking-off time
they had got on deck all the timber they required, and some of it sawn
to its proper length.  The next day saw the completion of the cutting,
sawing, and planing; and then came a fresh westerly breeze which enabled
us to lay up within about two points of our course for the next five
days, during which Cunningham completed his work, all but the bolting on
of the fins, which could be done in about ten minutes.  Then the wind
gradually veered until we were not only enabled to lay our course, but
had it a couple of points free, when, the wind being light, our big
jack-yard gaff-topsail came into play with magnificent effect, pushing
the little hooker along at about six knots, when but for it she would
scarcely have done four.  And finally it fell calm again, and the
schooner lost steerage way altogether.  There was again every sign that
the calm was likely to be prolonged--in fact, we were in the latitudes
of the "Doldrums", or calms that occur just to the north and south of
the Trade winds, where, as on the Line, the calms sometimes last for
weeks at a stretch.  It was therefore an excellent opportunity to test
Cunningham's contrivance, and we accordingly proceeded to bolt it up and
fix it in position.  It was rather an awkward and cumbersome
arrangement, demanding the united strength of all hands to get it over
the side, and it took us a full hour to get both parts fixed firmly and
to Cunningham's satisfaction.  But it had not been in position five
minutes before we saw that it was going to prove a success; for not only
did it serve to steady the little vessel, and ease her rolling to a
considerable extent, but she immediately began to gather way, and within
half an hour was slipping along through the water at the rate of a shade
over four knots by the log.  The skipper was enchanted.  "Furl
everything, Mr Temple," he said, "and head her due no'th.  We'll just
meander along now under bare poles until we runs into the south-east
Trades; and when once we hits them we'll be all right, and needn't start
tack nor sheet again until we reaches our oyster bed."



CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE PEARL-OYSTER BED.

We caught the south-east Trade winds the next day, very light at first,
but gradually freshening as we ran farther into them; and then, as soon
as we found ourselves fairly in the grip of the true breeze, with the
water rippling blue and crisply all about us, we got the schooner under
canvas once more, hoisted our "fins" inboard, and bore away upon a
nor'-west course, with starboard studdingsails and big gaff-topsail set
and dragging like a team of cart horses.  A week of this sort of thing
carried us to the calm belt under the Line; and here we once more
brought our "fins" into action, using them for three whole days and a
trifle over before we touched the southernmost fringe of the north-east
Trades, when we again went bowling along under all plain sail, that
being as much as we could conveniently show to a beam wind.  Finally, on
a certain morning immediately after breakfast, I climbed to the
topgallant yard, armed with Cunningham's telescope, which I had borrowed
for the occasion, and, looking straight ahead, saw--just where I had
expected to see it, namely, some fifteen miles beyond our jibboom end--a
patch of white water, some three miles in length, stretching north and
south right athwart the schooner's hawse.  It was the coral reef upon
which, if the skipper's friend Abe Johnson had spoken truth, that worthy
had suffered shipwreck, followed by all the horrors of complete solitude
for five solid months; and some two miles beyond which lay--according to
Abe--the rich pearl-oyster bed that was the real object of the _Martha
Brown's_ visit to this lonesome spot in the heart of the Pacific.

"See anything, Mr Temple?" hailed the skipper from the quarterdeck, in
a voice tense with excitement.

"Ay, ay, sir," I replied.  "It is there, right enough, as plain as mud
in a wine-glass, about fifteen miles off, and stretching right athwart
our hawse.  You had better luff a point, sir, and go round its northern
extremity."

"Luff a p'int it is," answered the skipper, directing the helmsman.
Then, as the schooner came to her new course, "How's that, Mr Temple?"

"Excellent, sir," I replied; "we shall just nicely clear the northern
end of the reef if she is kept at that."

"D'ye see anything else besides the reef, Mr Temple?" asked the
skipper,--"anything, I mean, in the shape of another schooner, for
instance?"

"Nothing at all, sir," I answered.

"That's all right, then," answered the skipper in a tone of exuberant
satisfaction.  "I guess you don't need to stay up there no longer, do
ye?"

I slung the telescope round my neck by its strap, and then, swinging off
the yard, slid down to the deck hand over hand by way of the topgallant
backstay, walking aft and joining the skipper and Cunningham as soon as
my feet touched the planks.

"So the reefs there, all right, is it?" remarked Brown, as I joined the
pair and returned the telescope with thanks to its lawful owner.  "There
ain't no chance of a mistake, I s'pose?"

"No chance at all," I replied confidently.  "It is there as plain as the
nose on one's face.  If you remember, I told you yesterday that,
provided the breeze held, we should be at anchor in the lagoon by noon
to-day; and so we shall."

"Ay, ay," answered Brown.  "I remember your sayin' so.  And I didn't
doubt your word, not for a second, for you're an A1 navigator, and no
mistake.  Never knowed a better.  But I was just a little bit afeard
that Abe might ha' been playin' it on me, or else that his riggers might
ha' got a bit mixed.  But I reckon it's a square deal, since you say
that the reefs there.  What do it look like?"

"From aloft it presents the precise appearance that you described to
me," I said.  "A bare reef, almost awash, with not a thing upon it,
except a few birds which I could just make out circling in the air above
it."

"Ay, that'll be it, sure enough," agreed Brown.  "I remember Abe
speakin' about them birds.  Their eggs, some clams that he knocked off
the rocks, and a fish or two that he managed to catch later on was all
that the pore feller had to eat for five everlastin' months--and raw at
that."

It was just five bells when we weathered the northern extremity of the
reef and bore away to look for the entrance to the lagoon.  I was then
aloft again, for the sake of the more extended view obtainable from the
height of the topgallant yard; and as we swept past the reef, and I
looked down upon it, I thought I had never seen a more ghastly place for
a solitary human being to be cast away upon.  It was composed,
apparently, of nothing but coral, upon which the everlasting surf was
gradually casting up a deposit of sand, which, when dry, the wind was as
gradually distributing over its surface.  Here and there I observed dark
patches which I took to be seaweed, partly buried in the sand; and there
was a tolerably well defined tide-mark, consisting apparently of more
seaweed, and flotsam of various kinds cast up by the surf.

But the most remarkable thing about the island was the multitude of
birds, gulls principally.  There were thousands of them in the air about
the reef, and many more thousands of them sitting on the reef itself.
The time was no doubt coming when the guano of these birds, their dead
bodies, and the refuse of their food, mingling and agglomerating with
the sand and rotting seaweed, would form an extraordinarily rich soil,
upon which a few coconuts, drifting across the illimitable ocean, would
be cast up by the surf, and, becoming buried, would sprout, throw out
roots and shoots, and become trees, as has happened in the case of so
many others of the Pacific islands.  But at that moment there was not a
green thing upon it.

The atoll, as a whole, was almost perfectly circular in shape, having a
diameter of about four miles; and for purposes of description it may be
spoken of as consisting of three parts, namely, the island, the lagoon,
and the encircling reef.  The island, which, being dry, was of course
the highest part of the atoll, measured about three and a quarter miles
long, and was crescent-shaped, being about three-eighths of a mile wide
in the middle, tapering off north and south in the form of the cusps of
the crescent moon; and from the extremities of the two cusps there swept
away the encircling reef which enclosed the lagoon in a very perfect
natural breakwater, having the inevitable opening as nearly as might be
in its middle, just opposite the widest part of the island.  But
although I have spoken of the island as being the highest part, it must
not be supposed that even this rose any considerable height above the
level of the ocean, its highest point, as we subsequently ascertained,
being only a bare six feet above the water's surface.

I was fortunate enough to catch a glimpse of the passage through the
reef almost immediately after going aloft; we therefore had no
difficulty in hitting it off, and, conning the schooner from the
crosstrees, I took her through without a hitch, our anchor plunging into
the placid waters of the lagoon a few minutes after the skipper had
struck six bells.

"Well, gents," Brown remarked, rubbing his hands, as, having been
forward to supervise the mooring of the ship in my absence aloft, he
came aft and joined Cunningham and myself, while the crew took to the
rigging and went aloft to furl the canvas, "here we are at last; and
ne'er a sign of the _Kingfisher_ anywhere about.  Did ye happen to
notice anything at all like a h'yster bank anywhere near while you was
aloft, Mr Temple?"

"Yes, sir, I did," answered I.  "I took a good look round while we were
coming in, and I noticed a distinct discoloration of the water about a
mile out, as dead to leeward of the island as it can possibly be.  I
have no doubt we shall find that to be the shoal of which your friend
spoke.  And there was another thing I noticed while I was aloft, and
which I will take this opportunity of mentioning.  The island is
literally covered with birds, sir, and, unfortunate as is the necessity,
I am afraid that our very first task must be to kill every one of them."

"Kill off them birds, Mr Temple?" echoed the skipper, in a tone of
mingled surprise and indignation.  "Why, what harm are they adoin'?"

"None at all at present, sir.  But--by the way, how do you propose to
obtain the pearls which you hope to procure from the oysters in yonder
bed?"

"Well," answered the skipper, "I had it in my mind to take the schooner
out to the bed every mornin' and anchor her right on top of it.  Then I
thought of lowerin' the boats, and, as the oysters comes up, dischargin'
'em into the boats, one boat at a time, until we've got a fair cargo,
a'ter which that boat'll be sent ashore in charge of, say, two men; and
Number 2 boat'll be loadin' while Number 1 is goin' ashore and comin'
back.  And when the oysters is took ashore, my plan is to spread 'em out
on the island and let 'em rot in the sun, an'--ah yes! now I see what
you means about them blamed birds.  They'll just go for them rottin'
oysters an' play the very Ole Gooseberry with 'em--is that what you
mean?"

"Precisely," I said.  "They will attack the decaying oysters, and you
will probably lose about three-fourths of your pearls."

"Ay, I see; I see," murmured the "Old Man".  "It seems a most tarnation
pity," he continued regretfully, "but I guess we'll have to do it--or
lose most o' them pearls."

"It will be an endless job, too--to say nothing of the pity of it--to
kill off all those thousands of birds," remarked Cunningham.  "But
perhaps, after all, it may not be necessary to resort to such extreme
measures as that.  Have you any firearms on board, Captain?"

"You bet I have, and ammunition too," answered the skipper, with a grin.
"You don't catch old Eph Brown venturin' his property on an expedition
like this here--among savages, too, when we gets away down among the
islands a'ter that there sandalwood--without bringin' along the means to
defend it.  I got a dozen muskets and six shot guns down below; and I
reckon I can get the lot out in ten minutes."

"Then," said Cunningham, "I'll tell you what we will do, Captain, if you
are agreeable.  Let Temple and me have a couple of those shot guns, with
a moderate quantity of ammunition, and we will go ashore and shoot a
sufficient number of those birds to make them thoroughly afraid of
anything resembling the human figure.  Then, when we have done that, we
will rig up a scarecrow on the leeward extremity of the island, where I
suppose you will deposit your oysters to undergo the process of decay,
and see how that acts before we attempt anything in the nature of actual
wholesale slaughter."

"Yes," assented the skipper eagerly, "I guess that plan's well worth
tryin', and I'm much obliged to ye for thinkin' of it.  I don't want the
death of any more o' them birds laid to my door than what there's
actooal need for, for they're purty creeturs, and, when all's said and
done, God made 'em, same's He made you and me.  But I'm afeard that a
few of 'em'll have to die, so the job might as well be done at once.
I'll go down below and get them shot guns, and you and Mr Temple might
as well go ashore directly after dinner."

Accordingly, as soon as our midday dinner was over, the gig--our gig--
was hoisted out, and Cunningham and I, with two hands for a crew, and
with a shot gun each, together with a double pocketful of cartridges,
went ashore to perform the exceedingly unpleasant but necessary task of
frightening the birds so effectually that they would not be likely to
interfere to any very great extent with our pearling operations.  At the
last moment, just before shoving off from the schooner's side,
Cunningham shouted to the cook to pass down into the boat the biggest
basket that he could find, and this the "Doctor" did, with the result
that when we landed on the island we carried with us a basket capable of
holding quite one hundred gulls' eggs.

We had already decided that the southern extremity of the island was the
proper place upon which to deposit our oysters, when obtained, because
by placing them there the exceedingly offensive odour which would be
generated by the process of decay would be carried away by the wind over
the open sea, while by anchoring the schooner as far to windward as
possible we might hope to escape in a very great measure, if not
altogether, the annoyance of the smell; therefore, upon landing, we
started operations at the south end of the island by driving the birds
away from there.

But our task was by no means so easy as we had anticipated; for so
extraordinarily tame were the birds that they positively refused to rise
at our approach, actually permitting themselves to be caught and their
necks to be wrung rather than take the trouble to get out of our way.
Certainly they resisted actual capture most vigorously, fighting us with
beak and wing, and many a sharp peck and severe blow did we receive
within the first ten minutes of our operations; but they would not take
to flight, or make the slightest attempt of any kind to avoid us.
Consequently at length, and very much against our will, we were obliged
to open fire upon them, and it was not until the creatures saw the
struggles and heard the piteous cries of the wounded among them that
they at length began to grasp the fact that we were enemies, and
dangerous.  And even then it was not until we had killed some three
hundred of them that they seemed to have fully learned their lesson, and
took to flight at our approach.  While this wretched work of slaughter
was proceeding the two men with the basket followed in our footsteps and
collected the eggs from the abandoned nests, choosing the cleanest as
being most likely to be fresh; so that, upon our return to the schooner
that night, the cook got to work, and all hands supped sumptuously upon
boiled and fried gulls' eggs, while we in the cabin regaled ourselves
upon savoury omelette, followed by pancakes.

After supper Cunningham and I, with an old, discarded suit of clothes
belonging to the skipper, rigged up a most realistic scarecrow, ready
for transportation to the shore the first thing next morning.

We were all astir at daybreak next day; and while the hands, under the
skipper's supervision, hoisted out the longboat and jollyboat and passed
them astern ready for towing, and then proceeded to wash down the decks,
Cunningham and I took the gig, and, carefully depositing our scarecrow
in the sternsheets, pulled ashore and set up the figure, the birds
taking to the air with loud, plaintive cries the moment that we stepped
ashore.  Then, having set up the figure, which represented a man
carrying a gun, we returned to the schooner, observing with
satisfaction, as we did so, that the birds seemed indisposed to settle
again, but, after wheeling in the air over the island for some time,
winged their way out to sea.

By the time that we got back to the schooner breakfast was ready, and
all hands were at once piped to the meal, regardless of the hour, the
word at the same time being passed that everybody would be expected on
deck again within twenty minutes.  But no such warning was needed, for
the forecastle hands by this time knew as well as the afterguard what we
had come to this lonesome spot for, and were as eager as ourselves not
only to see how the adventure would "pan out"--to use their own
expression--but also to gain the utmost possible advantage over the
_Kingfisher_ and her people, whom they regarded as would-be lawless
poachers upon our own private property; therefore when we of the cabin
returned to the deck after a hasty meal, which we had bolted in less
than a quarter of an hour, all hands were on deck, ready and waiting for
orders.  Accordingly no sooner did the skipper poke his head out of the
companion and bellow the order to loose all fore-and-aft canvas than the
group on the forecastle split itself up into sections, one section
actually running aft to cast loose the mainsail, while a second attacked
the foresail, a third laid out to loose the jibs, and the fourth and
last proceeded to fix the levers of the patent windlass and to heave in
the slack of the cable.

A quarter of an hour sufficed us to get the canvas set and the anchor
broken out of the sand; and then, as the schooner paid off and filled,
Cunningham proceeded to get his diving gear on deck and to make ready
for the great experiment, while I sprang into the fore rigging and made
my way aloft to the topsail-yard, from which to con the schooner out
through the reef in the first place, and afterwards to look out for the
oyster bed.  We could not possibly have had a finer day for the
beginning of our operations, for the sky was a clear, rich, deep blue,
dappled here and there at intervals with small patches of Trade-cloud,
which looked like bits of cotton wool, drifting solemnly athwart the
azure, while the Trade wind was blowing very moderately, and there was
no sea to speak of.

I had scarcely got myself comfortably settled upon the topsail-yard when
the skipper hailed me from where he stood aft close alongside the
helmsman.

"Tawps'l-yard, there!" he shouted.  "I s'pose you don't happen to see
nothin' of that there blamed _Kingfisher_ anywhere about, do ye, Mr
Temple?"

I sent my gaze slowly and searchingly right round the entire rim of the
horizon.  The air was so crystal-clear that no glass was needed to aid
the eye.  Had there been as much as three or four feet of a
royal-masthead showing above the horizon I could not have failed to
detect it, but there was nothing; the horizon was absolutely bare in
every direction, and I so reported it.  The skipper waved his hand by
way of reply, and I forthwith turned my attention to the business in
hand, which was that of conning the schooner through the passage in the
reef.

Twenty minutes later we were outside, rising and falling easily upon the
long Pacific swell; and the moment that it was prudent for us to do so
we starboarded our helm a trifle and kept away for the slightly
discoloured patch of water that seemed to mark the position of the shoal
upon which we expected to find the boundless wealth of the extensive bed
of pearl-oysters spoken of by the departed Abe.  Ten minutes sufficed us
to run down to it, and the moment that we reached it I saw that we had
not come upon a wild-goose chase.  The oysters were there, all right,
thousands, millions of them, showing up as a light-brown patch, nearly
ten acres in extent, clearly distinguishable through the crystal-clear
water.  I allowed the schooner to run to about the very centre of the
patch, and then shouted for the anchor to be let go.

Meanwhile all halyards had been let run two or three minutes earlier,
and the canvas was rolled up anyhow, everybody, from the skipper to the
cabin boy, seeming to be suddenly seized with a perfect delirium of
excitement.  As for me, I went down on deck by way of the backstays, and
at once proceeded to lend Cunningham a hand to get into his makeshift
diving rig, which he was very carefully overhauling.  And while this was
doing, four of the hands came along with a twenty-five-foot ladder,
heavily weighted at the bottom with pigs of iron ballast, which
Cunningham had caused to be constructed; and this they launched over the
side, allowing it to hang plumb up and down, well secured, just abaft
the main rigging.  This was for Cunningham to descend by; and upon
looking over the side I saw that it reached to within about four feet of
the surface of the oyster bed.  The getting of Cunningham into his suit,
and the arranging of all the preliminaries, such as the rigging of a
derrick wherewith to hoist to the surface the nets of oysters after
Cunningham had filled them, the hauling of the longboat alongside to
receive the first load, and so on, kept us busy for a full half-hour,
during which the skipper paced to and fro, urging us to hurry, and
gnawing his finger nails to the quick in his excitement and impatience.

But at length everything was ready, even to the shovel which Cunningham
was to use for shovelling the oysters into the nets; and with the upper
end of the air hose securely made fast to the main rigging, close to
where I stood with the signal line coiled in my hands ready for paying
out, and with a stout sword bayonet girt about his waist as a defence
against the possible attack of prowling sharks, the amateur diver was
assisted to climb the rail and get his feet upon the topmost rung of the
ladder, after which he was left to his own devices.  We had taken the
precaution to send a good man aloft in a boatswain's chair, bent to the
end of the gaff-topsail halyards, to keep a lookout for sharks, and he
had reported none in sight; we therefore hoped that we should not suffer
any very serious interruption from them, and Cunningham went over the
side with the utmost confidence, I keeping my eye on him as he
cautiously descended the ladder rung by rung, and paying out the signal
line in such a manner as always to maintain a very light strain upon it.

At length I saw him step off the bottom rung of the ladder and gingerly
lower himself to the surface of the oyster bed, having reached which he
gave a single tug of his signal line to indicate that he was all right.
Then, after pausing for a moment, apparently to take a good look round,
he cast off the shovel from the end of the line by which it had been
lowered, and proceeded methodically to shovel the oysters, just as they
came, into one of the nets, which had also been lowered within his
reach.  Ten minutes of steady work now ensued, at the end of which he
gave the signal to hoist away, and up came our first spoils, probably
about five hundred oysters, which were swung over the longboat and
emptied into her, the second net having meanwhile been lowered down to
the diver.

And now there occurred a somewhat diverting episode; for no sooner was
the first net-load of oysters discharged into the longboat than the
skipper, unable any longer to endure the suspense, scrambled over the
side, armed with a formidable jack knife, and, leaping down into the
boat, seized an oyster and proceeded to force it open with the blade of
his knife, no doubt fully expecting to find at least one pearl of price
in it.  But, alas! the poor man was doomed to disappointment, for there
was no sign or vestige of pearl in the fish, save the lovely iridescent
lining of the two shells.  A second attempt fared no better, and the
disappointed seeker flung the shells far from him with a muttered
something that sounded not unlike an imprecation.  But the good man was
not to be so easily put off.  A third oyster was seized and savagely
wrenched open, and this time three diminutive seed pearls rewarded his
perseverance.  Yet still he was not satisfied.  A fourth oyster was
opened, and proved a blank; a fifth was seized, and as the two shells
were forced apart a magnificent pearl was revealed, together with some
six or eight much smaller ones.  A shout of triumph apprised us all of
the fact that at last the search had proved successful; and the next
moment up came the skipper, his face aflame with delight and excitement,
to show all and sundry what a pearl looked like when fresh taken from
the parent fish.

Meanwhile the process of filling, hoisting, and emptying the nets went
steadily on for the best part of an hour, and then Cunningham signalled
that he was coming to the surface, some three thousand oysters having by
that time been secured.  When Cunningham presently appeared, and the
glass of his helmet was unscrewed, he informed us that his makeshift
suit was perfectly watertight, and answered its purpose even better than
he had dared to expect, and that he had come up simply because he felt
fatigued with his unaccustomed work and needed a little rest.  The
skipper thought this a good opportunity to change boats, so he sent away
the longboat with her load in charge of a couple of men, giving them
instructions how to dispose of the oysters; and the gig was hauled up
alongside in her place.  Then the boatswain, who had all along
manifested the utmost interest in the diving question, volunteered to
change places with Cunningham and do a spell of shovelling: but the
engineer explained that he could take another turn below quite easily,
and proposed, as an amendment, that the boatswain should take on the
afternoon shift; and, this being arranged, he again descended and
resumed operations.

Then in due course there came a brief respite while everybody went to
dinner, half an hour being allowed for the meal, at the expiration of
which time operations went on uninterruptedly until about half an hour
before sunset, when we were perforce obliged to cease work, in order to
get the schooner back into the lagoon before nightfall.  But we had done
not at all badly; for I had kept a rough--a very rough--account of the
number of oysters that had been brought to the surface that day, not
counting them, of course, but just estimating the number that had come
up in each net, and when I came to total up I found that, unless my
calculations were a long way out, we must have secured at least
twenty-five thousand oysters as a reward for our day's work.

But this by no means ended with the mooring of the schooner in the
lagoon, for when that was done there still remained the oysters to be
laid out in rows upon the southern extremity of the island; and we soon
found that the landing and laying of them out was a much more lengthy
process than the getting of them up from the sea bottom.  Very
fortunately for us, we had arrived at the island when the moon was four
days old, and in that exquisitely clear atmosphere a moon of even that
age affords a very useful amount of light, of which we availed ourselves
to empty the boats and make all ready for the next day before finally
knocking-off work.

The next day was, with a rather notable exception, just a repetition of
the day which had preceded it.  The weather was as fine, and matters
worked even more smoothly, for almost every hour revealed to us some
little improvement that might be made in our methods of work, which we
promptly adopted.  Thus, for example, the boatswain having proved
himself to be quite an expert diver, it was arranged that Cunningham and
he should work spell and spell about, each man working two hours and
then taking two hours' complete rest.  On this, our second day upon the
bank, Cunningham and the boatswain had each been down once, the dinner
hour had arrived and passed, and Cunningham was down again, working with
tremendous energy--for a friendly rivalry had already arisen between him
and the boatswain as to who could send up the most oysters--while I
stood in the main chains, tending the signal line and intently watching
the toiling figure diligently shovelling oysters away down below in the
cool green shadow of the schooner's hull.  As on the previous day, we
had a man aloft for the express purpose of keeping a lookout for sharks,
but every time we hailed him his reply was that there were no sharks in
sight.

Suddenly, as I stood watching Cunningham, a great greyish-brown object
slid lazily along beneath me, and paused immediately above the toiling
diver.  A single glance sufficed me to identify it as a shark, full
twenty feet in length; and I instantly sent down the pre-arranged danger
signal, while the man at the masthead yelled: "Shark ho! right over the
diver!"  I sang out to the two men who were in the boat receiving the
oysters as they came up to seize a couple of oars and violently splash
the surface of the water with them, in the hope that the sound would
drive the brute away--for, after all, the shark, voracious as it is, is
a timid creature, easily frightened by any sudden or unaccustomed noise.
And the attempt met with at least partial success, for the shark
instantly darted away a few yards; but it as suddenly turned, and,
apparently quite undismayed by the splashing, slowly came back.

Meanwhile, however, Cunningham had dropped his shovel, and, having drawn
the sword bayonet with which he was armed, stood quite quietly on the
defensive, alertly on the watch.  Evidently the shark did not quite know
what to make of the strange creature on the sea bottom, for he now began
to swim rapidly to and fro, making short tacks each way of a few yards
only, eyeing Cunningham intently all the while.  Then, before we could
do anything in the nature of intervention, the brute suddenly wheeled
and made a dash straight for the engineer.  So lightning swift was the
onslaught that the only thing I distinctly saw was the quick whisk of
the creature's tail as it turned, and the sudden dart of the great body,
followed by an equally sudden writhing movement; then in an instant the
great fish appeared to be enveloped in a cloud of red, in which it
almost disappeared; and the next thing I distinctly realised was that it
was gone, while, the red cloud slowly dissipating, Cunningham was
presently revealed in the very act of recovering his shovel for the
purpose of resuming work.  I signalled to him to come up at once, but he
replied with a vigorous negative, and the next moment he was hard at
work again.

A minute or two later the man aloft hailed: "I guess Mr Cunningham have
give that there shark his gruel; for there he is, away out there on the
starboard quarter, in his dyin' flurry!"  And, sure enough, there the
brute was, on the surface, about a hundred and fifty yards away,
twisting and splashing in the midst of a boil of pink foam; and a few
minutes later the struggles ceased altogether, and the monster floated
quiescent and awash, dead, one of its great pectoral fins and a narrow
strip of its white belly just showing above the surface.  I was terribly
afraid that the smell of blood, and of the dead carcass, would attract
other sharks to the neighbourhood, and so further imperil Cunningham's
safety--for sharks are reputed to possess an extraordinarily keen scent;
but nothing of the kind happened.  The dead shark slowly drifted away
and was finally lost sight of, and we finished our day's work without
further interruption.

Thus matters went steadily on for a fortnight, by which time we had
accumulated some three hundred and eighty thousand oysters, and had laid
them out upon the island to undergo the process of decay in the
scorching rays of the sun.  And that they were undergoing that process
at a very rapid rate our olfactory nerves soon informed us; for the
odour of them became perceptible as early as the fourth day, while by
the end of the fortnight it was so strong as to be scarcely endurable
even on the oyster bank itself, which was about a mile to leeward of the
island, although, by berthing the schooner every night right up in the
weather corner of the lagoon, we managed to avoid getting more than an
occasional whiff of it during the hours devoted to rest.

By the end of the fortnight, however, we discovered that even the
accumulation of wealth by scooping up pearl-oysters from the bottom of
the sea may become monotonous after a while, especially when the
accumulation is for somebody else's benefit; therefore, with one accord,
we petitioned "Old Man" Brown to give us a change of occupation by
allowing us to amuse ourselves searching for pearls among the rotting
fish, which now covered a considerable portion of the leeward half of
the island.  And Brown gladly jumped at the proposal; for he was every
day growing more anxious lest the _Kingfisher_ and her crew of "toughs"
should heave in sight and become troublesome, and was more than willing
to make sure of such spoil as we had already accumulated.  Therefore, on
a certain morning, instead of getting the schooner under way and
proceeding to the oyster bank, as usual, the longboat was hauled
alongside, and, attired in our very oldest clothes, armed with a ship's
bucket each, and provided with a plentiful supply of disinfectant cloths
to fasten over our mouths and nostrils upon reaching the field of
action, all hands of us, except the cook and the cabin boy, got into her
and pulled away for the shore.

The air was literally darkened by the immense numbers of birds that had
returned to the island, attracted by the odour, after having been driven
off, and we soon saw that a few of the bolder of them had summoned up
courage to settle among our oysters, despite the scarecrow which we had
set up; but they took to flight immediately upon our approach, and
hovered over us all day, uttering their melancholy cries with such
persistency, and creating such a volume of sound, that we could scarcely
hear our own voices.

However, we were there not to talk but to work.  Upon stepping ashore
the first thing we did, after securing the boat, was to fill our buckets
with clean salt water, in which to wash and deposit any pearls that we
might find; next we swathed our mouths and nostrils with the
disinfecting cloths; and then, told off by the skipper, each of us took
a row of the decaying fish and proceeded to search carefully the putrid
matter for what many people regard as the most lovely gems in the world.

There is no need for me to dilate upon the disagreeable, not to say
disgusting nature of the task upon which we now found ourselves engaged;
it may safely be left to the imagination of the reader, and I will
content myself with merely placing upon record the fact that it was
infinitely worse than even Cunningham or I had anticipated--and we
believed that we had gauged the objectionable character of the work
pretty accurately.  But, so far at least as I was concerned, I soon
forgot the sickeningly offensive nature of my work in the interest
attaching to it, for I had not been five minutes engaged upon it when I
came upon a most superb pearl, perfectly globular in shape, with the
exquisite sheeny lustre peculiar to gems of what are termed the first
water, and, as nearly as might be, an inch in diameter.  Such a find as
this was more than enough to make me forget all the disagreeableness of
the work upon which I was engaged, and to stimulate my curiosity to its
highest pitch.  Accordingly I proceeded with zest, and within an hour
had secured a round dozen of good-sized pearls--although none of them
approached the first in size--together with a sufficient quantity of
smaller pearls to fill about one-third of an ordinary half-pint tumbler.
Nor was this first hour of mine an exceptionally fortunate one, for
when we knocked off work at the end of the day my total find amounted to
no less than one hundred and seven pearls, ranging in size from half an
inch in diameter up to a monster that measured just over an inch and a
quarter, while of smaller gems I had more than sufficient to fill two
tumblers.  And when we all came to compare notes together upon our
return on board I found that I was by no means the most fortunate one of
the party, the skipper's total and those of three of the forecastle
hands considerably exceeding mine in quantity.



CHAPTER EIGHT.

THE "KINGFISHER" OF NANTUCKET.

It was on the third day of our repulsive work among the decaying oysters
that the expected happened.  We were all assiduously at work as usual,
groping with our fingers among the rotting fish for the sudden sensation
of hardness which proclaimed the presence of the gems, when one of the
party, straightening himself up for a moment to take the kinks out of
his backbone, let out a sudden yell of: "Sail ho!"

"Where away?" demanded the skipper, starting to his feet and staring
about him; and in a moment all hands of us were standing up and
following the "Old Man's" example.  There was no need for a reply to the
skipper's question, for we had but to look to see the stranger
instantly--a topsail-schooner, about five miles distant, coming up from
the southward, close-hauled, under a press of sail.

Brown stood staring intently at her for a full minute or more; then he
shouted:

"Yes, that's the gol-darned _Kingfisher_, right enough, ne'er a doubt of
it!  All hands to the boat, and let's get off to the _Marthy_.  I
wouldn't be a bit surprised if that Slocum and his crowd tries to make
trouble when they find us here before 'em."

"Why do you think so, Captain?" demanded Cunningham.  "Surely there are
enough oysters here for both of us, aren't there?"

"Well, yes, I reckon there are," agreed Brown, somewhat doubtfully.
"But I guess Slocum won't think so; he'll want the whole blamed lot."

I thought this rather good, remembering, as I did, that previous to our
arrival, and before we knew how extensive was the bed, the skipper had
been straining every nerve to reach the island before his rival, with
the avowed intention of sweeping the shoal clean if he could before the
arrival of the _Kingfisher_.  I said nothing, however, but, seizing the
bucket containing the pearls which I had gathered during the morning,
hastened away with the others toward where the longboat was moored.  The
moment that the last man was in we cast off, threw out our oars, and
gave way for our own vessel, for the stranger was coming up hand over
fist, and Brown was very anxious to be on board before the arrival of
the _Kingfisher_, in order that he might be fully prepared for all
eventualities.

We reached the _Martha_ a few minutes before the stranger hove in stays
to fetch the passage through the reef; and Brown at once went below,
taking with him a couple of hands, routed out the arms and ammunition
chests, and served out to each man a gun, a brace of Colt revolvers, and
a cutlass, together with a liberal supply of ammunition for the
firearms, at the same time instructing us to load our weapons and have
them ready for instant use, but to keep them out of sight until it
became apparent that they would be required.

By the time that our preparations were complete, the stranger--now
identifiable beyond all question as the _Kingfisher_, since she carried
her name legibly painted in white letters upon her head-boards--had
passed through the reef and, taking in her canvas as she came, was
steering for a berth about a cable's length from where the _Martha_ lay;
and a few minutes later she put down her helm, came head to wind, and
presently let go her anchor.  Meanwhile the skipper, Cunningham, and I
had been diligently taking stock of her through our glasses, with the
object of ascertaining how many hands she carried, and we agreed that
there were but eight in sight, which, counting also the cook and
steward, gave her a complement of ten all told against fourteen of us,
which fact caused our skipper to chuckle with satisfaction.

That we were not to be kept long in suspense with regard to the
intentions of the newcomers soon became sufficiently evident, for the
_Kingfisher_ had scarcely swung to her anchor when a dory was launched,
and, with three people in her, two at the oars and the third sitting in
the sternsheets, came pulling toward the _Martha Brown_.

Five minutes later the little craft swept up alongside, one of our
people hospitably dropped a rope's end into her to hang on by, and the
man in the sternsheets--a long, angular, big-boned individual, about six
feet three inches in height, apparently about thirty-four years of age,
with a thick thatch of reddish-brown hair, and an equally thick beard
and moustache of the same colour, and attired, despite the intense heat,
in a heavy pilot cloth jacket and trousers, a blue worsted jersey, a fur
cap, and sea-boots reaching above his knees--uncoiling his long limbs,
rose in the boat, and, with a nimbleness strangely at variance with his
ungainly appearance, climbed the side, swung himself in over our low
rail, and flung a quick, enquiring glance round the deck.

"Mornin'!" he remarked briefly in a surly tone of voice to the skipper,
Cunningham, and myself, as we stepped forward to meet him.  "I see this
here schooner's the _Marthy Brown_ o' Baltimore.  Which o' you 'uns is
the cap'n of her?"

"I am," answered our "Old Man," stepping forward.  "Name of Ephraim
Brown.  This here is my first officer, Mr Mark Temple, and this is Mr
Cunnin'ham, my second officer."

"Jerushy!  First and second officers, eh?" exclaimed the stranger in a
fine tone of irony.  "My, but you air puttin' on style, Cap'n, and no
mistake!  I'm plain Abner Slocum, cap'n and owner of the schooner
_Kingfisher_, sailin' out o' Nantucket; and my first, second, third, and
fourth mate is all rolled into one under the name o' Dan'l Greene.
That's him--the red-headed feller in the Scotch cap helpin' t'other 'un
to roll up my schooner's mains'l.  Well, Cap'n Brown, I've took the
liberty to come aboard your ship to ask what you happens to be doin'
here, if I ain't presumin' too much."

"May I ask what business that is of your'n, Cap'n--eh--um--Slocum?"
demanded Brown blandly.

"Cert'nly you may," retorted Slocum, with elaborate politeness, which,
however, vanished the next instant.  "An' it won't take me half a second
to answer ye," he continued truculently.  "It's business o' mine because
this 'ere island, and everything in the sea for three mile round it,
happens to belong to me--left me by my deceased brother-in-law, Abr'am
Johnson.  And I don't want, and won't have--you hear me!--won't have
nobody trespassin' on my property.  So the sooner you 'uns gits, the
better it'll be for all parties.  And now I hopes you understan's.  And
there's another thing.  By the all-fired smell o' that island I reckon
that you've been poachin' on my pearl-'yster bank.  Now, I dunno whether
you knows it or not, but by the laws of the United States of Ameriky
pearl poachin' is felony, and the poacher is liable to be put away for
ten years or so in Sing Sing.  But I don't want to be hard upon nobody;
so if you'll just hand over to me the pearls that you've poached, I'm
agreeable to let ye all go free, and say nothin' more about it."

"You don't say!" ejaculated Brown, apparently overwhelmed by such royal
clemency.  "Well, then, I guess--But stop a minute; I sure was very near
forgettin' something.  You say that this here island's yours, eh?  Well,
then, I s'pose you've got your title deeds and all that to prove it,
eh?"

"Title deeds be--" began Slocum, with an ugly snarl.  Then he pulled
himself up sharp.  "I sure have, to hum," he answered.  "But natchrally
I didn't bring sich vallyable papers along with me, for fear of losin'
'em.  And then again I didn't expect to find nobody here to dispute my
title.  See?"

"No," said Brown, "I don't see; and that's a solid fact.  What I do see
is somethin' like this here.  I'm cruisin' in the Pacific in this here
schooner o' mine, and one day we sights this here island, and comes in
to have a look at it.  We lowers a boat and pulls ashore, and what do we
find?  We finds that the place is uninhabited, with nary a sign that
anybody's ever set eyes on it before.  Anyway, it's uninhabited, and
it's miles and miles away from any other land; therefore it don't belong
to nobody, and accordin'ly I takes possession of it.  So you see, Cap'n,
you're all wrong about it bein' your'n.  It's mine; and if I was measly
and cantankerous I'd prob'ly order you to take your schooner outer my
harbour at once.  But I ain't that sorter man: I'm lib'ral and
free-handed to a fault; I ain't no greedy grab-all, not by a long chalk,
so you may stay in this here harbour o' mine so long as you've a mind
to.  But, you understan', you ain't none of yer to go ashore without my
leave; an'--"

"Oh, shucks!" interrupted Slocum in sudden fury.  "What d'ye mean by
givin' me that sort o' mush?  I tell ye that this island is mine, and I
means to have it.  And I means to have all the pearls that you've
poached, too; and look 'e here, Mister, if you ain't out o' sight before
nightfall, I'll--I'll--"

"Yes; you'll--what?" demanded the skipper calmly, seeing that the other
hesitated.

"Why, I'll--I'll blow you and your blamed schooner and all hands of you
to blazes!" exploded Slocum.

"You will, eh?" retorted Brown, slipping his right hand casually into
his jacket pocket.  "Then--hands up, you skunk! hands up; and look spry
about it, or by the living Jingo I'll shoot!  Up with 'em, I say.  Ah!
that's better, a good deal!" as Slocum slowly and reluctantly raised his
hands above his head in response to our skipper's command, emphasised by
a levelled revolver which the "Old Man" had produced so rapidly that it
was quite like a conjuring trick.

"Now, Mr Temple," continued Brown, addressing me but keeping his eye
unwaveringly upon his prisoner, "just you go to the rail and persuade
them two in the dory to come up on deck; persuade 'em with yer gun if
you can't do it any other way.  I guess we'll have to go on usin' force,
now that this cantankerous cuss have obliged us to begin.  And you, Mr
Cunnin'ham, be good enough to pass the word for the carpenter to lay aft
wi' three sets of irons."

"Here, I say, you monkey-faced old pirate, whatcher givin' us?  Whatcher
mean by callin' for irons?  You don't mean ter say you're goin' to make
a prisoner of me, do yer?" demanded Slocum, dropping his hands in his
fury.

"Hands up!" snapped the skipper, quick as lightning.  Then, as Slocum
threw them up again, he replied:

"Not goin' to make a prisoner of ye, eh?  You bet I sure am, then, you
and the hull of your crowd, since you've come here spoilin' for trouble.
But I don't want no trouble myself, I ain't that sorter man; so I'm
goin' to keep you 'uns safe in irons until I've finished my business
here, a'ter which I'll release ye, and you can do what yer like."

"The fust thing I'll do when you release me is to blow the blamed head
off your shoulders, ye all-fired pirate," snapped Slocum viciously.

"Put this man in irons," ordered Brown, as the carpenter came along, and
the next minute Slocum was fettered and Chips was overhauling him to
make sure that he had no concealed weapons about him.  Meanwhile I had
succeeded in "persuading" the two men who constituted the crew of the
dory to leave their boat and come up on deck, and they, too, were
promptly clapped in irons.  Thus we already had in our power three of
the _Kingfisher's_ complement of ten men all told, leaving seven, as
opposed to our own fourteen.

"Take 'em away and confine 'em below in the fore peak," ordered Brown.
And when this was done, "I guess there's no sense in makin' two bites at
a cherry," observed the skipper.  "We can't spare the time to fool
around watchin' those fellers; so have the longboat hauled alongside,
and let all hands except the cook and the cabin boy take their guns and
cutlasses and get down into her.  We'll just meander across and take
that there _Kingfisher_ right away, so savin' a heap o' trouble in the
long run.  And while we're doing that, `the Doctor' and the boy'll stay
here and keep an eye on the chaps down below."

So said, so done; we secured possession of the _Kingfisher_ without any
difficulty, for although her crew guessed our errand the moment that
they saw us coming, they could not very well help themselves, such
weapons as the Nantucket craft was provided with being stowed away and
locked up in Slocum's own cabin, where the crew could not get at them
except by breaking down the door.  But apart from that, they had no
stomach for fighting in the absence of Slocum, and they surrendered
immediately upon being ordered to do so, although, it must be confessed,
with not too good a grace.  Having thus secured possession of the
_Kingfisher_, the next thing that we did was to give her another fifty
fathoms of cable, so that she would ride easily and without being
watched in any weather that we were likely to have; after which her
crew, having previously been searched and deprived of everything that
could by any chance be utilised as a weapon, were ordered down into the
longboat, taken aboard the _Martha_, clapped in irons, and put down
below into the fore peak along with Slocum and the two men out of the
dory, one of our own men being detailed each day afterwards to mount
guard over them while the rest of us resumed operations ashore.

It cost us three weeks of strenuous work to complete the examination of,
and extract the pearls from the oysters that it had taken us a fortnight
to fish up from the bottom of the sea, and when we had finished even the
skipper confessed himself satisfied, so great had been our success.
Yet, although Brown was so far satisfied that he was content to leave
the remainder of the oysters to Slocum, he could not bring himself to
leave behind the empty shells from which we had extracted the pearls;
pearl shell, he informed us, was worth so many dollars--I forget how
many--per ton in New York, and it would pay him well to take in all that
we had--discarding an equal weight of ballast--and carry it there.  The
task of cleaning, carrying on board, and storing this shell--including
the turning out of cargo and the discharge of ballast to make room for
it--occupied us another fortnight; consequently by the time that all was
done and we were ready to sail again we had been close upon two months
at the island.  Then, upon a certain lovely morning, we loosed and set
our canvas and hove short; after which the crew of the _Kingfisher_,
Slocum included, were brought up on deck, ordered over the side into the
longboat, and transferred to their own vessel, one man being released
from his irons as soon as the transfer had been effected, in order that
he in turn might release the others.  And while this was being done the
longboat returned to the _Martha Brown_ and was hoisted in; after which
we tripped our anchor, hove it up to the bows, and stood out to sea.

The ensuing three months were more or less pleasantly and uneventfully
spent in cruising hither and thither among the various groups of
islands, seeking sandalwood, some of the natives proving exceedingly
friendly and agreeable to deal with, while others were very much the
reverse.  By the end of that time we had accumulated a very fair
quantity of the wood, and Brown had arrived at the conclusion that one
more call would about suffice to complete our cargo.  The question which
then arose was, where should that call be made? for we had pretty well
completed the round of the islands and exhausted their capabilities of
supply, sandalwood happening to be rather scarce that year, while the
demand for it had been unusually brisk, a frequent experience of ours
being that other traders had been beforehand with us and had taken all
that the islanders had for disposal.  Finally, while ashore one day on
the island of Tahiti, the skipper happened to overhear two men
discussing sandalwood together, one of whom remarked to the other that
there was still some wood to be obtained at the island of Roua Poua, one
of the Marquesas group; and two hours later we were under weigh, bound
for that same island.

Now at that time the Marquesas natives bore a somewhat shady character,
it being said of them that they were rather inclined to be treacherous
when the opportunity to be so was afforded them; therefore when, on our
fourth day out from Tahiti, we sighted Roua Poua, we approached the
island with all due precaution, every man of us being fully armed, with
orders to use his weapons freely upon the slightest provocation.  It was
dusk when we arrived and let go our anchor under the lee of the island,
and by the skipper's order the sails were merely hauled down or brailed
up, as the case might be, all ready for setting again at a moment's
notice, while the twenty-five fathom shackle of the cable was kept just
inside the hawse pipe, with the pin loosened and ready to be knocked out
instantly, in case it should become necessary to slip.

The anchor had scarcely splashed into the placid waters of the bay when,
as in the case of most of the other islands visited, the schooner was
surrounded by a round dozen or more canoes, manned by from two to five
men, all anxious to be allowed to come alongside and barter the fruit or
fish which they had brought off from the shore.  They appeared to be
fine stalwart fellows, and were unarmed, so far as we could see; but the
skipper would not allow any of them to come alongside that night, and
they returned good-humouredly enough to the shore after they had
received permission to come off again the next morning.  A strict anchor
watch was maintained that night, but no canoes came near us, nor did
anything occur to lead us to suppose that the natives meditated
treachery toward us.

When they again came off at daylight on the following morning, although
there were something like thirty canoes surrounding the schooner, each
manned, as before, by from two to five men, they made no attempt to
force their way alongside, but lay off at a distance of two or three
fathoms, the men holding up their wares for our inspection and shouting
their merits in that singular "pidgin" which passes for English among
the Polynesians.  And when at length Brown selected a particular canoe,
the assortment of fruit in which appeared to be of a temptingly varied
character, and ordered her owner to come alongside, the rest, instead of
exhibiting anger or jealousy, simply pelted the fortunate competitor
with good-natured chaff, and, taking to their paddles, headed for the
shore, well knowing that the crew of so small a craft as the _Martha
Brown_ would have no custom to spare for more than one well-laden canoe.
And even when the selected canoe came alongside, only two out of her
crew of four offered to board us, the other two remaining in the canoe
to pass up, as ordered by the owner, the various commodities which he
had for sale.  These commodities, by the way, consisted of fruits of
various descriptions, eggs, chickens of astounding skinniness, and a
half-grown porker, and the prices demanded, in what the skipper termed
"truck", were so ridiculously low that in the course of an hour's lively
bargaining we completely emptied the canoe of her contents.

When at length the bargaining was concluded, and the savage salesman was
about to depart, he turned to the skipper and asked, in particularly
good English:

"You stop it here long, Cap'n?"

"What business is that of your'n, sonny?" retorted Brown, his suspicions
suddenly awakened again.

"Name it me Oahika, not `sonny', Cap'n," returned the savage.  "If
schooner stop it here, Oahika like it come off every day, bring it
plenty fine fruit fresh fis' chicken-an-egg."

"Oh, that's your game, is it?" observed Brown, reassured.  "Want the
app'intment of bumboat man in or'nary to this here schooner, eh?"

Oahika's reply consisted merely of a good-humoured grin, which exhibited
a remarkably fine set of teeth, deeply stained with betel nut.  Probably
his comprehension of "Old Man" Brown's question was of the slenderest.
The skipper, however, accepted the grin as an affirmative, and
graciously remarked:

"Very well, then; you can come off again to-morrow, and see if we wants
anything else.  And say, the next time that you brings off chickens, let
'em be chickens, not livin' skelintons.  You sabby?"

Again Oahika smiled, the smile of the man who wishes to convey the
impression that he "sabbys" perfectly, while in reality he does nothing
of the kind.

"That's all right, then," continued Brown.  "Now you can git away ashore
agin as fast as you like, for we're goin' to be busy here."

The native, who probably comprehended the skipper's gestures better than
he did his words, at once turned and made toward the rail, but was
recalled by Brown, who enquired, in an offhand, casual sort of way:

"Say, you, Oah--what's-your-name--you don't happen to have no sandalwood
ashore there, I s'pose?"

"Sandalwood!" repeated the savage.  "I think it some mans got a leetle.
You want it sandalwood, Cap'n?"

"Well, I guess I could do with a little, if there was any goin' cheap,"
returned the skipper.

"You like it me ask them mans come see you, Cap'n?" demanded Oahika.

"Well, yes, I guess you may," replied the skipper.  "Ask 'em to come off
to-morrow mornin', bringin' the wood with 'em, and tell 'em that if
they're willin' to let it go cheap I'll buy it off 'em."

The savage intimated in his own peculiar fashion that it would afford
him much pleasure to perform this trifling service for his esteemed
friend and patron, and then took his leave, grinning with apparent
satisfaction at the result of his morning's work.  The skipper stood
watching the progress of the canoe until she had nearly reached the
shore, and then he turned to me and remarked:

"I guess there's been a mistake somewhere about these here Marquesas
natives.  They don't seem to me to be so very partic'lar treacherous.
How do they strike you?"

"Why," said I, "I have been amusing myself by very closely watching
those two who were aboard, and I am bound to admit that their behaviour
seemed quite unexceptionable.  I mean," I continued, noticing a slightly
puzzled look on my companion's face, "they seemed to behave pretty much
like the natives of most of the other islands which we have visited,
except that they did not attempt to steal anything."

"Yep, I guess I noticed that too," observed the skipper.  "Well," he
continued, "we'll just go on keepin' our eyes open for a bit, but I
don't reckon upon our findin' ourselves up agin anything so very serious
in this here island."

Brown had given our chocolate-coloured visitors to understand that we
were to have a busy day aboard the schooner; but as a matter of fact
that statement was merely an attempt to "bluff" the natives, "bluffing"
having latterly become almost an instinctive act with the skipper.
However, although we had nothing very particular to do we at least made
a show of great industry, easing up and overhauling rigging, renewing
chafing mats, and so on, Brown's notion being to convey to the natives
the idea that we had called in to overhaul and refit, rather than that
we were in quest of sandalwood; by which ruse I think he hoped to get
the wood at a somewhat cheaper rate than usual.

On the following morning Oahika and his crew came off to us again,
bringing more fruit, a small quantity of vegetables, about a dozen eggs,
and two animated barn-door skeletons which the skipper positively
refused to purchase at any price.  And with them came four other canoes,
each of which had some eight or ten sticks of sandalwood in her.

"Hullo!" exclaimed the skipper, when he saw this display, "what in the
nation do they mean by bringin' off them scraps?  Is it to show us the
sort o' stuff that they have to sell, I wonder?  Hi, you!"--to
Oahika--"what have them fellers brought off that wood for?"

"Sandalwood, that," explained the savage.  "They want it sell dem wood
you."

"Sell!" ejaculated the skipper; "sell!  Why, there ain't enough wood
there to light a fire with.  Is that all that they've got?--because
there ain't enough there to make it worth my while to open out my
`truck'.  I wouldn't give one bandanner handkercher for the whole measly
lot!"

Oahika conferred with his friends for a while, and then turned to the
skipper.

"Mans say," he explained, "that dem wood all it got cut.  Plenty more
yonder," pointing generally toward the shore.  "They say s'pose you want
it more wood, you go 'shore and show it dem how much you want, and mans
cut it for you."

"Well, I'm jiggered!" exclaimed the skipper explosively.  "If I'd ha'
knowed that them few twigs was all that the lazy skunks had got cut,
d'ye think I'd ha' brought the _Marthy_ all this way out of her road to
buy it?  No, sirree, not by a jugful!  But," he continued, his wrath
subsiding as rapidly as it had blazed up, "seein' that we're here I
s'pose the best thing for me to do'll be to go ashore, have a look at
that there wood, and see if I kin strike a bargain on it.  'T all
events, if I do that I'll be able to choose the best wood they have,
'nstead of buyin' just any blamed stuff that they like to bring off to
me."

"Do you think it will be wise to trust yourself ashore alone with those
fellows?"  I asked.  "You must remember that we have seen very little of
them, thus far; and it will be well to keep in mind, too, the fact that
they have rather an unenviable reputation for treachery.  Why not order
so many canoe-loads of wood from them, and let it go at that?"

"Well--no--I guess not," answered the skipper.  "If I do that they'll
work off all their worst stuff on me, and I'll just have to take it or
go without.  No; I reckon I'll go ashore and pick my own wood: then I
shall know that I'm gettin' full vally for my money.  But I won't go
alone; I guess I'll take two hands with me, and we'll go fully armed.  I
don't believe in takin' no unnecessary risks."

"No," I agreed; "there is no sense in that sort of thing.  Who will you
take with you?  Would you care to have Mr Cunningham and myself with
you?"

"No, I guess not," answered Brown with decision.  "I'll take Mr
Cunnin'ham and one o' the foremast hands with me; but you'll stay here,
Mr Temple, and look a'ter the ship.  And I guess I'll go right now;
then we shall be able to get back in time for dinner.  Now, let's see;
I'll have Mr Cunnin'ham for one, as I said, and--yes, Joe Maybury'll do
very well for t'other.  Just give them two their instructions, Mr
Temple, will ye.  I'll be ready to go in ten minutes; and I guess we'll
go in the jollyboat."

I found Cunningham and explained the situation to him, and he was,
naturally, delighted at the idea of having a run ashore; but I warned
him to keep his weather eye lifting, and to take a couple of fully
loaded revolvers with him, as well as plenty of cartridges, and a
cutlass.  Then I found Maybury, and gave him similar instructions,
winding up by telling off three more men to go in the jollyboat and
bring her back as soon as she had landed her passengers.  Ten minutes
later the little expedition started, and I stood and watched them as
they pulled away for the beach, accompanied by the five canoes which had
come off to us half an hour earlier.

As they drew in toward the shore I perceived, with a momentary qualm of
uneasiness, that quite a considerable number of natives was turning out
to meet them; but upon bringing the ship's telescope to bear upon the
beach my uneasiness was to a considerable extent dissipated, for I then
saw that the crowd was largely composed of women and children, while, so
far as I could see, none of the men carried anything resembling a
weapon.  Also I was unable to detect any sign of hostility or excitement
on the faces of the natives; on the contrary, they all appeared to be
smiling with the utmost good humour, and as Cunningham stepped out of
the boat I saw one _cafe au lait_ coloured young minx dart forward and
laughingly throw a garland of gay-tinted flowers round his neck.  The
screech of delight with which this achievement was greeted reached my
ears even where I was, a good half mile from the beach.  The laughing,
shouting crowd then closed in upon the newcomers, and once again I
became a trifle anxious; but presently I caught a glimpse of
Cunningham's smiling countenance in the midst of the crowd, and a minute
or two later the skipper and his bodyguard emerged, and, accompanied by
the sandalwood merchants, walked off up a footpath that vanished among
the trees within fifty yards of the shore.

Then, to my annoyance, the natives gathered round the boat, and the
crew, instead of returning forthwith, as I had instructed them to do,
laid in their oars, stepped out of her on to the sand, and proceeded
interestedly to inspect various articles which the savages seemed to be
urging them to purchase.  As I continued to watch them through the glass
I saw first one of our men and then another emerge from the crowd, go to
the boat, and carefully deposit something--probably a "curio" of some
kind--in her sternsheets, and then rejoin the laughing, gesticulating
throng.  This went on for something like twenty minutes, by the end of
which time my patience was quite exhausted; and I directed one of the
hands to get out the ensign and bend it on to the main signal halyards
while I went below to get a gun, intending to hoist the ensign and at
the same time fire the gun in the air as a signal of recall to the
recalcitrant boat's crew.  But when I returned on deck with the loaded
weapon I was just in time to see the entire crowd retiring up the
pathway, leaving the boat abandoned on the shore, with about a foot of
her forefoot hauled up on the beach and her painter made fast to one of
her stretchers, which had been thrust like a peg for about half its
length into the sand!

The man who was standing by to hoist the ensign grinned as he caught my
eye.  "I guess them three jokers have toddled off up to the village," he
said.

But I had my doubts, and did not like the appearance of things at all;
my former suspicions rushed back with redoubled force, and--

"Hoist away that ensign," I said curtly; and as the man began to pull
upon the halyards I lifted the gun to my shoulder, and, pointing it well
out to seaward, pulled the trigger.  By the time that the smoke cleared
away not a native was to be seen!



CHAPTER NINE.

TREACHERY!

My first feeling was one of simple annoyance with the three men who
constituted the boat's crew, because they had permitted themselves to be
cajoled into visiting the village and leaving the boat unprotected upon
the beach, instead of returning to the ship immediately after landing
the skipper, as I had instructed them to do.  But when a full hour had
elapsed, with no sign of the return of the truants, my annoyance began
to give place to a feeling of rapidly growing anxiety; and when that
hour grew to two, with still no sign of the absentees, my anxiety merged
into a feeling of downright alarm--nay, more than alarm, into a
conviction that something very serious had happened.

And now I found myself in an exceedingly awkward predicament; for while
I felt that something ought to be done, I could not, for the life of me,
decide what that something should be.  Two alternatives suggested
themselves, one being to arm all hands to the teeth, launch the gig, and
go ashore to investigate; while the other was to remain aboard and
prepare the schooner in every possible way to repel an attack, and at
the same time to have everything ready for flight at a moment's notice,
if need be.  The former was undoubtedly the proper thing to do, if one
were to act upon the assumption that the natives had seized the white
men who had landed, and were holding them as prisoners; but such an
assumption was scarcely justified by the reputation which the Marquesas
natives had earned for themselves, the story in circulation with regard
to them being to the effect that it was their custom promptly to kill
and eat any unfortunate whites who chanced to fall into their hands.  If
the six men who had been decoyed ashore that morning were already dead,
nothing was to be gained by landing the remainder of the _Martha's_
crew, except the infliction upon the natives of a sharp punishment--at a
considerable amount of risk to ourselves of further loss in the pitched
battle which would assuredly ensue.

Also there was the possibility--nay, more, the very strong probability--
that while we were busily engaged on shore in the attempt to administer
salutary chastisement for the betrayal of our shipmates, a party of
natives might board the unprotected schooner, slip her cable, and run
her ashore; and then where should we be, with no means of retreat
excepting our boats, which would doubtless also be seized?  If we could
only get hold of a native and ascertain from him what had become of the
absentees we should know what to do: for if the missing men were merely
prisoners we should be fully justified in taking the risk of attempting
to rescue them; but if, on the other hand, they were already dead, the
question of punishment might very well be left until a more fitting
moment.  But now there was not a solitary native to be seen anywhere,
which, in my opinion, was a decidedly bad sign.

The arrival of noon--by which hour the skipper fully expected to be back
aboard the ship, but was not--found me still undecided upon the question
of landing; but I had so far made up my mind that I had determined to
arm all hands and put the schooner into as efficient a state of defence
as possible.  Accordingly I gave orders to have the arms and ammunition
chests brought on deck, and instructed each man--there were only eight
of us, all told, now--to arm himself with a cutlass and a brace of fully
loaded revolvers, and also to have a loaded gun where he could put his
hand upon it at a moment's notice.  Next I caused all fore-and-aft
canvas to be loosed, all downhauls cast off, and all halyards ready for
hoisting away at a moment's notice; and when these orders had been duly
executed it seemed to me that we had done everything that was possible.

Yet the schooner was still in a very defenceless condition, so far as
resisting the simultaneous attack of several hundred determined natives
was concerned: we might empty our firearms upon them, and if every shot
told--which was most unlikely, in the excitement attendant upon an
attack--we should kill or wound precisely fifty-six of them; after which
the eight of us would be fighting, hand to hand, with the remainder, who
would outnumber us by at least twenty to one, and probably twice that
number!  What chance would we have under such conditions as those?
Absolutely none at all.  If, now, it were possible to raise the
schooner's bulwarks, or to render them unclimbable in some way!

As I considered this the thought of the trawl net which the skipper had
brought along for the purpose of dredging up the pearl-oysters occurred
to me, and I instantly decided that it might, with a little ingenuity,
be converted into an excellent boarding netting.  It was made of extra
stout hemp line, to resist the cutting action of the oyster shells over
which it was proposed to be dragged, and also to bring up a good heavy
load without bursting, and I at once recognised that if there was enough
of it to trice up all round the schooner--and I believed there was--it
might serve to keep the natives off our decks long enough to enable us
to give them so severe a punishing as to cool their ardour effectually
and ultimately beat them off.  The idea was too good not to be utilised
at once; and I gave instructions to have the net immediately routed out
and brought on deck.  It was a big, heavy affair, and it took the eight
of us the best part of half an hour to clear it out of the sail-room and
get it on deck; but when at length we had done so I at once saw that,
with a certain amount of cutting and contriving, it might be made to
serve its new purpose very excellently: and forthwith all hands of us
fell upon it, and by eight bells in the afternoon watch had converted it
into an exceedingly efficient boarding net.  Then we triced it up, and
felt that at last we were ready for whatever the fates--and the
natives--might have in store for us.

Meanwhile the jollyboat still lay abandoned upon the beach, and no sign
of her crew or of the skipper and his two companions had been seen; nor
had the strictest scrutiny, with the aid of the ship's telescope,
revealed any indication of natives ashore: in fact, so far as
appearances alone were concerned, the island might have been
uninhabited.  But the continued absence of our shipmates, now prolonged
far beyond all reasonable limits, left no doubt in any of our minds that
something very seriously wrong had happened to them; and but for the
circumstance that we were in complete ignorance as to what that
happening really was, and the hope that some of them at least might
still be alive, I would at once have got the schooner under way and gone
to sea.  But to do that was impossible while their fate was still in
doubt; for not even to ensure our own safety against the attack that we
were all convinced was impending could we do that which would amount to
the abandonment of possibly living white men to the mercy of the
savages.

With the tricing up and securing of the boarding netting our
preparations for the defence of the schooner were completed to the best
of our ability; and now all that remained was for us to sit down and
passively await events, which, in the present case, meant an attack by
the savages at any moment after darkness had fallen sufficiently to
conceal their movements.  But, that we might be as fully prepared as
possible, I gave instructions for the advancement of the supper hour, so
that we might partake of that meal while there was still light enough to
enable us to see our surroundings; and after that we busied ourselves
about a general straightening up of the decks and the removal of all
unnecessary hamper, in order that, if fight we must, we might at least
fight with clear decks.

Fortunately for us the night fell fine and clear, with brilliant
starlight which enabled us to see all round the ship for a distance of
about a couple of hundred yards; but inshore of us the shadow of the
island lay jet-black upon the surface of the water, completely hiding
all evidence of movement in that direction, even when I attempted to
probe the blackness with the night glass.  Therefore we were obliged to
trust quite as much to our ears as to our eyes for warning of the
approach of an enemy; but even they did not help us much, for the island
was but a small one, and the thunder of the surf upon its weather shore,
borne to us with almost startling distinctness, mingled with the sough
of the wind among the trees and the lap of the ripples alongside, making
with these a combination of sound that effectually screened any such
movement as the launching of a canoe or the distant dip of paddles.  I
foresaw that this was likely to be a wakeful night for me, for with such
a heavy load of responsibility upon my young shoulders I could not
possibly have slept, even upon a bed of down.  I therefore instructed
the men to bring their beds on deck and snatch such rest as might come
to them, while I kept a lookout.  Also I made a point of striking the
ship's bell regularly every half-hour, in the faint hope that if the
savages could be brought to realise that we were upon the alert they
might, after all, decide not to risk an attack.

With incredible slowness the laggard moments passed; the second
dog-watch came to an end; and then, still more slowly, as it seemed to
my impatience, first one, then two, three, four, and so on up to eight
bells of the first watch were tolled out, and still there were no signs
of the enemy.  And all this while I was continuously padding round the
decks in a pair of old felt-soled slippers, which effectually silenced
my footsteps upon the planking, pausing for a moment at every half-dozen
steps to peer anxiously but in vain into the shadow of the island for
some indication of movement.  Finally four bells of the middle watch
arrived, and their passage was duly recorded by the strokes of the
ship's bell.  Meanwhile the stress of the day's anxiety, combined with
my continuous and monotonous perambulation of the deck, and no doubt
assisted by the soft coolness of the offshore breeze, laden with the
odours of earth and vegetation, and the constant booming sound of the
distant surf, was beginning to tell upon me; my jarred nerves had become
steady, my breathing had become deep and regular, my limbs were growing
weary, and my eyelids began occasionally to droop; in short, I was
beginning to feel fatigued and in need of sleep.

This, then, was evidently the moment at which to attempt to snatch a
little rest, and I was debating within myself which of the men I should
call to relieve me, or rather which of them I could best trust to keep
an alert lookout, when I fancied I caught, just for an instant out of
the corner of my eye, a faint, silvery gleam, as of the phosphorescence
of disturbed water, deep in the heart of the darkest shadow in the
direction of the beach.  I looked more closely, and presently saw again,
this time quite distinctly, the rippling, moon-like gleam of water
disturbed as it might be by the launching of a boat or a canoe.  Yes,
there was no mistake about it, there was undoubtedly a movement of some
sort in there; and even as I came to this conclusion I saw the thing
repeated twice, thrice, five or six times, with spaces of a few yards
between.  That was enough; at last the savages were on the move, and in
a moment my fatigue fell from me like a garment, and I was once again
the incarnation of alertness.  Without making a sound I glided along the
deck in my old soft slippers, and, laying my hand lightly upon each
sleeper's shoulder, murmured in his ear: "The enemy is under way!  Go to
your station as noiselessly as possible, taking your gun with you; and
do not fire until I give the word."

By the time that I had awakened my little band, and had seen each man at
his proper station, it had become perfectly apparent that eight canoes
were stealing slowly out toward us from the beach; for although they
were still enveloped in deep shadow, and were being paddled so
cautiously that not the faintest suspicion of a sound could be heard, it
was possible for us to see distinctly, in the midst of the blackness,
eight separate points of disturbance, each indicated by short, wavering
lines of phosphorescent light, marking the slight ripple created by the
gentle passage of some object through the water, in addition to which an
occasional small luminous swirl indicated the stealthy dip of a paddle
in the water at infrequent intervals.  The excessive caution with which
they were making their approach seemed to suggest an intention on the
part of the savages to get as near as possible to the schooner
unobserved, with probably a quick dash at the end to cover the last
hundred feet or so of water.

Crouching low behind the bulwarks, and levelling the ship's night glass
over the rail, I kept the instrument slowly sweeping athwart the
advancing line of craft, and at length saw eight large canoes gradually
take shape as they drew imperceptibly out of the heart of the deepest
shadow.  I endeavoured to count the number of occupants, but soon found
this to be impossible in the dim light.  I made a rough guess, however,
and came to the conclusion that there were at least twenty in each
canoe; it was evident therefore that, despite our superiority in the
matter of weapons, there was a desperate struggle in store for us.  I
waited patiently until the canoes had approached us near enough to
enable us to distinguish the loom of them with the unaided eye, and
then, springing up on the wheel grating, I suddenly hailed:

"Canoes ahoy!  Keep off there!  If you attempt to come any nearer I will
open fire upon you."

A complete cessation of paddling immediately followed my hail.  Possibly
the savages were a trifle chagrined to discover that we were on the
alert, or perhaps they did not fully understand what I had said--
although I did not believe that, for most of the South Sea natives knew
enough of English to enable an Englishman to make himself understood.
Be that as it may, they paused long enough to enable me to call to the
little band of defenders a final instruction.

"Don't fire, lads," I said, "until you can see your mark distinctly.
Then aim carefully, and make every shot tell.  Much will depend upon the
effect of our first volley, which we must therefore make as deadly as
possible."

A low murmur of comprehension arose from the scanty crew ranged at wide
intervals along the schooner's port rail, that being the side which the
natives were approaching.  But before anything more could be said, a
loud shout--in a voice the tones of which seemed somehow familiar to
me--arose from one of the canoes, and was instantly answered by a yell
that, from its volume of sound, must have emanated from the throats of
nearly or quite two hundred savages; and then, without further attempt
at concealment, a whole host of paddles suddenly dashed into the water,
lashing it into long, swirling lines of luminous foam, and, with loud
cries of mutual encouragement from the occupants, the eight big canoes
surged forward and came rushing through the water at the schooner.

"Keep cool, men," I shouted above the din: "pick your mark; aim into the
thick of them; and load and fire as many times as you can before they
can get alongside."  And forthwith I led off with a shot aimed straight
at the centre of the dark mass which represented the nearest canoe, at
that moment distant about two hundred and fifty yards.  My aim was true,
and my bullet must have found a double mark, for two distinct shrieks
responded a bare moment before a ragged volley of seven shots rang out
from the rest of the defenders.  More shrieks followed this discharge,
but it did not stop the rush of the canoes, which now came sweeping
toward us like so many steamers.  Meanwhile I was busily engaged in
slipping another cartridge into the breach of my piece, calculating upon
being able to get in two more shots before the savages arrived
alongside.  And so, as a matter of fact, I did, as also did some of the
others, with disastrous results for the savages, if the shrieks that
followed upon each discharge were to be accepted as any criterion; and,
apart from that, there was a noticeable wavering and hesitation on the
part of the crews of two or three of the canoes after that third
discharge.  But the hesitation was only momentary; then the rascals
gripped their courage afresh and drove their canoes alongside, four
dashing up on our port side, and the remaining four essaying to board us
to starboard.  And when the canoes were within about four or five
fathoms of the schooner's side, with good way upon them, the savages
suddenly laid in their paddles and, rising to their feet, hurled a heavy
shower of spears at us, every one of which flew harmlessly over our
heads, luckily for us.

Then the heavy night air suddenly became vibrant with a medley of harsh,
discordant sounds, compounded of the yells and shrieks of the savages,
the fierce ejaculations of our own people, the quick, snapping
explosions of revolvers, and the gasping groans of the wounded, as the
natives swarmed up our low sides and suddenly found themselves
confronted by the barrier of our improvised boarding net, through the
meshes of which our lads pointed their revolvers and thrust furiously
with their cutlasses, while the savages unavailingly strove to tear the
stout strands apart and make an opening through which to pass, or thrust
at us in their turn with their spears.  Suddenly, in the dim starlight,
as I was busily reloading my revolver, I saw the cook emerge from the
galley with what looked like a bucket in his hand.  With a quick twirl
he seemed to throw the contents of this bucket through the net just
where the savages were crowding thickest on the other side of it, and
the next instant there arose a more than usually piercing chorus of
shrieks, while the great bulk of the savages at that particular point
appeared to melt away suddenly, and I heard the heavy impact of a number
of bodies falling headlong into the canoes alongside.

The "Doctor" paused a moment, apparently to note the effect of his
experiment, and then he hastily returned to the galley, presently
emerging again and repeating his former tactics with similar results.  I
subsequently learned that, when it became known that an attack of the
savages might be certainly looked for, the cook had lighted a rousing
fire in his galley, filled his coppers with a mixture of slush and salt
water, and brought the whole to the boil, so arranging the matter that
the mixture was in a state of furious ebullition by the time the savages
arrived alongside.  And wherever the blacks pressed thickest and most
determinedly, there Cooky intervened with a bucketful of his scalding
stuff, which he very effectively distributed over the naked bodies of a
round dozen or so of our assailants by giving the bucket a neat twirl at
the instant of discharge.

But despite the effective aid thus rendered, matters were, on the whole,
going rather badly for us, for two American forecastle hands were by
this time down, transfixed by spears which pinned them to the deck,
while the sailmaker and I were each punctured and bleeding freely, Sails
having received a bad prick in his left shoulder, while a spear had
passed completely through the fleshy part of my right thigh; in addition
to which a party of savages, by concentrating their efforts upon one
particular spot, had contrived to make a hole in the net, which they
were rapidly enlarging.  Of this last fact I was happily unaware, as
indeed I was of the critical character of our situation generally, for
it was forward, where Murdock, the ex-boatswain of the _Zenobia_, was in
charge, that matters were going so badly, while aft, where I was, we
were doing pretty well.

But Murdock was not the sort of man to be discouraged because for the
moment he happened to be getting the worst of it; on the contrary, it
was just that state of things that stirred him to extra effort, and it
did so now.  Perceiving that, unless something were done to prevent them
effectively, the savages would soon force their way through the net--and
thereafter make short work of all hands of us--Murdock sets his wits
going, and presently thought out a plan which he immediately proceeded
to put into operation.  Seizing a half-empty case of revolver
ammunition, he broke open about a dozen cartridges and arranged the
powder in a little heap at the bottom of the case, burying one end of a
length of extemporised fuse in the heap.  Then he piled the cartridges
on the top of the heap, placed the case on the windlass bitts, ignited
the free end of the fuse, and rushed aft, yelling to us to throw
ourselves flat upon our faces as he did so.

So urgent was his call that we all instinctively obeyed it; and there we
lay for perhaps ten or fifteen seconds, while the savages, seeing the
weak point suddenly deserted, swarmed about it in greatly augmented
numbers, finally enlarging the hole in the net to such an extent that at
length it was big enough to permit the passage of a man, when one after
another they began to force their way through.  It was at this precise
moment that the spark of the burning fuse reached the powder, which of
course instantly blew up, igniting the hundred or so of cartridges that
remained in the case, and scattering the bullets in them in all
directions.  There was a quick flash of the ignited powder, immediately
followed by the cracker-like reports of the exploding cartridges, a
horrible chorus of yells and shrieks of wounded men, and then--sudden,
complete silence, for the space of perhaps half a dozen breaths.  Then
came renewed groans and outcries, as the injured men felt the first
smart of their wounds, followed by a sudden wailing cry, and with one
accord the panic-stricken savages flung themselves back into their
canoes, seized their paddles, and headed for the shore in frantic haste,
being presently sped upon their way by the bullets which we poured into
their midst as long as they remained in sight.

Then, and not until then, we laid aside our weapons, mopped the
perspiration and powder grime from our streaming brows, bound up each
other's wounds, and went forward to inspect the results of Murdock's
little experiment.  It had been exceedingly effective, for scattered
round the spot where the explosion had occurred we found no less than
nineteen savages, of whom eleven were dead, five were more or less
severely wounded, and three appeared to be only stunned.  These three we
promptly proceeded to bind hand and foot, during which operation we
discovered that one of the trio was none other than friend Oahika, our
"bumboat man in or'nary", as the skipper had styled him.  I was
especially glad that this particular rascal had fallen into our hands,
for during the progress of the fight I had frequently caught sight of
him, by the light afforded by the flash of our revolvers, and had
noticed that he was taking an exceptionally prominent part in the
proceedings; while one or two circumstances which I had also noticed led
me to suspect that he might possibly be a person of some importance
among the natives of Roua Poua.

And now, as with the assistance of three lanterns we proceeded with our
investigations, the really desperate character of the struggle in which
we had so recently been engaged began to be borne in upon us; for, in
addition to the nineteen who had fallen victims to the boatswain's
contrivance, we found scattered about the ship twenty-six dead, and
thirty-three more or less wounded natives; while others--with whom the
sharks were already busy--were floating in the water near the ship.  As
for ourselves, we had lost two foremast hands, both of them Americans,
while the remainder of us, with the solitary exception of the cook, had
each his scratch to show, my own and the sailmaker's being, fortunately,
the only wounds that could be reasonably termed serious, while even they
were of comparatively little moment, provided that gangrene did not
supervene.

And now, the natives having been beaten off, our next task was to
straighten up after the fight, and a beginning was made by throwing all
the dead--except our own two--overboard, where the sharks might be
safely trusted to see to their speedy disposal.  Then we overhauled the
wounded savages: and such of them as had received only trifling hurts,
and might therefore perhaps yet give us trouble if we were not careful,
we bound securely; while the others we laid out on deck, and then
proceeded to doctor up as well as our means and our very limited
surgical knowledge permitted.

It was while we were all thus busily engaged that the boatswain,
happening to straighten his back for a moment and cast an alert glance
across the water toward the shore, suddenly stood rigid and staring, and
then remarked to me, in a low tone of voice:

"Just look over there for a minute, Mr Temple.  Ain't that a canoe or
somethin' headin' this way?"

I looked in the direction indicated, and at once sighted a small,
shapeless blot of deeper blackness in the shadow that enshrouded the
whole of the west side of the island.  But if it was a canoe it was
certainly a very small craft; moreover, it was not coming from the
direction of the beach, but from a point apparently about a mile to the
north of it.  We stood watching it for a full minute, or more, and then
I caught the now familiar phosphorescent gleam of water which indicated
the presence of a moving object.

"Yes," I said, "it certainly is a canoe, Murdock; but she seems to be
only a very small affair, such as need give us no very serious amount of
anxiety.  We will keep an eye upon her for a minute or two and see what
she is after.  Perhaps it is a messenger from the natives coming off to
treat with us for the surrender of the wounded.  I hope it may be,
because then we shall perhaps learn what has become of the skipper and
the rest of the missing men."

As the canoe continued to approach, we observed a certain eccentricity
in her behaviour, for instead of progressing in a straight line her
course was a decided _zigzag_, now heading one way and now another, to
the extent of about four points of the compass; still it looked as
though she was aiming for the schooner, for her general direction of
approach was toward us.  I procured the night glass and brought it to
bear upon her, and was then able to distinguish that she was indeed an
exceedingly diminutive craft, containing only one figure, who seemed to
be sitting in her stern, and was paddling somewhat awkwardly, first on
one side of her and then on the other, which probably accounted for her
eccentricity of movement.  Furthermore, as I continued to watch, a
certain suggestion of familiarity grew upon me in connection with the
appearance and actions of the paddling figure; and finally, when the
canoe had approached to within about a hundred fathoms of the schooner,
I put down the glass and hailed:

"Canoe ahoy! what canoe is that?"

"Hillo! is that you, Temple?" came the reply in Cunningham's well-known
voice.

"Ay, ay," I replied, "it is I, right enough.  And glad I am to see that
you are all right.  Do you happen to know anything about the skipper?"

"Got him here, in the bottom of the canoe," was the reply.  "The poor
old chap is rather badly hurt, I'm afraid.  Con-found this canoe!  Why
won't the wretched thing go straight?"

"It is because you don't understand how to handle her, I expect,"
replied I.  "Do you know anything about the three men who took you
ashore yesterday?"

"No," answered Cunningham.  "Didn't they return to the ship?"

"They did not; and I am very much afraid that we shall never set eyes
upon them again."

"Phew!" whistled Cunningham; "that's bad news, although I'm not very
greatly surprised to hear it after the way that the beggars ashore
behaved--Hillo! what's this?  Why--I say, Temple, there's a dead native
floating about out here.  What's the meaning of that?"

"It means that a determined attempt to capture the schooner was made,
about two hours ago, and was very near being successful," said I.  "Do
you mean to say that you did not hear the rumpus?"

"Not a sound of it," answered Cunningham.  "But of course that may be
accounted for by--but one can talk about that later.  Just heave me a
rope's end, there's a good chap, and--I say, how are we going to get the
skipper up on deck?  He's rather badly hurt, and can't manage without
assistance, I'm afraid."

The canoe was by this time close aboard of us, and a few seconds later
she was brought alongside with the aid of the line which I hove to
Cunningham.  Then I dropped lightly over the side into her, to see what
could be done to help Brown, who all this time had remained perfectly
silent.  I found him propped up in the eyes of the little craft, and
when I stooped over him I saw that his eyes were closed, as though he
slept.  But according to Cunningham it was not sleep, it was
insensibility, resulting from a blow on the head with a heavy club.  In
any case the poor old fellow was obviously quite unable to help himself.
I therefore took the rope's end which I had thrown to Cunningham, made
a standing bowline in the end of it, passed it under the skipper's arms,
and then sang out to those on deck to hoist away gently, while
Cunningham and I helped by lifting.  Thus presently we managed to get
Brown first on deck and then down into his own stateroom, where
Cunningham, who claimed to possess a certain amateurish skill and
knowledge in medicine and surgery, at once took him in hand, while I
returned to the deck and assisted the others in the task of
straightening up generally.

By the time we had finished the young dawn was paling the eastern sky,
and the island, from being a mere shapeless black shadow, had changed to
a deep neutral-tinted--almost black--silhouette, as clear and sharp of
outline as though it had been cut out of paper, its equally dark
reflection trembling on the surface of the water, and coming and going
almost as far out as where the schooner lay at anchor.  Then, even as I
stood watching, the pallor brightened to a clear, pale tint of purest
primrose, which presently flushed into a warm, delicate orange hue; a
long shaft of white light shot straight up toward the zenith, and an
instant later the topmast branches of the trees that crowned the island
became edged with a thin hair-line of burning gold, which spread with
marvellous rapidity north and south until every limb and trunk glowed
with it.  Finally a level beam of golden light flashed through a dense
clump of foliage that crowned the highest point of the island, and the
next instant that same clump became swallowed up and lost in a great,
dazzling, palpitating blaze of golden light, which was the body of the
rising sun; the colour of the island changed from neutral tint to deep
sepia, and from that to innumerable subtle tones of olive and green, as
the light grew stronger, and the masses of foliage separated themselves
from each other and became distinct, until the shape of each became
perfectly defined and took its proper place in the picture.  And while
these magical colour changes were in progress the deep shadow which
marked the junction of land and water dissolved until the beach once
more emerged into view, with the jollyboat still hauled up on it where
she had been left on the previous day, and round about her, to left and
right, eight big canoes, undoubtedly those which had been used in the
attack upon the schooner a few hours earlier.

While I still stood gazing, entranced, at the beauty of the new day,
Cunningham emerged from the companion way and joined me.

"Well," he said, "you will be glad to hear that I think we shall pull
the poor old skipper through, after all.  I started to give him a
thorough overhaul as soon as you left me; and I found that those
murdering thieves of natives had literally cracked the poor old chap's
skull for him.  I also found that a tiny splinter of bone had been
driven inward upon the brain by the force of the blow; and this splinter
I succeeded in extracting, with the result that he emerged from his
state of coma, and, after I had properly dressed his wound, went to
sleep."



CHAPTER TEN.

WE LOSE THE SKIPPER.

"I am delighted to hear it," I said, "for we have paid dearly enough
already for our folly in coming to this island, without being called
upon to pay the additional penalty of that poor old chap's life.  We
have lost two of our number in the attack upon the ship, while the three
hands who took you ashore yesterday are missing--and, by the by, where
is Maybury?"

"Dead, poor chap, I am sorry to say--murdered by those treacherous
scoundrels of natives," answered Cunningham.  "The way of it was this.
When we landed we were immediately surrounded by a mob of blacks; and
just for a moment I had a shadowy suspicion that things were not quite
all that they ought to be.  But as I looked round I saw that the natives
were all unarmed; and, moreover, they were all smiling and apparently in
the best of tempers--indeed, one of them, a girl, flung a garland of
flowers round my neck, either as a joke or a sign of goodwill, I didn't
quite know which--so I took it for granted that they were friendly
disposed, and we all got laughing and joking together.  Then the
skipper, Maybury, and I gradually worked our way through the crowd, and,
accompanied by the men who had wood to sell, walked up through the
village, which seemed to be inhabited chiefly by naked little
piccaninnies, playing in the sand with the dogs, and women.

"The village is about a quarter of a mile in length, and beyond it there
are about twenty acres of cleared ground, planted with manioc, cassava,
corn, and fruit trees--principally bananas, beyond which is the virgin
forest.  Toward this we made our way, and, entering it, followed a bush
path for about a quarter of a mile, until we reached a small open space.
We had scarcely entered this when the three pretended sandalwood
merchants simultaneously turned upon us, and, uttering a terrific yell,
seized each of us by the arms, which they tried to confine behind our
backs.  Taken unawares though I was, I struggled fiercely to throw off
my particular assailant, but the beggar was a big sinewy chap, with
muscles like steel, and ere I could wrench myself clear about a dozen
other blacks sprang into the enclosure, evidently in response to the
shout raised by our captors; and before I well knew what was happening I
found myself upon the ground, with three or four savages sitting upon
me, while others were binding me hand and foot.  While I was still
struggling I heard the pop of a revolver twice, the reports being so
close together that I knew at once they must have come from different
weapons; and the next instant I heard a dull crack, a groan, and the
fall of two heavy bodies upon the dry leaves and twigs which carpeted
the floor of the open space where the struggle had taken place.  Then,
when my captors had effectually secured my limbs, they raised me to my
feet, and I saw the skipper lying, face downward, about a yard away,
with his head bare, a small stream of blood trickling from it and
clotting among his grey hair; while close to him lay Maybury on his
back, quite dead, with a long spear driven right through his heart.

"The blacks turned the skipper over, examined him closely, and then,
finding that he was not dead, held some sort of consultation in their
own language, the purport of which of course I could not gather; but the
end of it was that they hoisted both of us upon their shoulders, carried
us back to the village, and thrust us into one of the huts, where we lay
untended for the remainder of the day and practically the whole of last
night.  Then some time--about the small hours I think it must have
been--a girl, who proved to be the same who had flung the garland of
flowers round my neck, stole into the hut as silently as a ghost, laid
her finger upon my lips--to indicate, I suppose, that I was not to
talk--and deftly proceeded to cast adrift my bonds; after which she
proceeded vigorously to chafe my ankles and wrists, in order to restore
the circulation, which had been practically suspended by the tightness
with which the ligatures had been bound.  And look here, Temple, if you
should ever chance to have an enemy, and have a fancy to torture him,
just bind his wrists and ankles tightly together and leave him for a few
hours--that's all!

"Well, when the feeling had come back into my limbs a bit, and I could
move them without screaming, the girl produced some food and drink, and,
although I don't in the least know what they were, I ate and drank
freely.  Then, in the curious `pidgin' lingo that these people use when
conversing with white men, the girl gave me to understand that my life
and that of the skipper was in the greatest jeopardy, and that if I did
not want particularly to die I must buck up and save myself and the
skipper.  Then, taking command, she bade me lift the old man by the
shoulders while she took his feet; and in this fashion we slipped out of
the hut, seeing nobody, and made our way slowly through the wood until
we emerged upon a little beach just on the other side of that headland.
Then she drew out from among the bushes a small canoe, in the bottom of
which she helped me to place the skipper; after which, with a warning to
me to be exceedingly careful and to make no noise, she handed me a
paddle, thrust the canoe afloat, and vanished.  And--and--well, that's
all!  And now you may as well pitch me the yarn of your share of the
night's doings.  If one may venture to judge by appearances you seem to
have had a fairly lively time out here."

"We have, I can assure you," said I; and then I proceeded to give
Cunningham a detailed account of all that had happened during the
absence of himself and the skipper.  I had scarcely finished when the
cabin boy came up with the intimation that breakfast was ready in the
cabin, and we accordingly went below, seated ourselves, and fell to.  We
did not dally long over the meal, for there was still plenty to be done
and thought about; but before returning to the deck I remarked to
Cunningham that I should like to look in and see how the skipper was
getting on, and we both entered the stateroom together.  To my surprise
we found that the old chap was awake and seemingly feeling not very much
the worse for the hard knock on the head which he had received; indeed,
he wanted to turn out and dress and go on deck.  But Cunningham, who had
assumed the role of surgeon, would not hear of such a thing--would not
even permit Brown to leave his bunk; so, as a compromise, I just had to
sit down and spin the whole yarn of our adventure over again to him.
The poor old fellow seemed very much cut up when he learned that we had
lost six men--all of them compatriots of his, too--and bitterly
reproached himself for having come to the island at all.  Of course we
comforted him as well as we could by pointing out to him that the
happening was due not so much to want of precaution on his part as to
the exceeding guile of the natives; and then I led the conversation
round to the prisoners, and asked what he proposed to do with them.
Cunningham was for taking the law into our own hands and inflicting upon
them a salutary lesson by hanging one of them at the yardarm for each of
our people who had been murdered; but Brown would not hear of this, and
we were all three still discussing the matter when the cabin boy came
down with a message from Murdock to say that a large canoe had just been
launched from the beach and was heading for the schooner, and would I be
pleased to go on deck.

Of course I instantly obeyed the call, for my first idea was that
another attack was possibly impending; but when I got on deck I found
that the canoe, although a large one, was manned by only four natives,
who were approaching us very slowly, and apparently with a considerable
amount of trepidation, and that a large palm-leaf was conspicuously
displayed in the bows of the craft, the latter being, as I interpreted
it, intended to serve the purpose of a flag of truce.  Naturally we at
once assumed our weapons, and saw that our firearms were fully loaded
and placed handy for use, lest further treachery should be contemplated;
and then I hailed the canoe and informed her occupants that if they had
anything to say to us they might approach within easy speaking distance,
but that they were not to attempt to come alongside without permission,
and that if any such attempt were made they would at once be fired upon.
And that there might be no misunderstanding upon this point I
flourished a loaded gun in their sight, to show that we were quite
prepared to carry out our threat.

Slowly and hesitatingly the canoe continued to approach the schooner
until she had arrived within about twenty fathoms of us, and then her
crew backed water and brought their craft to a standstill.  A short
consultation among them next followed, and then one of their number rose
to his feet and hailed.

"Master," he shouted, "we got it three mans ashore belong you.  You any
mans got it belong we?"

"Yes," replied I.  "We have eight of your people on board here.  Are the
white men unhurt?"

"No," was the answer.  "They all get it hurt leettle bit, not much.
Black mans along you not hurt, eh?"

"Three of them are unhurt; the others are wounded so they no can walk.
What for you not bring it off those white mans with you?"  I demanded,
adopting their peculiar mode of speech under the mistaken impression
that I could thus make myself the better understood.

"Those white mans no can walk too," answered my interlocutor.  "Suppose
you want it them, we bring them off, and you give it us those eight
black fellows belong we, eh?"

So it was an exchange of prisoners that they had come off to negotiate,
it appeared.  Well, I was more than willing to make the exchange, but I
did not care to appear too eager; so I temporised by enquiring as to the
nature and extent of the white men's hurts.  But they either could not
or would not reply in a manner that was perfectly intelligible to me,
and matters seemed to be approaching a deadlock when one of the canoe
men started to his feet, and in an eager, impatient manner, asked:

"Master, suppose you no got it Oahika aboard, eh?" which enquiry went a
good way toward confirming my opinion that the rascal was a person of
some importance.

"Yes," I replied, "we got it Oahika, all right, not hurt one little
bit."  Then, with some vague idea of trying the effect of a "bluff", I
continued: "He great blackguard scoundrel!  He attack schooner last
night, kill it two white mans!  By and by we hang Oahika up there until
he go dead!" and I pointed to the schooner's lower yardarm.

A yell of anguish immediately followed this announcement of mine, fully
confirming me in the belief that Oahika was likely to prove a valuable
asset if properly manipulated.  The next moment, however, one of the men
jumped up and shouted:

"Mine no believe you got it Oahika.  Suppose yes, you show it him, eh?"

"Murdock, Simpson," I shouted, "just hoist that swab Oahika up on his
feet and take him to the rail, so that those fellows in the canoe may
see him."

This was done; and the moment that the fellow's head and shoulders
appeared above the top of the schooner's low bulwark another loud howl
arose from the crew of the canoe, who incontinently flung themselves
down on their knees and began to kow-tow energetically.  But they were
quickly interrupted by Oahika, who shouted angrily at them, and then, as
soon as he had secured their attention, proceeded to gabble to them a
long string of what seemed to be instructions, in a language quite
unintelligible to me.  When he had finished, the occupants of the canoe
waved their hands, as if to indicate that they understood, then seized
their paddles and began to sweep the canoe's head round toward the
shore.  This sudden change of front rather puzzled me.  I did not quite
know what to make of it; it might mean anything, I thought, and among
other things it might mean that Oahika had given instructions to muster
every available fighting man in the village--or the island--and renew
the attack upon the schooner.  So I hailed the hastily departing canoe:

"Hillo, there, canoe ahoy!  Where are you going, and what are you about
to do?"

The men ceased paddling for a moment, and one of them flourished his
hand toward the island.

"We get it back along ashore plenty quick and bring it them three mans
belong you.  Then you give it us Oahika, eh?" he announced.

"You bring the three white mans, and then we'll see," I retorted.
"And--listen you--if you bring any more of your own men with you I shall
shoot Oahika dead!  Sabby?"

This threat, uttered upon the spur of the moment, seemed to disconcert
them very decidedly, for they remained inactive, staring each other in
the face.  It also seemed to disconcert Oahika; for no sooner had I
finished speaking than he began to shout a long string of further
directions, to which the canoe men replied from time to time by waving
their hands.  Finally Oahika brought his communication to an end with a
few words which, from the intonation of his voice, might have been an
injunction to the men to hurry up; and away the canoe sped toward the
shore.

As soon as it had gone I went down below and reported to the skipper,
who now seemed to be not quite so well as he had been half an hour
earlier.  He was, naturally, very pleased to learn that the three men
whom we had all believed to be dead were still alive; and he instructed
me to make the best terms I could for their ransom, and, as soon as I
had secured possession of them and the boat, to get the schooner under
way and proceed to sea without further delay.

The canoe had been gone about three-quarters of an hour when, watching
the shore through the ship's telescope, I perceived a slight stir upon
the beach, and presently became aware that a small party of natives had
gathered about the jollyboat, which they pushed off from the beach,
making fast her painter to the stern of the canoe.  Then other natives
appeared, bearing in grass hammocks the three missing seamen, who were
laid in the sternsheets of the jollyboat; and finally the canoe was
manned, apparently by the same four natives who had previously come off
in her, and headed for the schooner, whereupon I gave orders for the
windlass to be manned and the cable to be hove short, all ready for
tripping the anchor at a moment's notice.  This was done; and by the
time the canoe was once more within hailing distance the cable was so
taut up and down that a single additional revolution of the windlass
barrel would break out the anchor and free us from the ground.

And now came the really difficult part of my negotiation with the
savages; for, being themselves superlatively unscrupulous and deceitful,
they naturally suspected us of being the same, and would not come
alongside, or render up possession of the jollyboat and the three
wounded seamen whom she carried, until we on our part had released
Oahika.  And this I flatly refused to do, feeling that, as likely as
not, they would play us some scurvy trick as soon as they had recovered
possession of the man who, I now very strongly suspected, was the
paramount chief of the island, or, if not that, at least a chief of very
considerable importance.  We argued, stipulated, and made counter
stipulations, all to no purpose, and finally once more arrived at a
deadlock.  Of course I might very easily have settled the matter by
shooting the four natives in the canoe; but that would have been an act
of the very blackest treachery, and I was strongly of opinion that it
was just such treacherous conduct on the part of certain unscrupulous
white men that had made the natives of some of the Polynesian islands
the cruel, treacherous wretches that they had become.

I therefore once more resorted to "bluff", by hailing them and saying
that unless they came alongside at once and surrendered possession of
the boat and those in her, I would get the schooner under way and
proceed to sea, taking Oahika and the rest of our prisoners with me; and
to make my threat the more effective I turned away and gave the order to
man the windlass.  This was enough; with the first clank of the windlass
pawls, Oahika, who had thus far taken no part in our second palaver, let
out a yell at the men in the canoe which caused them to surrender
instantly at discretion and rush their craft up alongside the schooner.

And now I determined upon a bold thing.  These Roua Poua savages had
caused us a vast amount of trouble and loss; through them we were
short-handed to the extent of no less than six men; and I felt that for
the sake of my own satisfaction and self-respect I must get something,
though it were ever so little, back out of them.  Therefore, since we
white men were all armed, and therefore in a position to take good care
of ourselves, as soon as the tackles were hooked into the jollyboat's
ringbolts I ordered the four savages in the canoe to leave her and come
on deck to help to hoist in the boat; and this they did in a state of
the most abject fear and trembling.  Then I sent them for'ard to the
windlass to assist in breaking out the anchor; and it was not until the
schooner was actually adrift that I permitted them to begin the transfer
of their wounded from the _Martha's_ deck to the canoe.  They displayed
remarkably little consideration for the comfort and wellbeing of their
comrades in the performance of this duty; and indeed I have always been
of opinion that had I been foolish enough to liberate Oahika before the
others had been transhipped, he and his canoemen would have
incontinently made off at top speed for the shore, leaving the others,
sound and wounded alike, upon our hands and at our mercy.  But I was
careful to keep Oahika until the last, and it was not until the schooner
was fairly under way and heading out to sea that I cast him adrift and
permitted him to go over the side, which he did in a splutter of mingled
wrath and fear, pouring out a long string of what were probably native
curses as he seized the steering paddle and violently thrust the canoe
off the schooner's side.

By midday we were bowling merrily away to the westward under every rag
that we could set, and Roua Poua had sunk out of sight beneath the
eastern horizon.  Long before this, however--in fact, the moment that
they were safely aboard and comfortably bestowed in their bunks--
Cunningham had taken the three wounded seamen in hand; and when he had
done all that he could for them he came up on deck and reported to me.

"I am afraid," he said, "that there is not much hope for those three,"
with a jerk of his thumb in the direction of the forecastle.  "Sullivan
and Halpin have had their skulls cracked by blows inflicted with a war
club, and their cases are very similar to that of the skipper, but
worse; while poor Glenn has no less than eleven spear wounds in his
body, and though none of them is very serious in itself this heat makes
me terribly afraid of gangrene.  However, I have done all that I can for
them at present, and we must just hope for the best.  Glenn tells me
that after the skipper and I had left them the natives came swarming
round them, exciting their curiosity by exhibiting curios of various
kinds for sale, or barter, rather, at ridiculously cheap prices, and so
enticing them away from the beach toward the village, where, they were
informed, some really valuable articles might be seen.  And then, when
they arrived at the village, they were suddenly set upon before they had
time to draw their weapons, overpowered, and confined in a hut, where
they were left all day yesterday and all last night without food or
water, and with their injuries untended.  I am afraid there is not much
hope for them, poor fellows!"

This was bad news--so very bad, indeed, that I felt it my duty to go
forthwith to the skipper, report the matter to him, and ask for
instructions; my own idea being that we ought to head for the Samoa or
Tonga group, and procure properly qualified medical assistance with as
little delay as possible.

But when I got down below and began to talk to the Old Man I soon found
that he was, for some inscrutable reason, utterly opposed to any such
idea.  He would not give his reasons, but he positively forbade me to do
as I had suggested, instructing me instead to work out a Great Circle
track to Canton, and to get the ship upon her proper course at once.
And as he seemed to be in full possession of all his faculties, and to
know quite well what he was talking about, I had no alternative but to
obey.  And indeed, so far as saving the three men in the forecastle was
concerned, we might as well have been heading for Canton as anywhere
else; for Halpin and Glenn died within a couple of hours of each other
that same night, while Sullivan lingered only some twenty-six hours
longer.

I looked forward to a speedy and pleasant run to Canton, for I reckoned
upon carrying the Trades with us practically all the way.  But we were
unfortunate; for after a fine run of nine days to the northward and
westward we ran into the belt of equatorial calms in latitude 4 degrees
South, and for fully three weeks thereafter encountered such
extraordinary weather that we dared not ship our fins, from fear of
having them carried away, or of badly straining the schooner.  For
instead of the long spell of calms which one usually expects in those
latitudes the quiet weather generally lasted but an hour or two, and
then was succeeded by such furious squalls that, for the most part, we
could do nothing but run before them under bare poles; and perhaps the
most exasperating part of it all was that these squalls blew mostly from
the westward, or nearly dead in our teeth, so that it was only toward
the tail end of them, just when they were dying out, that we were able
to bring the little hooker to the wind for half an hour or so, and make
a few miles of northing.  And when it was not blowing with hurricane
strength it was usually just the opposite: a flat calm, with a black,
lowering, overcast sky, moist, steamy, overpowering heat, heavy storms
of thunder and lightning, torrential downpours of tepid rain--which, by
the way, enabled us to re-fill all our water tanks and casks--and
waterspouts _ad libitum_ constantly threatening us with destruction.

It was a month, to a day, from the date of our departure from Roua Poua
when we at length cleared the calm belt and got the first breath of the
north-east Trades in latitude 3 degrees 47 minutes North, and longitude
158 degrees 55 minutes West, having been driven back almost as far east
as Christmas Island by the baffling winds and furious squalls with which
we had been obliged to contend; and this brought the dangerous Marshall
group right athwart our track.  Therefore, the poor old skipper being
still unwell, and quite unfit for duty, I decided to make a good stretch
to the northward--say as far as latitude 10 degrees North--before
bearing up for Canton; by doing which I should have a clear sea before
me for the remainder of the trip.

I have spoken of the skipper as being unwell and quite unfit for duty;
but that scarcely conveys a correct impression of his condition.  The
fact was that he was well enough to be up and about on deck, but he was
constantly worried with headache of the most distracting kind, and, what
was still worse, his intellect seemed to be failing him: he suffered
from frequent total lapses of memory, stopping short in the midst of a
conversation simply because he forgot in a moment what he was talking
about; and he was subject, from time to time, to hallucinations, when he
would assure us, with the utmost gravity, that he was the King of
England taking a holiday "incognito", the re-incarnation of Morgan the
pirate, or something else equally ridiculous, while at other times he
would be perfectly rational.  For the first two or three weeks, while
these symptoms were in process of development, he caused Cunningham and
me a very considerable amount of anxiety, for we were constantly
dreading some new departure which would render him dangerous either to
himself or to others; but at length, as we were unable to detect any
such tendency, we grew easier in our minds, just allowing him to wander
about the ship at his own sweet will, and amuse himself by giving the
most extraordinary orders, which nobody ever even pretended to carry
out.  We came to the conclusion that he was suffering from some obscure
form of concussion of the brain, from which we hoped he might be
relieved upon our arrival at Hong-Kong, where we expected to obtain
efficient surgical assistance; but that, meanwhile, he was in no very
serious danger.  As the event proved, however, we were all woefully
mistaken.  We had made as much northing as I deemed necessary, and were
bowling along upon a west-nor'-west course, reeling off our ten knots
per hour, with all our flying kites abroad and a fine north-east breeze
over our starboard quarter, when, about four bells in the first; watch,
the skipper came up on deck complaining that he found it impossible to
sleep in consequence of the extreme heat of his cabin.  The night was
brilliantly starlit, and the air so clear that we could have easily
distinguished a sail at a distance of two miles, had there been owe to
see; but the light was not strong enough to enable me clearly to
distinguish Brown's features, even when he was standing beside me, while
the cabin lamp was turned low, so that there was not much light coming
through the skylight.  But when the old fellow fell into step by my
side, and began to talk quite rationally about the heat below, the
impossibility of sleeping, and his gratification at the fine breeze
which we had fallen in with, and so on, I was completely thrown off my
guard; for he appeared to be in precisely the condition that I had often
previously seen him in, when he had talked rationally enough for a time,
taken a little walk--as he was doing at that moment--and then, suddenly
forgetting what he was conversing about, gone below and slept for
several hours.

All at once, as we were walking to and fro between the main rigging and
the wheel grating, the old fellow halted, pulled off his cap, extracted
a big bandana handkerchief from it, and proceeded to mop his head and
face, from which--as in my own case--the perspiration was freely
pouring.

"Great snakes," he ejaculated, "but it is hot, and no mistake!  The
sweat's pourin' out o' me like water outen a sponge.  I guess that's
what's makin' me so all-fired thirsty.  Where's the water cask?  I'm
boun' to have a drink.  My tongue's so dry it's rattlin' agin my teeth!
Can't ye hear it?  Where's that there scuttle butt, I say?"

"Better not drink direct from the cask, sir," I said, for Cunningham had
strongly urged us all to drink nothing but filtered water, and even that
with a dash of lime juice in it, during the extreme heat.  "The filter
stands on the sideboard, and there is an opened bottle of lime juice in
the rack above it; you will find that very much cooler and more
refreshing than the water from the scuttle butt.  That stuff is really
not fit to drink."

"But I'm so tarnation thirsty that I must have a drink," he insisted,
"and I'd rather drink outer the cask than go below.  Why, man alive,
that there cabin is like a oven!"

"Oh," said I, glancing hastily round and noting that the weather seemed
fine and settled, "if that is all I'll very soon slip down and fetch you
up a drink!  Bring yourself to an anchor here on the wheel grating, sir,
while I go below.  I'll be back in a brace of shakes.  Just keep your
eye on him, Chips," I whispered to the carpenter, who was at the wheel.
"I'll not be gone more than half a minute."

"Right you are, sir," responded the carpenter, turning his quid in his
mouth as the skipper obediently seated himself on the wheel grating,
while I made a rush for the companion.  I turned up the cabin lamp,
procured a tumbler, and was in the act of measuring out a liberal dose
of lime juice when I heard the carpenter's voice suddenly upraised in
accents of panic.

"Man overboard!  Man overboard!!" he shouted.  "Mr Temple, come on
deck, sir; the skipper's been and throwed hisself over the lee rail!"

Flinging down the tumbler and bottle of lime juice, I mounted the
companion ladder in two jumps, nearly dashing my brains out against the
slide in my haste, and stared stupidly about me for a moment, being more
than half-stunned.  Then, as I pulled myself together, I heard Chips
repeating, parrot-wise:

"He just laid his han's upon the rail and swung hisself clean overboard,
like a boy jumpin' a gate."

"Down helm, man; down helm and round her to!"  I roared.  And rushing to
the main rigging I let go the lee braces and began to drag frantically
upon the weather ones in an ineffectual effort to back the topsail.
Then I remembered that the weather studdingsails were set, being
reminded thereof, in fact, by the snapping of the topmast
studdingsail-boom, as the schooner, with her helm hard a-lee, rushed
furiously up into the wind, and her topgallantsail, topsail, and
squaresail flew aback, and the broken spar began to thresh spitefully
against the fore rigging in the fresh breeze.  I saw at once that I had
made a mess of things to no purpose, and also stood to make a far worse
mess of them if I was not careful; for the amount of sail which the
schooner could carry while running off the wind was altogether too much
for her when brought to, and she was now lying over with her lee rail
buried, with the possibility that her masts might go over the side at
any moment if she were not relieved in one way or another.  As for
saving the skipper, that was impossible: for--as I had forgotten for the
moment--we were now, owing to the loss of six of our foremast men,
short-handed, and we could not possibly launch a boat until the schooner
was snugged down; and by the time we had done that we should be miles
away from the spot where the skipper had gone overboard, without any
certain, definite knowledge as to the precise direction in which to look
for him.  Therefore, all these circumstances coming to my mind in a
flash, I jumped to the wheel and helped Chips to put it hard up again,
luckily managing to get the little hooker before the wind once more with
no further damage than the loss of a studdingsail-boom and the splitting
of the lower studdingsail.



CHAPTER ELEVEN.

THE WRECK OF THE "MARTHA BROWN".

This last fatality had the rather curious result that of the entire crew
who left Baltimore in the _Martha Brown_ only the cook and the cabin boy
now survived, the remainder of the existing crew consisting of
Cunningham, myself, and the boatswain, carpenter, and sailmaker of the
_Zenobia_; it also resulted in the destinies of the ship and those
aboard her, and the interests of poor old Ephraim Brown's widow,
suddenly falling into my inexperienced hands.  This being the case, I
decided to consult with Cunningham at once as to the proper steps to be
taken under the circumstances, although my own view of the matter was
perfectly clear and decided.  And that view, stated briefly, amounted to
this: that my obvious duty was to do the very best I possibly could for
Mrs Brown, and that, knowing quite clearly what the skipper's
intentions were, I could not do better than carry them out in their
entirety.  It was in this form that I laid the matter before Cunningham,
asking him to give me his opinion upon it, and requesting him to suggest
a better course if he could think of one; but he fully agreed with me
that, the schooner being practically full of sandalwood, and being also
within three weeks' sail of Canton, we could not do better than proceed
to our destination, dispose of our cargo, invest the proceeds in tea,
and then be guided by circumstances--or, rather, the state of the
market--as to whether we should take the tea to Europe or America,
ultimately returning to Baltimore, and there rendering an account of our
stewardship.  And upon this understanding being arrived at, the voyage
to Canton was continued.

It was on the afternoon of the third day following the suicide of the
skipper that the Trade wind, which up to then had been blowing with its
usual steadiness, began to weaken, and upon consulting the barometer I
found that the mercury was falling rather rapidly.  At the same time I
became aware that the aspect of the firmament was undergoing a subtle
change, the clear, brilliant blue of the sky gradually fading to a
colourless pallor, as though a succession of veils of white gauze was
being drawn across it, while the clouds, sailing up out of the
north-east, paused in their flight and began to bank up in the
south-west quarter.  These changes continued throughout the afternoon,
the result being that the sun gradually became blotted out, and was
entirely obscured about an hour and a half before the time of sunset.
And with the disappearance of the sun the wind sank until it died away
altogether and the schooner lost steerage way, while the heavens assumed
a dark, lowering appearance, and the atmosphere became close,
suffocating, and so oppressively hot that even the thinnest and lightest
of clothing was an almost unendurable burden, and every article was
dispensed with that could be discarded without outraging decency.  But
although the wind had completely died away, the swell did not diminish;
on the contrary, it seemed if anything to increase, for the schooner
rolled and plunged most outrageously, shipping water over her rails, her
bows, and even her taffrail, the water seeming to heap itself up
suddenly and fall aboard her in the most extraordinary and unexpected
manner.  It was evident that a change of weather was impending, and, as
the mercury clearly indicated that the change would be for the worse, I
caused the schooner to be stripped just before darkness set in, leaving
only the reefed foresail and fore staysail set, under which short canvas
I believed she could not come to much harm, let the impending weather be
what it might.

A quarter of an hour after the time of sunset the darkness was so
intense that for all practical purposes we might as well have been
blind, for at a distance of ten or twelve feet from the illuminated
cabin skylight it was literally impossible to see one's hand when held
close before one's eyes; while between the darkness and the violently
uneasy motions of the little hooker it was positively dangerous to
attempt to move about the decks.  As for staying below, it was out of
the question, for the cabins were like so many ovens; therefore, after
supper was over, Cunningham and I both returned to the deck, and,
seating ourselves on the wheel grating beside the lashed wheel, chatted
together while the engineer smoked pipe after pipe.

It happened to be my eight hours in, that night; therefore, since it was
hopeless to think of sleeping in my bunk on such a hot, breathless
night, I stretched myself out on the wheel grating, shortly after eight
bells of the second dog-watch, and was soon fast asleep, despite the
hardness of my bed, while Cunningham sat near me, keeping such a lookout
as was possible under the circumstances.

It was seven bells, or within half an hour of midnight, when Cunningham
awoke me.

"Sorry to disturb you before your time, old chap," he apologised.  "I
have been hoping that it might not be necessary to awake you until eight
bells, but--just look at that sky!  What on earth does it mean; and what
is going to happen?"

I had started up, broad awake, the instant that Cunningham's hand
touched my shoulder, and had at once become conscious of the very
extraordinary and portentous aspect of the sky; it was therefore quite
unnecessary for me to ask what he meant.  When, soon after the
expiration of the second dog-watch, I had stretched myself out and
fallen asleep on the wheel grating, the darkness had been as opaque as
that of Egypt when Moses stretched forth his hand and there was a thick
darkness in all the land for the space of three days, during which the
Egyptians saw not one another, neither rose any from his place; but now,
the moment that I opened my eyes, I saw that the plunging schooner, the
restless, heaving surface of the ocean, and the overarching dome of the
sky, packed with enormous masses of slowly working cloud, were all
suffused with ruddy light, such as might be emitted by a volcano in
furious eruption.  Yet no flaming crater was anywhere visible, nor did
the light flicker or wax and wane, as it would have done had it issued
from such a source; it was perfectly steady, and after I had gazed upon
it for a time I could come to no other conclusion than that it emanated
from the clouds themselves, which glowed with the colour of iron heated
to a low red-heat.  I had never before beheld such a weird,
awe-inspiring spectacle, but as I gazed upon it the memory came to me
that I had somewhere read of something similar, and I also remembered
that it had been described as the precursor of a hurricane, or some
similar atmospheric convulsion.

"I am afraid it means a heavy blow, a hurricane--or typhoon as they call
it in these seas," said I: "and I am very glad that you called me, for I
will take the hint and have the schooner battened down forthwith; also
this is the first time I have ever witnessed such a phenomenon, and I
would not have missed it on any account.  You might as well turn in now,
if you care to do so," I added, "for I see it is not far off eight
bells, and I shall not attempt to sleep again."

"Thanks, no--not if I know it!" answered Cunningham.  "Like yourself, I
have never seen anything of this kind before, and I intend to see all
that I can of it now that I have the opportunity.  It began more than
half an hour ago, the ruddy glare growing out of the inky blackness so
subtly and imperceptibly that it is difficult to say precisely when it
began, but I became conscious of it when I got up to strike six bells.
Then it brightened so rapidly, and seemed so altogether unnatural, that
at length I began to feel jumpy about it, and decided that the time had
arrived when you ought to be called."

"Quite right," I agreed.  "Well, if you won't turn in, perhaps you will
be good enough to keep a lookout here while I go for'ard and see to the
battening down.  There is not much to be done, but the little that needs
doing might as well be done at once."  And therewith I left him and
staggered along the squirming deck to the forecastle head, where Chips
and Sails were perched upon the windlass bitts, out of the way of the
water that was constantly slopping in over one bow or the other, talking
together in a low-pitched murmur, and staring awestruck at the
incandescent sky.

"Well, Chips," said I, "have you ever seen anything like this before?"

"Ay, sir, I seen the same thing once before, when I was in the
_Tenedos_, one of the China tea clippers," answered the carpenter.  "We
was in the Injin Hocean at the time, homeward-bound.  The skipper--Cap'n
Bowers, his name was--was down with dysentery at the time, and the mate
was one o' these here chaps that thinks they knows everything.  He
'lowed that the weather signs didn't mean nothin' partic'lar, and
wouldn't so much as take in the skysails--because, d'ye see, we was
racin' home with another ship, and Mister Mate reckoned he wasn't goin'
to be scared into shortenin' down just because the weather looked a bit
unusual.  Consequence was that we was on our beam-ends about a hour
a'terwards, with all three masts over the side and the ship threatenin'
to go down under us.  A nice busy twenty-four hours we had of it a'ter
that, I can tell ye, Mr Temple, and it ended up in our crawlin' into
Table Bay under jury-masts, and lyin' there five solid months before the
new spars comed out to us and we re-rigged the old barkie!"

"How did it come down upon you then--in the shape of a sudden squall?"
I demanded.

"Well, no, not exactly that," answered the carpenter.  "It began wi'
little whifflin' gusts that comed up from nowhere partic'lar, and was
gone again afore you could say Jack Robinson.  They comed moanin' along,
filled the canvas with a smack, and--there was an end o' that one.  Then
another'd come along same way, do the same thing, and go floatin' away
down to loo'ard.  It happened 'bout half a dozen times, and then, afore
we knowed where we was, away come the hurricane, screamin' and yellin'
like Billy-oh.  `Halyards and sheets let go, fore an' aft!' yells my
noble Mr Mate--Bryce his name was; but, Lor' bless you, sir, afore we
could cast off the turns from the belayin' pins the gale had hit us, and
there we was, on our beam-ends, wi! the deck standin' up like the side
of a 'ouse."

"Well," said I, "that can scarcely happen to us, I think, with the small
spread of canvas that we are showing.  But it will be bad enough when it
comes, I doubt not; so go below and call Murdock, the cook, and the
cabin boy, and say I want them to come on deck, as I am about to batten
down the fore scuttle.  And when eight bells comes, you will have to go
aft and stretch yourselves out on the cabin lockers, for the forecastle
will be closed until this breeze is over."

It took us but a few minutes to batten down the forecastle hatch
securely, for there was a good tarpaulin cover that had been specially
made to fit it; and when that was done I set our scanty crew to work--
myself lending a hand--to secure the galley and the boats with extra
lashings, so that they might not be washed away: and when we had
finished, the cook entered his galley and shut himself in, to finish the
night there.

As it happened, we were none too soon in the completion of our
preparations; for scarcely had we finished when the ruddy glow in the
sky began to die out again, and as it did so the first of those
scuffling puffs of which Chips had spoken came whining and moaning
across the surface of the ocean from the south-west, filling our scanty
spread of canvas with a resounding clap and then passing away toward the
north-east, its track across the glistening surface of the ocean being
marked by a dimming blur like a catspaw, which swept down toward us,
touched us for an instant, and was gone again.  This occurred some seven
or eight times at decreasing intervals, each succeeding rush of air
being of a few seconds' longer duration than the preceding one, and
coming with greater strength and spite, thus enabling us at last to get
steerage way upon the schooner and partially turn her stern toward the
point from which we expected the outfly to come.  And when presently it
came roaring and howling and screaming down upon us, with such a medley
of sound as might be expected from a legion of unchained furies, our
port quarter was turned towards it, with the schooner in motion and
paying off before it.  Yet, even so, it swooped down upon us with such
appalling violence that the little vessel careened until her lee
sheer-poles were buried and the water was up to the coaming of the main
hatch.  But with way on her, her helm hard up, no after canvas set, and
the hurricane dragging at her stout foresail, she could not help paying
off, and after a long minute of heart-racking suspense, during which we
momentarily expected her to keel-up with us, she suddenly righted and
went flying away dead before the wind, with the water boiling under her
bows up to the level of her head-boards.

One of the _Martha Brown's_ good points was that she steered as handily
as a little boat.  I therefore had no difficulty in keeping her dead
before the wind without assistance, although Cunningham stood by to lend
me a hand should I chance to need any help.  Also the water, apart from
the boiling foam into which its surface was scourged by the hurricane,
was perfectly smooth, the smallest suggestion of a wave crest being
instantly seized by the wind and swept away to leeward in the form of
fine, salt rain; indeed, the air was so full of spindrift and scudwater
that I believed, even had it been daylight, we could not have seen
farther than about two, or at most three, lengths from the ship.  As it
was, with the outfly of the hurricane that weird, unnatural, ruddy light
of which I have spoken almost immediately died out from the sky, leaving
the night as pitch-dark as before, save for the ghostly gleam of
phosphorescent light which arose from the storm-swept ocean, and which
gave the water, as far as it could be seen, the appearance as if
moonlight were shining up through it.

When we had been scudding for a full quarter of an hour before that
raving, screaming, howling fury of wind I began momentarily to expect
and look for some indication that the worst was over, and to hope that
the wind would moderate sufficiently to allow us to heave the schooner
to before the sea should acquire height and weight enough to render the
operation dangerous, for now every mile that we ran was carrying us just
so much farther from our destination.  But as time went on the gale,
instead of moderating, seemed to increase in strength, until I began to
wonder how much longer hemp and pine and canvas could endure the
terrific strain to which our foremast, its rigging, and the reefed
foresail were exposed.  Still, although the mast was bowed forward in a
curve that seemed to have approached perilously near to breaking-point,
and although the shrouds and backstays were strained until they were
hard as iron bars, everything was, so far, holding splendidly, and the
schooner was rushing along at a speed which I was firmly persuaded she
had never before approached.

At length, after I had been at the wheel nearly three hours, Cunningham
insisted on relieving me: and, to speak truth, I was more than glad to
accept his offer, for notwithstanding that it was by that time blowing
harder than ever, and that the wind continued to scoop up the water in
such vast quantities that the air was thick with salt rain, a high and
unpleasantly steep sea had gradually risen, chasing the schooner and
constantly threatening to poop her, or broach her to, so that at length,
in order to escape the one fate or the other, it became necessary to
keep the wheel perpetually in motion, now to port and anon to starboard;
and a couple of hours of that kind of work, combined with the heavy
strain upon one's nerves, is enough pretty well to tire out the
strongest--moreover, I was drenched to the skin.  Therefore I gladly
made way for Cunningham, and, having first gone forward and directed
Murdock to go aft and stand by the wheel, so that he might be at hand in
the event of Cunningham needing any assistance, I returned aft--finding
it necessary, by the way, to go down on my hands and knees and literally
crawl along the deck, in order to make headway against the buffeting of
the wind--and went below to my cabin, where I proceeded to strip off my
wet clothes and subject myself to a vigorous towelling preparatory to
donning a dry rig and my mackintosh.

Taking my time over the operation, I had proceeded so far as to have
donned a dry undervest and a pair of thin duck trousers; and, having
rolled the legs of these up to my knees, was in the act of unhooking my
long mackintosh coat from its peg, when a terrific shock hurled me
violently against the cabin bulkhead, and the next instant a deafening
medley of sounds, compounded chiefly of the crash of breaking spars, the
wild yells of Cunningham and Murdock, the seething smash of a perfect
mountain of water on the deck, the splintering of the glass in the cabin
skylight and the pouring of a deluge of water down into the cabin, smote
upon my ears.

Partially stunned by the violence with which I had been dashed against
the bulkhead, I made no immediate effort to rise, but remained passively
where I had fallen, stupidly striving to realise what had happened,
until a tremendous upheaval of the schooner's hull, by which she was
hove completely over on her beam-ends, and a rush of water that
half-filled my cabin awoke me to the consciousness that a catastrophe of
some sort had overtaken us, and I scrambled awkwardly and with
difficulty to my feet, pulling myself up by means of the knobs of the
drawers under my standing bedplace, when another furious shock again
upset me, and I fell squatting into the water violently surging to and
fro athwart my cabin.  By this time, however, full consciousness of the
serious character of the situation had come to me, and as the schooner
was again hove up and almost on to her opposite beam-ends, I let go my
hold of the drawer-knobs and went swirling out through my stateroom
door, lifted fairly off my feet by the rush of water, and found myself
swimming for my life in the main cabin, in the midst of a squadron of
cushions that had floated or been flung off the top of the cabin
lockers.  Then another mountainous sea swooped down upon and overwhelmed
the hapless schooner, another deluge poured into her cabin through the
smashed skylight and the companion, and had not a backwash of water just
then swept me into the companion way and stranded me on the ladder, so
that I could grasp the handrail, I should certainly have been drowned,
for that second downpour filled the cabin to the level of the beams.

As I pulled myself up and secured a footing on the companion ladder I
felt the hull of schooner again soaring aloft, up, up, until it seemed
to my excited imagination as though the little craft was being hove
right up among the clouds and at the same time being capsized.  Then
came the thundering crash of another mountain of water upon her deck,
accompanied by the sound of rending woodwork as the companion cover
parted company and was swept away; a whole Niagara of water poured down
through the opening upon my devoted head, and as I clung to the handrail
with the grip of a drowning man the schooner struck a third time, with
such terrific violence that I fully expected the hull to go to pieces
about my ears.  But no, the stanchly built little hooker still held
together, although I knew that her bottom must be stove in like a
cracked egg-shell; and presently, when I felt that I could not hold my
breath for another second, I found my head once more above water, and
saw dimly, close above me, the hole in the deck where the companion
cover had once been.  Another moment and I had again found footing on
the ladder, and, bruised all over and aching in every joint of my body,
I crawled out on deck.

Whether it was that my eyes had at last adjusted themselves to the
darkness, or that the darkness was less profound than it had been, I
know not, but as I emerged from the companion way and secured a footing
on deck I became aware that I could dimly perceive my immediate
surroundings.  The first object to catch my eye was the stump of the
mainmast within a few feet of the spot where I was standing, and the
instinct of self-preservation at once prompted me to make a dash at it
and fling my arms round it, in order that I might not be swept away by
the next sea which should break aboard.  And as I stood there gasping
for breath and staring about me I discovered that I could not only dimly
perceive my immediate surroundings, but that the entire hull of the
schooner was visible as an all but shapeless black patch in the midst of
a madly leaping chaos of swirling foam, which gleamed ghostly white in
the light of its own phosphorescence.  It was still blowing as furiously
as ever, and the air was thick with spindrift and scudwater, which
blotted out everything outside the radius of some thirty fathoms on
every side; but the schooner now seemed to be in comparatively smooth
water, and I was not long in guessing at the reason, for, glancing to
windward, I could dimly see, a few fathoms away, a great wall of
spouting, leaping white breakers, evidently marking the position of the
reef upon which we had struck so violently, and over which we now seemed
to have beaten, for there were no further shocks.  But imperfectly as I
could distinguish objects in the darkness, I could still see enough to
convince me that the schooner was a complete wreck and full of water,
for both masts were over the starboard side, still attached to the hull
by the rigging, while every scrap of bulwark, boats, galley, in fact
everything above the level of the deck, was swept away.

A single glance sufficed me to grasp these details, and then I turned my
gaze inboard again, wondering whether any of the others had survived
that awful passage across the reef.  And as I did so the sound of
someone vomiting close at hand reached my ears.

"Who is that?"  I demanded, looking in the direction from which the
sound proceeded, and as I spoke a figure uphove itself from among the
raffle of the port main rigging, which lay athwart the deck, and a voice
which I recognised as Cunningham's responded.

"That you, Temple?" it asked.  "Ugh!  Ouch!  Ow!  By the Piper, this is
awful!  I seem to have swallowed half the Pacific Ocean!  Ow!  Ugh!  I--
Aw!  I say, old chap--auch!--where the dickens are we, and what has
happened, eh?"

"Where we are I'll be hanged if I know," I responded, "for all about
here should be open water, according to the chart.  But it isn't, for
we've just beaten over a reef and in all probability smashed the bottom
of the poor little hooker to matchwood in the process.  And now the best
we can hope is that there is land of some sort close under our lee, for
if there isn't we are in a very pretty pickle.  Have you seen anything
of the others?"

"Yes," answered Cunningham, "Murdock is here; but I'm afraid he is badly
hurt, poor chap, if not killed outright.  When the schooner struck, he
and I were swept for'ard by the first sea that broke aboard, and the
next thing I knew, when the water had gone, was that I was clinging to
this rigging here with one hand, and that I had hold of somebody's leg
with the other, that somebody being Murdock.  But he was--and still is--
insensible, and I am afraid he must have been violently dashed against
some of the wreckage, so I lost no time in making him fast to the first
loose rope's end I could find.  But I say, if the schooner's bottom is
stove, as you say, I suppose she'll sink in a few minutes, won't she?"

"Sink!  With her hold full of sandalwood?  Not much!"  I retorted.
"Still, I hope there is land not far away, for I have no fancy for
washing about the Pacific on a crazy, waterlogged hulk, and that is the
condition of the _Martha Brown_ at this moment.  But where are Chips and
Sails and the boy?  I'm afraid we shall never again set eyes upon poor
cooky, for he was in the galley, and that, I see, is gone, together with
everything else that was on deck."

"Yes," said Cunningham, "it went, I think, with the first sea that broke
aboard us when we struck the reef.  And I don't know what has become of
the others.  I seem to remember having seen two figures emerge from the
companion way while I was busy with Murdock here, but I don't know what
became of them.  I wonder whether we could do anything for the
boatswain--the sea is no longer breaking aboard, and--"

"Yes, of course," said I.  "Where is he?  We can at least discover
whether or not he is alive."

"Here he is, among all this raffle," answered Cunningham.  "The first
thing, I suppose, will be to get him clear of it, and then--"

"Well, I am afraid that is about all that we can do for him at present,"
said I, as I moved across the sluggishly rolling deck toward Cunningham.
I stooped beside him, and at his direction lifted the tangle of rigging
beneath which the boatswain was lying, while he proceeded to cast off
the lashings that had saved the inert body from being washed overboard.
Then between us we dragged the man out to a clear spot on the deck,
where Cunningham knelt, supporting the head and shoulders, while I tore
open the front of the thin vest and laid my hand upon the broad, hairy
chest.  The heart was beating, although but feebly; yet as Cunningham
continued to support the man in a sitting position the beats gradually
became stronger, and presently, with a groan, consciousness returned,
and, heaving himself over on his side, with an ejaculation, poor Murdock
began to vomit violently, as Cunningham had done, having evidently, like
him, swallowed a great quantity of salt water.  For perhaps five minutes
the paroxysm continued with severity; then, having rid himself of most
of the salt water, the man, between groans, began to ask where he was,
and then, as memory returned, informed us that he had received a violent
blow on the top of the head which had knocked the senses out of him.
Fortunately there was no wound; and after a while the boatswain was able
to sit up unassisted, with his back against the stump of the mainmast.
And then, having placed him in a tolerably comfortable position, we were
free again to take cognisance of things in general, when we became aware
of the fact that the schooner, although still rolling heavily with the
movement of the water about her, had taken the ground; and upon looking
away to leeward I thought I could perceive, through the flying spindrift
and against the darkness of the sky, a darker shadow which could
scarcely be anything else than land.

When next we turned to Murdock, to enquire whether there was anything
more that we could do for him, we found that he had fallen asleep, which
was perhaps the best thing that could have happened to him.  We
therefore left him to finish his nap and fell to pacing the weather side
of the deck, between the main rigging and the taffrail, comparing notes
as to our experiences; and while we were still thus engaged we became
aware of two things.  The first of these was that the gale was breaking,
while the second was that the dawn was at hand, for far away to leeward
of us the sky was paling, down to a certain point, beneath which the
shadow lay as dark as ever, but was assuming, even as we stood, a
certain definiteness of shape, ultimately resolving itself into the
outline of what seemed a distant hill, with deeper shadows between
ourselves and it, which, in turn, developed into a low, bush-crowned
cliff, out of the base of which a sandy beach presently grew as the
light gathered strength.

Then, quite suddenly, the clouds to windward and overhead broke up into
detached masses, between which a few stars twinkled transiently before
they vanished in the fast-growing light of the new day; and the cloud
masses drove away to leeward and disappeared, revealing a sky of the
deepest, richest ultramarine, softening away down in the eastern quarter
to a tone of the palest and most delicate primrose, against which the
outline of the distant hill stood out, sharp as though cut out of paper,
so deeply purple as to be almost black.  Then, the light coming so
swiftly that the eye scarcely found time to note the multitudinous
changes of tint accompanying it, the sky behind the hill flushed from
palest primrose to rich, glowing amber; a few evanescent shreds of cloud
midway between horizon and zenith blushed rosy red at being caught
unawares by the sun's first rays, then vanished; a pencil dipped in
burning gold outlined the crest of the distant hill for a few seconds,
and then the upper edge of the sun's disk, palpitating with living
light, floated up into view beyond the ridge of the hill, and in an
instant the whole scene, save the beach, which still lay in the shadow
of the cliff, became a picture of brilliant, dazzling light and colour.
To seaward, about two miles distant, was the creaming surf, sparkling
diamond-like as it plunged down upon the reef over which we had driven
and then leaped and spouted thirty feet high into the clear air before
the wind caught it and tore it into mist; while shoreward there
stretched a line of curving sandy beach, about a mile in length, forming
part of the shore of a shallow bay into which we had driven and wherein
the schooner now lay stranded.  The beach was distant about half a
cable's length from us, and was backed by a rocky cliff averaging about
fifty feet in height, crowned by a growth of low scrub, over the top of
which appeared what now seemed to be a low, flat-topped hill, distant
perhaps three miles inland.

The beach immediately to leeward of the schooner was strewed with
fragments of wreckage, among which we recognised the galley and some
fragments of the boats; but what gave us the greatest satisfaction of
all was to see two apparently inanimate figures--those of the carpenter
and the sailmaker--rise slowly to their feet, walk down to the water's
edge, stare intently in our direction under the sharp of their hands,
and then wave their hands frantically in response to our waving, as they
recognised the fact that we were aboard the wreck, and for the present,
at all events, safe.  Then they put their hands trumpet-wise to their
mouths and evidently hailed us; but the roar and the crash of the surf
on the reef were so deafening that it was impossible for us to catch a
word of what they said, and, recognising this, they presently turned and
walked up the sand until they came to a dry spot, where they sat down,
with the obvious intention of awaiting events.  As for Cunningham and
myself, we could do nothing but abide in patience where we were until
the surf upon the beach should moderate sufficiently to render it safe
for us to swim ashore, the wreck being swept so clean that, without
breaking up the deck, there was not a fragment of timber left out of
which to construct a raft.



CHAPTER TWELVE.

THE ISLAND.

By the time the sun had been risen about an hour, Cunningham and I
became aware that it needed something more than a mere shipwreck to rob
us of our appetite, for we found ourselves rapidly developing a good,
wholesome hunger; but, alas! there were no means of appeasing it, for
the schooner was full of water and everything in the nature of
provisions was quite un-get-at-able: we should therefore be obliged to
wait for a meal until we could get ashore, which, we decided, could
scarcely be until the afternoon, if even then.  And we soon came to the
conclusion that our companions ashore were in like case with ourselves,
so far at least as hunger was concerned, for about half an hour later we
saw them rise to their feet, point first to their mouths and then to the
top of the cliff, and presently proceed to the cliff foot, evidently in
search of a spot at which it might be climbed.  And although, viewed
from the wreck, the cliff appeared to be quite vertical, they soon found
such a spot; for, as we watched, they began to ascend the cliff,
zigzagging to right and left and apparently following something that by
courtesy might be called a path, for they walked rather than climbed it,
reaching the top in about five minutes.  Then, with a wave of the hand
to us, they turned into the bushes and disappeared, returning about an
hour afterwards with what, as they held it up for us to see, looked like
a small bunch of bananas.

Meanwhile, the gale having broken, the wind rapidly dropped, until about
midday it fell stark calm.  But it was not until nearly sunset that the
surf on the beach had abated sufficiently to render it at all safe for
us to attempt the swim from the wreck to the shore, by which time we
were both so ravenously hungry that we were prepared to take quite an
appreciable amount of risk, if by doing so we could procure the
wherewithal to appease our craving for food.  And while waiting for the
sea to go down we employed our time usefully in cutting adrift the
rigging by which the broken masts remained attached to the wreck, thus
giving the wreckage a chance to drive ashore upon the beach, where we
should eventually want it.

At length, however, when the sun had dropped to within some fifteen
degrees of the western horizon, and was shining full into the bay where
the wreck lay, the sea had so far gone down and the surf on the beach
had so far abated as to render it possible for us to land without
incurring much risk of injury to our limbs; we therefore awoke Murdock--
who had passed most of the day in sleep--and, finding him in pretty good
form after his long rest, forthwith proceeded to make the attempt.  The
distance which we had to traverse was a mere trifle of about fifty
fathoms or thereabouts, and we did perfectly well until we reached the
inner line of breakers; but there, as luck would have it, something went
wrong with the boatswain, and without saying a word to either of us he
suddenly flung up his hands and disappeared, at the precise moment when
the comber had us in its grip and was about to fling us up on the beach,
and when, consequently, it was most necessary that each of us should be
perfectly free to look after himself.  Fortunately, however, we were all
swimming close together, and as Murdock disappeared, Cunningham and I
with one accord dived and made a grab at him, catching him just as the
breaker curled over and broke, hurling us all forward in a smothering
swirl of foam; and the next instant we were all being rolled over and
over upon the sand.  Then, as we came to rest, I dug my toes and the
fingers of my disengaged hand deep into the sand, ready for the
backwash, while, as it afterward appeared, Cunningham did the same; and
after a severe struggle of a few seconds' duration the water receded,
leaving us stranded and gasping for breath, when Chips and Sails, who
had been on the watch, rushed down into the water, and, in obedience to
a gasped request from me, seized the boatswain's insensible body and
dragged it up out of reach of the next breaker, while Cunningham and I
scrambled to our feet and staggered after them.

Once ashore the boatswain soon recovered from his fainting fit, or
whatever it had been, whereupon we all seated ourselves in a circle upon
the sand and feasted upon bananas, afterwards slaking our thirst at a
little runnel of deliciously cool, sweet water that the carpenter had
discovered, earlier in the day, trickling out of the cliff at no great
distance from the point at which the wreck had come ashore.  And while
we were eating, the carpenter informed us that he and the sailmaker had
been stretched out upon the schooner's cabin lockers, fast asleep, when
she struck upon the reef for the first time; and that, awakened by the
violence of the shock and the crash of the falling masts, they had
leaped to their feet, and, scarcely knowing what they did, rushed up on
deck, only to be swept overboard the next instant by a heavy sea which
broke over the ship.  Neither of them knew, at the moment, what had
befallen the other; but from what they told us it was evident that the
same sea which washed them overboard swept the schooner's deck of
everything and carried away her bulwarks: for when, fighting for breath,
they rose to the surface, each of them found himself close to a mass of
floating wreckage, to which he clung desperately, and so was eventually
flung up on the beach, with the life so nearly battered out of him that
it was just as much as either of them could do to crawl far enough up
the beach to get beyond the reach of the deadly backwash, when they both
collapsed, and so lay senseless until they were revived by the rays of
the morning sun.

There were, however, two still missing, namely, the cook and the cabin
boy.  The former of these we found, quite dead, shut up in the stranded
galley; but exactly what became of the cabin boy we never knew, for we
never found a trace of him, alive or dead.  We buried the body of the
cook that same evening in the sand, using fragments of splintered
planking wherewith to dig the grave, after which we flung ourselves down
upon the dry sand above high-water mark, and, completely worn out, slept
soundly until the following morning.

We awoke shortly after sunrise, to find the weather gloriously fine, the
Trade wind again blowing briskly, and, to our very great surprise, the
wreck but a few yards from the shore, in very little over two feet of
water.  But a single glance around us at the greatly altered appearance
of the beach, as compared with what we had seen of it on the previous
day, sufficed to explain the apparent mystery.  The tide had something
to do with it, of course, for it chanced that the schooner had come
ashore on the very top of the highest spring tide: but it was perfectly
evident that, apart from this, the water in the bay had been piled up to
quite an unusual height by the gale; hence when the storm had subsided
and the ocean had once more found its normal level the wreck was left
little short of high and dry.  This was quite a stroke of good luck for
us; for we subsequently discovered that the range of tide in that
particular part of the ocean was so exceedingly small that, even at
high-water, we were able to wade right out to the wreck, while the
wreckage which had been cast ashore on the previous day was now lying
high and dry far up the beach, and quite beyond the reach of the
ordinary tides.  We were thus saved a vast amount of trouble, for
although, when we began salvage operations, it was still necessary to do
a certain amount of rafting in order to convey heavy articles ashore,
light articles, such as we could carry, could be taken thither by the
simple process of lowering them over the side to one of our companions,
who then carried them ashore in his arms or on his shoulders.

But there were one or two matters demanding our immediate attention, the
first being breakfast, while the next was the settlement of the very
important question whether or not the island happened to possess other
inhabitants than ourselves, and, incidentally, if so, what would be
their attitude toward us.  And this last was a matter of the most vital
importance to us; for our experience, gained during the collection of
our cargo of sandalwood, was that while the natives of certain of the
islands were gentle, kindly disposed toward strangers, and perfectly
harmless, those of others were exceedingly jealous and suspicious,
fierce, treacherous, bloodthirsty, and in some cases actually cannibals.
Of course if it should so chance that we had been cast away upon an
island inhabited by natives possessing the last-named characteristics,
our prospects of ultimate escape with our lives were what poor old
Skipper Brown would have designated as "purty slim", and until the point
could be determined it behoved us to be exceedingly careful.  Therefore,
after discussing the matter at a sort of council of war, it was decided
that, important as it might be to explore the island and ascertain its
capabilities and limitations without delay, it was still more important
and urgent to provide ourselves with the means of self-defence.
Accordingly, while Chips and Sails again undertook to climb the cliff
and procure some bananas for breakfast, Cunningham and I, accompanied by
the boatswain--who seemed, after a good night's rest, to be little the
worse for the happenings of the previous day--agreed to wade off and
board the wreck, with the view of securing such weapons and ammunition
as were come-at-able, and had not been spoiled by sea water.

The arms chest, although actually under water, was secured without
difficulty and carried ashore, together with several bottles of oil
which we were able to rescue from the lazarette; and, this done,
Cunningham and I set to work, immediately after breakfast, thoroughly to
dry, clean, and oil all the weapons and put them in perfect working
order, although such ammunition as we had been able to find was
completely ruined by sea water.  But I seemed to remember having heard
our late skipper say that there was a reserve stock, packed in
waterproof zinc-lined cases, stowed away somewhere in the ship;
therefore, while Cunningham and I were engaged upon the task of cleaning
the arms, the other three men went aboard the wreck and proceeded
systematically to salve the entire contents of the lazarette, with the
result that, before the day's work was ended, they had found cases
yielding no less than one thousand rounds of gun ammunition and two
thousand revolver cartridges, all of which proved to be in perfect
condition.  We were thus pretty well provided with the means of
self-defence, and, given something in the nature of a fairly strong
defensive position, ought to be able to render a reasonably good account
of ourselves.

The next thing to be done was to find that defensive position; the
following day was therefore devoted to a thorough exploration of the
island by the entire party, the expedition setting out immediately after
breakfast, each of us being armed with cutlass, gun, and a brace of
revolvers, with a good supply of cartridges in our pockets.  Thus far we
had observed nothing indicating that the island was inhabited by others
than ourselves: but it must be remembered that the schooner had been
wrecked in a bay hemmed in on the land side by cliffs, and that hitherto
our farthest excursion had been to the top of the cliffs and just the
few yards inland which were necessary to enable us to procure bananas
from the trees growing right up to the cliff edge; the remainder of the
island was therefore, so far, a _terra incognita_ to us all, and might,
for aught that we could tell to the contrary, be swarming with savages.
We therefore decided to proceed with caution, all keeping close
together.

To scale the cliff proved a very easy matter, for the carpenter and
sailmaker had, on their first day ashore, found what might be termed a
sort of natural stairway zigzagging up it, consisting of a series of
rock projections, or ledges, up and down which it was possible to pass
with little or no difficulty, and which served our purpose admirably.

Having climbed this stairway, we found ourselves at the top of the cliff
and confronted by a dense undergrowth of jungle, consisting for the most
part of an inextricable tangle of tough creepers, interspersed with
shrubs and trees of various kinds, many of which seemed to be fruit
bearers.  Among these we recognised the plantain, banana, custard-apple,
loquat, granadilla, guava, pawpaw, and some others with which none of us
were acquainted; the fruit, however, was neither very plentiful nor very
fine, most of the trees being so completely smothered with creepers that
they could get neither sun, air, nor room enough to grow properly.  We
pushed through this brake for about a mile, working steadily uphill all
the time, and frequently being compelled to cut a way for ourselves with
our cutlasses, finally emerging upon a kind of ridge, bare of scrub, but
richly carpeted with guinea grass, with a few tall trees of various
kinds scattered here and there about it.  But although this ridge, or
plateau, was comparatively open, our view was still exceedingly
circumscribed, for we were hemmed in on every hand by the bush belt,
which seemed completely to cover the entire island, except the plateau
upon which we stood and the bald summit of the curious-looking hill or
mountain about two miles distant.  The summit of this hill, which
appeared to be flat, and which we estimated to be about three thousand
feet higher than the ridge upon which we were then standing, promised to
afford us a perfect view of the whole island; therefore, as the day was
still young, we at once decided to make our way to and survey our domain
from it.

The crest of the ridge upon which we stood appeared to lead straight
toward the mountain, moreover it was not nearly so densely overgrown as
was the lower ground; our progress, therefore, was tolerably rapid, and
in the course of an hour we found ourselves clear of the bush and
standing upon the lower slopes of the mountain.  And then we knew that
the towering mass in front of us could be nothing else than a volcano,
either dormant or extinct, for there was no sign of smoke rising from
its summit, although the nature of the soil around us, consisting as it
did of pumice stone, scoriae, and ancient lava, left no doubt as to the
character of the mountain.

And now began the really difficult part of our task.  Although the
ground was entirely bare of vegetation the surface was so exceedingly
rough and broken, and so loose, that progress was very slow, becoming
more so with every forward step; for while the lower slopes of the
mountain were of quite an easy grade, they rapidly steepened as we
advanced, until the last five hundred feet or so approached so nearly to
the perpendicular that at length further progress seemed to be all but
impossible, and we could only advance a yard or two at a time, climbing
upon hands and knees, with short spells of rest between the spurts.

But when at length, about midday, we finally reached the summit, it was
unanimously agreed that our toil was amply rewarded, for the entire
island lay stretched out at our feet like a map, with mile after mile of
the blue, foam-flecked ocean reaching far away to the horizon on every
hand, while away in the south-western quarter, a hundred miles distant
perhaps, there appeared a faint film of misty blue which indicated the
presence of other land.  But this last was much too distant to interest
us in any way; it was our own particular domain that absorbed all our
attention, and the first thing that we observed about it was that its
length ran practically east and west.  It was of very irregular shape,
the most graphic way of describing it being, perhaps, to say that in
general outline it somewhat resembled a rather acute-angled triangle,
with two large pieces bitten out of it near the base, one bite having
been taken out of the north side, while the other and larger had removed
the south-west angle and formed the bay in which lay the wreck.  The
acute angle pointed toward the east, and the sides of the triangle were
much twisted and broken.  The mountain, upon the summit of which we
stood, occupied the middle of the eastern half of the island, and proved
to be, as we had anticipated, the crater of an apparently extinct
volcano.  The interior of the crater was elliptical in shape, about a
mile long by half a mile wide, and was a funnel-like opening about five
thousand feet deep, with practically perpendicular sides.  It resembled,
as much as anything, an enormous well, for there was water at the bottom
of it, though probably of no great depth.  Also at the bottom, all round
the edge of the water and for some distance up the sides, there were
enormous quantities of what we judged to be sulphur.

The top edge of the crater, which from below presented the appearance of
a flat-topped hill, was about thirty feet wide and tolerably level; we
therefore had no difficulty in walking right round it, and so obtaining
a complete view of the entire island, which was everywhere covered with
verdure, save immediately round the base of the volcano.  But although
the outline of the island was very irregular, there were only two
indentations worthy of the name of bays in it, namely, the one in which
the wreck lay, and which we at once decided to name South-west Bay, and
another at the north-west extremity of the island, which we named North
Bay.  These two bays were the only portions of the coastline possessing
anything in the nature of a beach; and, that fact once established, we
knew that if natives existed anywhere on the island, we should find
traces of them on one or the other of the bays.  But we had already
learned that there were none on the shore of South-west Bay; and now,
carefully examining the other bay, we could see no trace of canoes on
its beach, or huts along its margin, neither could we detect the
slightest sign of a smoke wreath in any direction.  We therefore finally
came to the conclusion that, excepting ourselves, the island was without
inhabitants, and one source of anxiety was thereupon removed from our
minds.

Standing upon the edge of the crater and looking westward, we obtained a
perfect view of the whole of the western half of the island, including
both bays; and, looking down upon the land below us from a great height,
as we now did, we were able to form a very accurate idea of its origin,
which we at once judged to be volcanic.  The entire island, in fact, was
evidently the summit of a volcano projecting above the surface of the
ocean, the two bays above referred to having evidently been at one time
two craters or vents for the internal fires, since both were encircled
by reefs which had all the appearance of having been at one time part of
the lip of the respective craters.

As we stood up there, studying the conformation and general appearance
of the island, we fell to discussing our future prospects, and soon
arrived at the conclusion that, situated just where the island happened
to be, far away from all the regular ship tracks, its very existence
apparently unknown--since it was not marked upon the chart--it might be
months, or even years, before we should be rescued by being taken off by
a ship; and that therefore our wisest course would be, first, to save
everything possible from the wreck, and then carefully break her up,
using her timber to build some sort of a craft to convey us back to
civilisation.  This would at all events keep us busy and our minds
occupied, giving us an object in life--something to strive for, think
about, and achieve--and thus preserve us all from falling into a low and
despondent frame of mind; and if in the end a ship should happen to
appear and take us off, why, so much the better, while if nothing of the
kind occurred we should in due time be able to effect our own escape.
Cunningham was particularly enthusiastic over the scheme; yacht
designing, it appeared, was a hobby of his, and he promised us that if
we would only give him a free hand he would design us something which
would not only be fairly easy to build, but would also be safe and
comfortable, and quite capable of conveying us all to any part of the
world we might choose as our destination.  This struck me as a far too
ambitious project for five men to undertake; but when, later on, we
again discussed the matter, with a chart of the Pacific before us, and I
discovered that the Sandwich Islands, the nearest civilised land, lay
some fourteen hundred miles distant, I changed my opinion.  I had
already done one ocean trip in an open boat, and had no desire to
attempt another.

On our way back to the beach abreast the wreck, which now constituted
our temporary home, we took a look at North Bay.  With this, as a place
of residence, we instantly became violently enamoured: because, in the
first place, it was open to the north-east Trade wind, and was therefore
far cooler and more pleasant than the beach of South-west Bay, shut in
as the latter was under the lee of high cliffs, and opposed to the
afternoon sun; next, there was a little stream of delicious fresh water
falling over a low cliff into a small rock basin, affording an ideal
freshwater bath; next, we discovered a fine large, perfectly dry cave,
close to the shore, with an entrance so narrow that it constituted of
itself a perfect rock fortress; and, lastly, a large and varied
assortment of very fine fruit trees was discovered growing quite close
to the beach, only needing to be cleared of the undergrowth to make a
splendid orchard.  The one drawback to the bay was that it was about two
miles distant from the wreck, near which we should of necessity be
obliged to establish our shipyard; but its many advantages so far
outweighed this that we took possession of the cave there and then, and
slept in it that night.

And now ensued a particularly busy time for us all; for when we came to
consider the situation we found that there were several matters
demanding our attention, and they were all of so urgent a character that
it was rather difficult for us to determine offhand which should be the
first to receive it.  For, to begin with, we were all agreed that unless
something quite unforeseen and unexpected, in the nature of a call at
the island by a ship, should occur in the meantime, we must be prepared
for a sojourn of at least a year in our present quarters; and that, of
course, meant that we should be obliged to give serious consideration to
the question of the maintenance of our health, which, in its turn, meant
that we must carefully regulate our diet, and alter it as much as
possible, not depending too much upon fruit, but varying it by a
frequent change to fish, our only possible alternative.

But we soon discovered that in order to catch fish, as well as for many
other purposes, it was not only very desirable, but also almost
imperatively necessary _that_ we should have something in the nature of
a boat, which, of course, remained to be built.  Then there was the
salvage of everything contained in the wreck of the schooner, including
the timber and metal of which she was built; to say nothing of certain
gardening operations projected by Murdock, with the object of improving
the quality of the fruit growing in the immediate vicinity of our cave,
the cultivation of certain vegetables, and sundry other schemes having
for their object the betterment of our condition during the period of
our sojourn upon the island--Murdock's hobby happening to be gardening,
as Cunningham's happened to be yacht designing (and, as often happens
when men take up some useful occupation as an amusement, both soon
proved themselves to be exceptionally skilful in all matters relating to
their respective hobbies).  Therefore, while Chips, Sails, and I went
strenuously to work upon the operation of salving everything that we
could find aboard the wreck, the boatswain, with the assistance of poor
Cooky's fire shovel, and a few other iron implements which he converted
into tools, devoted himself to the production of a fruit and vegetable
garden in the immediate neighbourhood of our cave dwelling, clearing
away all the scrub which grew around and choked some two dozen fruit
trees, digging and hoeing up the soil, and planting therein every
potato, onion, and bean that we could find for him among the cook's
stores aboard the ship.  And while he and we were busy in the manner
described, Cunningham rescued a few sheets of paper and some lead
pencils from the skipper's cabin, carefully dried the former, sharpened
the latter, and, with an empty packing case for table, and a scale
constructed with the assistance of the carpenter's two-foot rule,
assiduously devoted himself to the task of designing what he called a
"catamaran" for immediate use, and then a small schooner by means of
which we were eventually to make our escape from the island and return
to civilisation.

The catamaran struck me as being a particularly simple and ingenious
affair, some of its many merits consisting in the facts that it needed
no moulds for its construction, that it could be built of any fragments
of wreckage that were too short and too much splintered and damaged to
be of use in the construction of the schooner, and that it needed no
very elaborate working or shaping.  It consisted essentially of two
oblong tanks or boxes, each thirty feet long by two feet wide by two
feet six inches deep.  These boxes were not unlike a Thames fishing punt
in shape, although they were, proportionately, much narrower and deeper.
The bottom of each was perfectly flat transversely, and also
longitudinally, except at the ends, where it curved up gradually in a
semi-parabola until it met the gunwale.  These two boxes, or punts,
having been decked over and made perfectly watertight, were then joined
together--with a space of eight feet between them--by stout beams, over
the after part of which was laid the schooner's wheel grating, to serve
the purpose of a deck; a broad-bladed steering paddle was fitted
securely into a grommet attached to the aftermost beam; the punts were
simply rigged with an enormous lateen sail made out of the schooner's
tattered foresail, and there we had a nondescript kind of craft, thirty
feet long by twelve feet beam, drawing only about eight inches of water
when light and on an even keel, buoyant, unsinkable, and uncapsizable,
which, when we came to try her, developed a speed under sail that was
positively astounding, and went to windward like a racing cutter.

She was wet, of course, particularly when driven hard to windward, but
in such a climate as we now enjoyed, to be drenched with salt water was
a pleasure rather than otherwise, and, regarded as a drawback, was not
worth a moment's consideration.  It took us a month almost to a day to
build and rig her complete; and after our first trial of her we almost
invariably used her to go to and fro between the two bays, although the
trip by water was about seven miles in length, as compared with the
short cut of two miles overland.  Yet we did it either way in a little
over half an hour, while the sail home in the evening, after a hard
day's work, was much the more exhilarating mode of travelling of the
two.  And what, perhaps, gratified us as much as anything in connection
with the construction of this exceedingly useful craft was that in
building her we had not been obliged to touch the schooner at all, but
had drawn for our material entirely upon the loose wreckage of bulwarks
and so on that we had found strewn about the beach on the day after the
wreck, together with four stout saplings which we cut down to serve as
beams, and which we found to be exceedingly tough and in many respects
to resemble elm.

And while the carpenter, the boatswain, Sails, and I had been
strenuously at work upon the construction of the catamaran, Cunningham
had been quite as industriously employed upon his design for the
proposed schooner, working alone, day after day, in our cave dwelling
round at North Bay, evolving his half-breadth and body plans, his
midship section, buttock lines, water lines, diagonals, and all the rest
of it; ruling in, rubbing out again, calculating, altering, modifying,
and patiently labouring to get his several drawings to agree accurately
with each other, and resolutely refusing to be satisfied until he had
got everything exactly to his liking: and at length he was able to
display to us, not altogether without pride, the completed draught of as
pretty a little ship as I think I ever set eyes upon.  He had taken, as
the foundation of his design, the shape of the _Zenobia's_ gig, in which
we had made our memorable Atlantic voyage, and out of which we had been
taken by poor old Skipper Brown, that fine little craft having produced
a profound impression upon him, in consequence of the splendid qualities
as a sea boat which she had exhibited.  But the new craft was of course
to be much bigger than the gig, for she was not only to be completely
decked from stem to stern, but was to be sufficiently roomy in her
interior to enable us to perform a voyage of over a thousand miles with
a very fair measure of comfort.  Her principal dimensions, therefore,
were forty feet on the water line by ten feet beam; and, in order to
provide a reasonable amount of headroom below, as also to make her
weatherly, she was considerably deeper in proportion than the gig, and
much sharper in the floor, this providing her with plenty of power for
her size, by means of which she would be enabled to make good way even
in a heavy head sea.  Her bow was an almost exact reproduction of that
of the gig, rather long and overhanging, with plenty of "flare" to lift
her over a head sea, and she was provided with an even longer counter,
which gave her after-body a remarkably smooth and easy delivery; while,
for the rest, her water lines were almost those of a racing yacht, so
that I concluded she would be exceedingly nimble under her canvas.
Altogether we were immensely pleased with, and not a little impressed by
Cunningham's effort; but I could not help reminding the others that it
was one thing to draught a smart little vessel on paper, and quite
another to build her with such resources as we had at our disposal.
Chips, however, who of course knew--or should have known--more about
such matters than any of the rest of us, while not exactly pooh-poohing
my reminder, was confident that--as he expressed it--we were men enough
to bring the scheme to fruition; and with that assertion I was obliged,
by no means unwillingly, to rest satisfied.

Meanwhile, however, a great deal still remained to be done before we
could start work upon the new schooner; for although we had by this time
salved everything from the wreck--and it was astonishing how much and
what a wide variety of things we found in her--she still remained to be
broken up; and we agreed that that should be our next job.



CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

TWO IMPORTANT EVENTS OCCUR.

It may be thought that there is little or nothing of interest to be
found in the operation of breaking up the wreck of a ship, but I, who
have assisted in such an operation, can testify most strongly to the
contrary; for when the work is undertaken as we undertook to break up
the wreck of the _Martha Brown_--that is to say, carefully, taking her
apart plank by plank and beam by beam, exactly reversing, in fact, the
several processes by which she was put together--there is plenty of both
interest and instruction to be found in observing the numberless
ingenious devices which have been resorted to by the shipwright to join
together the several members of the hull in such a manner as to ensure
the maximum of strength, so that, when once joined together, no strain
short of that involving the absolute destruction of the material should
be capable of pulling them apart again.  We who had been aboard the
schooner during the time of her passage across the reef, and had
experienced in our own persons the terrific violence of the shocks to
which she had then been subjected, were amazed that she had not been
shattered like an _egg_ shell; but when, later on, we came to dismember
her, we were still more amazed to find how little damage, comparatively
speaking, she had sustained while passing through that fearful ordeal on
the reef, and what extraordinary exertions were needed to wrench her
several parts asunder.  But a detailed description of the varied schemes
to which we were obliged to resort in order to effect our purpose would
be of no interest to the general reader; I will therefore content myself
with the bare statement that it cost us six weeks of the hardest labour
I ever performed in my life to reduce the _Martha Brown_ to her
component parts, and to stack the materials upon the beach in readiness
for use in the construction of the new schooner.

In fairness to ourselves, however, it must be said that during part of
that time there were only four of us engaged upon the work, Cunningham
being busy upon calculations of stability, the relative positions of the
centre of gravity and the metacentre of the new schooner, and I know not
what beside, in connection with the determination of the amount of
ballast that would be needed, the position of the masts, and the area
and proportions of the several sails--for now that the engineer was
fairly mounted upon his new hobby there was no possibility of dragging
him out of the saddle.  He had several novel theories which he was
anxious to test, and he was resolutely determined that the new schooner
should be as nearly perfect as his skill could make her; he therefore
simply scoffed at us when we pointed out that time was flying,
indignantly demanded to be told what mattered a few days more or less in
comparison with the importance of the matters with which he was dealing,
and returned to his figures with renewed zest.

But all things come to an end sooner or later, and the day at length
arrived when Cunningham completed his final calculation, drew his last
line, and carefully rolled up his completed drawings, to await the
moment when they would be called for upon the beginning of the important
task of laying the keel of the new schooner.

Now, if I have succeeded in portraying anything like a true picture of
our life upon the island, the reader will have gathered the impression
that, after the first day following the wreck, we were constantly in a
condition of breathless activity, due to the fact that there were so
many matters, each of apparently paramount importance, all clamouring
for our instant attention, and that, at the beginning at least, we
strove to attend to all these several matters at the same time, doing
first a little to this, and then a little to that or the other,
according to what we believed at the moment to be most pressing.  And
this state of affairs prevailed with us until we had salved everything
possible from the wreck, and until we had built our catamaran; after
which we felt that we might with advantage adopt some sort of system in
the arrangement of our work.

Now among a number of the things that we desired to do, but had
postponed in favour of other matters, which had seemed more pressingly
urgent, was the exploration of our cave.  This cave was situated only
some thirty yards from the beach, in North Bay, in the heart of a
steeply rising acclivity which gradually merged itself in the plateau
constituting the western extremity of the island.  It was only by the
merest accident that we had discovered the existence of the cavern on
that day when we undertook the exploration of the island--although there
is no doubt that we should have found it sooner or later--for the
entrance was so small that only one person could pass through at a time,
and even then only in a crouching position; and it was this latter
circumstance which at first so strongly commended the place to us as a
residence, for it was in fact quite a stronghold in its way, being
capable of defence for a practically unlimited period by a single armed
man.  Once past that low and narrow opening, however, one found oneself
in quite a spacious chamber of roughly circular shape, some thirty feet
in diameter by about twelve feet high, with a perfectly smooth, dry,
sandy floor, rendering the cave a most comfortable place of abode, as we
discovered when we had taken up our quarters in it.

Thereafter we had all been so strenuously busy that, with the exception
of Cunningham, we had used the cave merely as a sleeping place; while
the engineer, absorbed in his drawings and calculations, had never
thought of exploring the cave and examining its extent, resting
satisfied with the knowledge that the place was amply large enough for
all our requirements, while the situation of the island rendered the
presence of wild animals or noxious reptiles within it an impossibility.
And so, absorbed in our various occupations, we had allowed the matter
to go on from day to day, recognising, in an abstract sort of fashion,
the fact that it would be no more than an act of common prudence to
examine the cavern, but daily postponing the examination until a more
convenient season.  Thus the matter had been allowed to slide until the
day finally arrived when Cunningham reached the end of his labours--
rather earlier than he had anticipated--and, having put away his papers,
suddenly bethought him that here at last was his opportunity to give the
interior of the cavern a thorough overhaul.  He accordingly provided
himself with an abundant supply of dry branches, to serve as torches,
lighted one of them, and proceeded forthwith to investigate, with the
result that about an hour later he startled us all by unexpectedly
emerging from behind a thick clump of bushes on the beach of South-west
Bay and frantically waving a lighted torch in his hand, under the
influence of such violent excitement that when we dropped work, and ran
to him to learn what was the matter, we found him to all intents and
purposes incoherent for the moment.

"Hurrah, you chaps, hurrah!" he yelled, waving the flaming torch above
his head as he advanced to meet us.  "Aren't we a lot of lucky dogs, eh?
Cheer, you beggars, cheer, and split your throats!  Who wouldn't be
shipwrecked, if they could meet with such a slice of luck as ours?  By
George!--I say, Temple, kick me, old chap, will ye, just to convince me
that I'm awake."

"Steady, man, steady!"  I returned, seizing him by the shoulder and
giving him a good shaking.  "What in the world is the matter with you,
and what is all the excitement about?  You don't mean to say that
there's a ship in sight, standing in for the island, do you?"

"Ship!" he retorted, in accents of ineffable contempt; "not much, there
isn't.  No, it is something infinitely better than that.  It is this, my
son, that when we leave this island we do so as a little bunch of
bloated plutocrats--millionaires, my boy, millionaires!"

"Millionaires!"  I ejaculated.  "What on earth does the man mean?  What
are you driving at, Cunningham?  Can't you pull yourself together and
tell us in plain English what has happened?"

"I know," exclaimed Parsons, with sudden illumination.  "He've found a
buried treasure!  Ain't that it, Mr Cunnin'ham?"

"Ay," answered Cunningham, "you are right, in a way, Chips, certainly.
But it is no pirates' hoard that I have found--no chests heaped high
with cups and candlesticks of gold and silver and jewelled weapons, and
overflowing with necklaces, bracelets, and rings torn from the persons
of shrieking women; it is something far better than that.  It is a gold
mine, in the heart of yonder hill."

"A gold mine!"  I returned, in accents of deep disappointment.  "Surely
that is nothing to get into such a tremendous state of excitement about.
We have no tools with which to work it, and--"

"Tools!" repeated Cunningham with withering scorn; "we have all the
tools we shall need.  See this," and he produced from his pocket a
nodule of a dull, reddish-yellow colour, of irregular shape, and about
the size of a small egg.  "I picked this out of the soil with my
fingers.  And there is plenty more where this came from."

I took the nugget in my hand and examined it curiously.  There was
nothing very remarkable about it excepting its weight, which was very
great for an object of its size.  But it was gold, without a doubt; I
had seen and examined gold nuggets before, and could not be deceived.

"Where did you find this?"  I asked, as I passed the thing on to Murdock
for his inspection.

"In our cave--or rather in a passage leading from it to this beach,"
answered Cunningham, who had by this time regained his composure.  "You
see," he continued, "the way of it was this.  I have finished my
calculations and drawings--finished them rather earlier to-day than I
expected; and I thought that, as I had an hour or two to spare, I might
as well employ the time in giving the cavern a thorough overhaul.
Accordingly I provided myself with some dry branches to serve as
torches, lighted up, and proceeded to look round.  Then I found that, as
I have more than once suspected, there was an opening at the back end of
the cavern, giving access to another chamber almost as large as the one
which we occupy; while beyond that again there are other passages and
chambers--seven of the latter in all--communicating with each other, and
ending in a long, tortuous cleft forming a passage which leads out
there, behind those bushes.  But it is the last chamber of all, the one
nearest in this direction, that is the marvel.  Unlike the others--all
rock chambers--the one about which I am now speaking is a great hollow
in what appears to be a `fault' of stiff clay; and, man alive, that clay
is as thick with gold nuggets as a pudding is thick with plums!  There
must be more than a hundredweight of nuggets actually in sight,
protruding from the walls and floor of that chamber, every one of which
may be picked out with no other tools than a man's fingers; so what
there is hidden, and just waiting to be dug out, heaven only knows, but
there must be tons upon tons of it!  Come and see for yourselves.  Never
mind about your work for the rest of the day, come and look at your
fortunes; it is not every day that you will see such a sight, I give you
my word."

Well, of course, you will guess that we did not need a second
invitation.  There were we, five men cast away upon an uncharted island
in mid-Pacific, far from all the usual ship tracks; our hopes of rescue
consisting in the possibility that we might be taken off, sooner or
later, by a stray whaler, or, failing that, of effecting our escape
eventually in a craft to be built by ourselves--provided that we should
prove possessed of the requisite skill to build her out of the materials
at our disposal.  At that moment, and under those circumstances, gold
was just about as valueless to us as the pebbles on the beach; yet such
is the magic of the word that no sooner was gold mentioned than we all
incontinently dropped our tools, and, quite forgetting that it might be
our fate never to escape at all from the island, eagerly followed
Cunningham, consumed with impatience to view this wonderful find of his.

And wonderful, in truth, it was.  The way to it was through what
Cunningham had aptly described as a cleft, the outer extremity of which
was in the face of the cliff, so completely concealed from the beach by
a clump of bushes that it might never have been discovered, except by
the merest accident.  The cleft was exceedingly tortuous as to
direction, narrow, so low that in places it was necessary to go down
upon hands and knees to effect a passage, full of awkward and unexpected
projections, rough and uneven of floor, with here and there little pools
of water which had dripped from the roof and sides.  We traversed about
a mile of this, and then suddenly emerged into a great, shapeless hollow
in what appeared to be a wide stratum of stiff brown clay, sandwiched
between two almost vertical layers of sandstone, which seemed to have
been turned over during some tremendous natural convulsion, perhaps when
the island was hove up above the surface of the sea.  And what
Cunningham had said respecting the abundance of gold was strictly and
literally true: the nuggets were as thickly arranged, proportionately,
as raisins in a Christmas pudding; there were hundreds of them in sight,
singly, at distances apart of not much more than a foot, and in little
groups of half a dozen or more, almost touching each other.  Within two
minutes I dug out, with my fingers only, a nugget shaped somewhat like a
potato and as big as an orange, and the dislodging of that revealed
another sticking in the clay behind it.  Naturally we all with one
accord went to work picking out nuggets, some using our bare fingers
only, while those who happened to have knives about them used them.  In
the course of half an hour we had each picked out as many nuggets as we
could dispose about our persons, and then the lessening number of
torches warned us that it was high time to beat a retreat; but our
labours seemed to have produced no visible effect, for where we had
removed one nugget we had, as a rule, disclosed another.  I estimated
that, during that short half-hour, each of us had collected an average
of about seven pounds weight of gold.

Now, for a day or two after this discovery, it threatened to be a most
serious misfortune; for the ability to acquire large quantities of gold
at the mere cost of the exertion necessary to pick it out of the soil
appealed so strongly to the boatswain, carpenter, and sailmaker that
during the two days immediately following Cunningham's sensational
announcement they absolutely refused to do any work whatever except dig
out nuggets of gold, and the more they gathered the more eager did they
appear to be to gather more.  But at the end of that time, the fact that
Cunningham and I had steadfastly refrained from the display of any
anxiety to share in their good fortune, having, on the contrary, pursued
the task of breaking up the wreck, together with our reiterated
insistance on the greater importance of the work upon which we were
engaged, steadied them a bit; and by the end of the second day we
detected signs that the sharp edge of their enthusiasm had worn off, and
that they were once more beginning to think.  Then Cunningham and I
proceeded to remind them of a fact to which, at the outset, they
stubbornly refused to listen, namely, that we knew where the gold was,
and could get it at any time; but the matter which most vitally
concerned us was to get the schooner built and in the water as quickly
as possible, so that, should it become necessary for us to quit the
island in haste, we might have the means to do so.  The three
recalcitrants came to see this at last, persuaded thereto, perhaps, by a
rather exaggerated attitude of indifference to the gold on the part of
Cunningham and myself, and an equally exaggerated anxiety to push on
with the schooner; with the ultimate result that on the morning of the
third day they rather shamefacedly announced their readiness to turn-to
again, and accompanied us to South-west Bay.  But what put the finishing
touch to the matter was Cunningham's audacious proposal to ballast the
schooner entirely with gold, and sail in her direct home to England.
This idea very strongly appealed to their somewhat crude imaginations,
especially when the engineer took a sheet of paper and proved to them by
figures that if we could obtain gold enough to carry out this plan, the
value of it, equally divided among the five of us, would enable each to
bank upward of half a million; which, if judiciously invested, would
provide us with an income of somewhere about two thousand pounds
sterling per month!  Such figures as these naturally appealed to men
whose incomes hitherto had amounted to about five pounds per month, and
they were immediately all on fire to build the Schooner, if only to see
how much gold she could be induced to carry as ballast.

Had there been a shipwright in our party he would probably have been
intensely amused at the lightheartedness and assured confidence with
which we approached the task of building a schooner, small, certainly,
but complete in every respect, out of the timbers and planking of the
dismembered _Martha Brown_.  I do not believe that anyone excepting
myself had the slightest suspicion of the difficulties that we were so
cheerfully facing; but by the time that we had got the keel blocks laid,
and were preparing to shape and put together the keel, it began to dawn
upon us that we had undertaken a distinctly formidable task, and one in
which we might very easily fail should we once permit ourselves to
become discouraged.  Indeed, the getting out of the keel was in itself a
work of such difficulty that Chips more than once threw down his tools
and pronounced the task impossible, demanding the revision and
simplification of the design.

But Cunningham was deeply in love with the design which he had worked
out with so much care--and so indeed was I; therefore we resolutely
resisted Parsons' demands, and insisted that all that was needed was
patience and the resolution to take the necessary pains, and in the end
we got our own way and the work proceeded.  But it proceeded with what,
to me, was painful slowness, there being days occasionally on which the
embryo ship presented precisely the same appearance when we knocked off
work in the evening that she had done when we started in the morning,
the whole day having been consumed in cutting out and putting together
the several pieces of timber which were subsequently to be worked into
her hull.  Nevertheless, patience and perseverance worked wonders, and
by and by, after we had been steadily at work for close upon six months,
a day came when we were able to stand and gaze admiringly at the
completed skeleton of as smart a little vessel as I ever set eyes upon.
If she possessed a fault in my eyes it was that she presented altogether
too smart an appearance, being, in model, nothing less than an
exceedingly beautiful little yacht; and according to my merchant
seaman's view of the matter a forty-foot yacht was not precisely the
kind of craft best adapted to navigate the thousands of miles of ocean
that lay between ourselves and home.  Yet when Cunningham challenged me
to point out what I regarded as faults, I was met at every turn by
arguments which seemed quite unanswerable, so that at last I was driven
to take refuge in the adage that the proof of the pudding is in the
eating, and to acknowledge that if the vessel only behaved half as well
as her designer asserted she would, I should be more than satisfied.

Now, although there were five of us--all young and in the very pink of
condition--engaged upon the work of building the schooner, there were
times when the united strength of all hands scarcely sufficed to
accomplish some particular task, such as the setting up of a pair of
frames, or the bending and fastening of a stringer; consequently we
welcomed, almost literally with open arms, the arrival of two
able-bodied assistants, who came to us under somewhat singular
circumstances.

From the day of the wreck, when we found ourselves castaways, up to the
moment when, as I have said above, we were able to gaze upon the
complete skeleton of our new schooner, we had enjoyed an uninterrupted
continuance of perfect weather; but a few days after the date referred
to the Trade wind died away, and all the indications pointed toward the
approach of another hurricane.  And indeed we were allowed barely
sufficient time to make everything about the shipyard secure when our
anticipations were realised by the outburst of a hurricane which, if it
was not as violent as the one that had shipwrecked us, was more than
sufficiently so to compel us completely to suspend our building
operations for two whole days.  These we spent in the cavern diligently
and systematically digging for gold, under the direction and supervision
of Cunningham; and I may as well mention here that the results of the
two days' labours demonstrated that we had been lucky enough to stumble
upon what is probably the most fabulously rich "pocket" of gold nuggets
that has ever been discovered by man.

The gale broke some time during the night of the second day, and when we
awoke and turned out on the following morning the weather had reverted
to its normal delightful conditions, and only a heavy south-westerly sea
remained as evidence of what had been.  I think I have already mentioned
that it was our habit to proceed to and fro between North and South-west
Bays in the catamaran, in preference to tramping two miles overland in
the tropical heat; but on this particular day we walked, being of
opinion that it was hardly desirable to expose the catamaran to the
strain of a trip round the end of the island in so steep and heavy a
sea.  Knocking-off work at the usual time, we climbed the cliffs and
proceeded to walk back to North Bay across the plateau, the boatswain,
carpenter, and sailmaker leading the way, while Cunningham and I
followed, about a hundred yards behind, a distance which was more than
sufficient to allow the trio to get out of sight ahead of us.  And as
Cunningham and I sauntered along very slowly we had no expectation of
seeing anything more of Murdock and his companions until our arrival at
the cave; consequently we were a little surprised, upon our emerging
from the jungle, to find the three seamen standing in the open, upon the
highest point of the plateau, all gazing intently to seaward.

"What is it, Murdock?"  I shouted, as we hastened our steps to join
them.  "Anything in sight?"

"Why, yes, Mr Temple," answered the boatswain, facing round toward us.
"There's something floatin', about a couple o' mile off there, that
looks like a boat with people in her."

"A boat!"  I ejaculated.  "Where away?  Show me!"

"Come here, sir, and stand where I am," replied Murdock.  Then, as I
took up a position on the spot indicated, the man placed himself behind
me, and proceeded to point over my shoulder.

"See that there low bush, yonder, Mr Temple, just in line with my
finger?" he demanded.  "Very well, then.  Just run your eye along about
a p'int, or maybe a little more, to the west'ard, and--there! d'ye see
her, sir?  Ah, now she's vanished again in the trough.  But you keep
your eye gazin' in that direction and you'll--there she is again!  See
her, sir?"

"Ay, I do," said I, as I caught a momentary glimpse of a small dark
object which appeared for a moment, hovering on the crest of a sea, and
then sank out of sight again.  And, as Murdock had said, it certainly
presented very much the appearance of a small boat drifting slowly away
toward the south-west before the freshening Trade wind.  Moreover,
although the glimpse I had caught had been but momentary, I thought I
had detected the appearance of what might very well be a crouching human
figure sitting in her.  Presently I got another sight of the thing, and
my impression that it was indeed a boat--or possibly a canoe--with one
or more persons in her was so greatly strengthened that I determined
there and then to investigate.

"I really believe you are right, Murdock," said I.  "At all events it
looks so much like a boat--with people in her--that we certainly ought
to satisfy ourselves.  So, come along, one of you; we'll take the
catamaran and go off to her.  If it really is a boat, and there are
people in her, it is very evident that they are too utterly exhausted to
make the island, and if they miss it they will inevitably perish.  Come
along; we have not a moment to waste if we are to save the daylight."

With one accord each of my companions stepped forward, eager to
accompany me the moment that there was a question of saving life; but I
needed only one man, and I chose Murdock, as being the smartest seaman
and the strongest man among them: and without further ado we took to our
heels and raced to the beach, I shouting over my shoulder to Cunningham
to stay where he was and guide us by signalling with his hands the
direction in which we should steer.

As I had said, we had not a moment to waste, for the sun's disk was even
then within a finger's breadth of the horizon, and darkness followed
sunset with amazing swiftness in that latitude.  Murdock and I therefore
ran at our utmost speed to the beach, cast adrift the catamaran, sprang
aboard her, thrust her head offshore, and then threw ourselves upon the
halyards and mast-headed the yard, when I seized the steering paddle and
headed the craft for an opening between the breakers on the reef, while
Murdock stationed himself beside me, with his hand shielding his eyes as
he stared seaward, anxiously watching for the first glimpse of the
object of which we were in pursuit.

For the moment, however, his efforts were useless, as he and I both
knew, for the object had been so far to the westward when last seen that
we could not hope to sight her until we were fairly beyond the limits of
the bay; and when this at length happened the upper edge of the sun's
disk was just visible above the western horizon, sinking beneath it at
the precise moment when the catamaran shot through the opening between
two formidable walls of breakers, which were dashing themselves into
spray thirty feet high as they hurled themselves upon the lava reef.

The boat, or whatever it was, ought now to be within the range of our
vision, and Murdock intently scrutinised the darkening sea ahead for
some sign of it, but in vain.  Then he turned his glances shoreward and
saw Cunningham standing on the verge of the bluff, vigorously waving us
to keep away.

"Put up your hellum a bit, sir," he admonished me, with his eye still
upon Cunningham; then--"Steady!" as he saw the engineer fling both hands
above his head, and almost at the same instant I caught the faintest
glimpse imaginable of a small dark spot appearing for a moment in
ghostly fashion against the creaming head of a distant breaker, just
clear of the lower end of our lateen yard.

"There she is!"  I exclaimed, and as I spoke a star glimmered out of the
deepening blue almost immediately above the spot where the object had
appeared.

"Where away, sir?" demanded the boatswain, again peering ahead under the
sharp of his hand.

"Do you see that star?"  I responded, pointing with my disengaged hand.
"Well, she is about half a point to the westward--there she is again,
straight ahead!"

"I see her, sir; I see her," answered Murdock.  "Steady as you go, Mr
Temple, and we're bound to pick her up."

I thought so too, although the darkness was falling about us with the
rapidity of a sea fog gathering.  Still, the star was a splendid guide,
and steering by it we caught two or three additional glimpses of the
object before the darkness completely enveloped us.  Moreover, the
catamaran was slashing along at racing speed, smothering us with spray
every time she hit the crest of a wave; and now my chief fear was that
this same spray might so effectually conceal our surroundings at the
precise moment when we most needed to see, namely, when we were
surmounting a comber, that we might unwittingly overshoot our mark.
Therefore at very brief intervals I admonished Murdock to "keep his eyes
skinned", at the same time myself keeping as sharp a lookout as I could.
I estimated that, with the breeze then blowing, we ought to cover the
distance between the object and ourselves in about six or seven minutes
after clearing the reef, but I had no means of judging the time, except
by guesswork, out there in the darkness, and I was on tenterhooks lest
we should miss the thing and stand too far out, when the chances would
be all against our picking her up on the return journey.  Therefore at
last, feeling that we must be pretty close to the object of our quest, I
sent Murdock forward, believing that he would have a better chance of
picking her up from there than by standing alongside me, although his
figure would greatly obscure my own view.

Accordingly the boatswain went right forward into the very eyes of the
catamaran, where he would be clear of the heaviest of the flying spray;
and he had scarcely taken his station when, without looking round, he
suddenly shouted:

"There she is, sir!  Keep her away or you'll be on to her; hard up, sir!
So, steady!  Now, hard down and shake her.  That'll do, sir; keep her
at that.  Luff a bit yet, sir.  So, steady!" and, dashing aft, the
boatswain snatched up a small coil of line that we had made ready for
the purpose, and hurled himself recklessly at a dark mass that at that
moment came sliding close past what had been our lee side before I
luffed the catamaran into the wind.  I heard the splashing clatter of
his boots as he landed upon certain objects that sounded like loose
paddles lying washing about in the bottom of the canoe--for such I now
saw the craft to be; saw him stoop, as though making fast the rope he
had taken with him; and then he shouted: "All fast, sir; let her go
off!"  I put up the helm of the catamaran, and as she fell off and began
to gather fresh way Murdock hauled his prize up alongside and scrambled
out of her, snubbing the towline to a length of about two fathoms.

"It's a canoe, sir," he reported as he rose to his feet beside me, "and
there's people aboard her--natives--four or five, I sh'd say, though I
didn't stop to count 'em; and I'm blest if I know whether they're alive
or dead, but I think there must be life in one of 'em at least, for when
I jumped into her I stumbled over one, and I thought I heard a groan."

"Well," said I, "I hope we have been in time to save the poor beggars.
I suspect that they belong to the island that is visible from the
crater, about a hundred miles to the south-west of us, and that they
were caught in the gale and blown out to sea.  If so, they have been at
sea three whole nights and two days, drenched all the time with the
flying spray, buffeted with the wind, and labouring hard all the while
to keep their cockleshell of a craft afloat.  And these islanders are
not very tough when it comes to facing prolonged exposure of that kind."

We got the catamaran round and headed her for the island, with the canoe
in tow, the carpenter having been thoughtful enough to light a fire on
the beach to serve as a guide to us; and a quarter of an hour later we
were ashore again, with Cunningham, Chips, and Sails tenderly lifting
five natives out of the half-swamped canoe and laying them on the sand,
close to the fire, while Murdock and I secured the catamaran.  By the
time that we had done this, Cunningham had got to work upon the new
arrivals, in two of whom he found signs of life, while the other three
he pronounced doubtful.  Then, under his directions, we each took a
body, which we proceeded vigorously to chafe and slap with our bare
hands, varying the treatment with occasional attempts to administer a
little stimulant, with the object of restoring the suspended circulation
of the blood; and eventually--not to dwell at unnecessary length upon
this episode--we succeeded in restoring two of them, but the remaining
three defied our utmost efforts, although we worked at them until late
into the night.  Then, having bountifully fed the two survivors, we left
them to dispose of themselves as they would for the night, and retired
to our cavern.



CHAPTER FOURTEEN.

MOKALUA AND VATI.

When we turned out on the following morning our two resuscitated savages
were nowhere to be seen, and the bodies of the three dead had also
vanished; but a glance in the direction of the beach showed that they
were still somewhere on the island, for their canoe lay hauled up on the
sand, alongside the catamaran, where we had left her on the previous
night, and the prints of their naked feet on the sand indicated that
they had made some three or four journeys to the eastern extremity of
the bay.  We therefore concluded that the two were performing the
obsequies of their departed companions, and made no endeavour to
discover their whereabouts, taking it for granted that they would
reappear when they had disposed of their dead to their satisfaction.
While we were partaking of breakfast a big cloud of smoke arose from the
woods situated at the eastern extremity of the bay, causing us to
surmise that the dead were at that moment undergoing the process of
cremation; but we made no attempt to investigate, leaving the savages to
their own devices for that day, and proceeding to the shipyard as usual
immediately after breakfast.

Shortly after midday our two savages hove in sight, making their way
down the cliff path to the shipyard, having evidently followed the path
over the plateau which we had beaten in our frequent passages to and fro
between the two bays.  They displayed no fear of us, approaching us
without the slightest hesitation, but exhibiting more curiosity than any
natives with whom I had thus far been brought into contact.  They seemed
to be filled with astonishment at the whiteness of our skins when,
following our usual custom, we discarded our scanty clothing and plunged
into the sea for a few minutes before partaking of our midday meal; and
did not appear to be able to understand how it was that, while our
faces, necks, hands, and arms were almost as dark as their own skins,
the remaining portions of our bodies, ordinarily protected from the sun
by our clothing, should be so very much lighter.  They were not
oppressed by any feeling of false modesty or bashfulness, but examined
us minutely at close quarters, jabbering together with the utmost
animation all the while and lightly running their fingers over our arms
and necks, with the apparent purpose of finding the join in the
differently coloured portions of our skin.

This was all very well, of course, and sufficiently amusing to all
concerned; but now that these two savages had come to us we quite
intended to make use of them, and allow them to work for their living.
Therefore, as soon as we had resumed our clothing, Murdock undertook the
task of making known our intentions and wishes to our dusky friends.
And the way he did it was amusing enough.  In common with others of his
kind he had repeatedly been brought into contact with foreigners of
various nationalities, both civilised and savage, but he had one simple
method of communicating with them all, a method which he was firmly
convinced must be efficacious in exact proportion to the measure of
intelligence possessed by the persons with whom he desired to
communicate; and that method was to speak to the stranger in broken
English!  For example, he proposed to set these two natives to the task
of collecting fuel for the purpose of cooking the fish which Chips and
Sails were about to catch for our midday meal by going offshore a short
distance in the catamaran; and the way he did it was something like
this.

Turning to the two natives, he poked first one and then the other on the
naked chest with his forefinger, to secure their attention, and then
proceeded to remark, with much flourishing of his hands:

"Now then, Johnnie, and you, Jim, come along wi' me and gather firewood.
Savvy?"

To this the natives naturally responded with a blank stare of
non-comprehension, gradually merging into a broad smile.  Then, seeing
that his first attempt had not been exactly a success, the boatswain
proceeded upon his usual lines.  Assuming an aspect of intense
earnestness, and holding his forefinger up before them, he continued:

"Now, lookee here, you coffee-coloured sweeps, me wantee you come alonga
me and catchee plenty wood for makee fire cookee fis' that them two men
are goin' for catchee.  Now, then, d'ye savvy that?"

The intonation of his concluding words no doubt conveyed to the minds of
his hearers the idea that he was asking a question, for the two savages
turned to each other and exchanged a few words.  Then the elder, with a
broad smile, pointed first to himself and uttered the word "Mokalua"--
which we easily understood must be his name--and then to his companion,
pronouncing the word "Vati", which was as certainly the name of the
other.  So evident was this that even Murdock understood it, and, proud
of his quick comprehension, hastened to display his cleverness by
prodding the first native in the chest and remarking:

"Ay, ay; that's easy enough to understand: your name's Mokalua, and
yours,"--turning to the other--"is Vati.  That's all right; I can see
that we'll soon get to understand each other.  Now then, Mokalua and
Vati, let's have another try.  Me wantee plenty much firewood, so you
two come and helpy me gatheree it.  Comprenny?"

Further blank looks from the natives, at which the boatswain lost his
patience; and, clutching Mokalua by the wrist, while he seized the
unhappy Vati by the shoulder and violently swung him round with his face
toward the cliffs, he exclaimed savagely:

"Here, come along o' me, you two!  You're like the monkeys; you can
understand, but you won't, for fear o' bein' put to work!  But you don't
get over me quite so easily as that, my sons; I've had that trick tried
on me before, but it didn't come off, and it ain't comin' off now.
You've got to work for your livin' while you're on this here hisland,
and don't you forget it.  Can't understand my language, can't ye?  Well,
I can speak another language with my boot--"

I saw that the time had arrived for me to interfere.  Murdock was
rapidly working himself up into a rage, and when he was angry he was a
little apt to be violent; also he was an exceptionally powerful man,
while the two natives whom he held in his grasp were still weak from
semi-starvation and long exposure, and were beginning to look rather
frightened.  Now I did not want them to be frightened, I wanted to win
their confidence, so I stepped forward and gently removed the
boatswain's grasp from the persons of his prisoners, saying:

"There, that will do, Murdock; don't get excited, man, because these two
bronze images cannot understand you.  You cannot understand them, you
know, so you are quits.  We shall just have to be patient with them, and
treat them kindly; and I have no doubt that in due time they will learn
to understand what we want them to do."  Then, turning to the two
wide-eyed savages, and trusting that they would at least understand the
intonation of my voice, I patted them both good-naturedly on the
shoulder and said, in English of course:

"That's all right.  Don't you be afraid of him, he'll not hurt you; he's
quite a good-natured chap.  But he wants you to go with him to the woods
yonder; so run along," and I first pointed to the jungle, then to
Murdock, patted them encouragingly on the back, and finally waved my
hand toward the cliffs.

That I was tolerably successful in a general sort of way was at once
evident, for the expression of mingled fear and savagery on Mokalua's
features at once vanished, giving place to a smile; he nodded his head,
pointed to Murdock, himself, and Vati, waved his hand toward the woods,
said a few quick words to his companion, and at once set off at a brisk
walk toward the cliff path, accompanied by the two others, the trio
returning about twenty minutes later with an abundant supply of dry
twigs and branches, with which they at once proceeded to build the
constituents of a fire.  But it was evident, from their actions and
their quick, earnest interchange of remarks, that the two were
exceedingly curious as to how we were going to set light to the wood,
now that we had it; and they looked on with the most absorbed interest
while Cunningham took a little dry moss in his hand and focused the
sun's rays upon it with a burning-glass, afterwards fanning it into a
flame by gently whirling it in the air; and I shall not readily forget
their amazement when the moss burst into flame and Cunningham thrust it
into the heart of the heap of sticks.  When Cunningham made to return
the lens to his pocket, Mokalua held out his hand and said something
which we readily understood to be a request that he might be permitted
to look at it: and when the engineer handed it over to him the native
first examined it with wondering eyes, turning it about in his hands,
holding it up, and becoming quite eloquent in the expression of his
amazement when his quick eye detected the inverted image of the
landscape seen through it; then, after one or two futile attempts, he
succeeded in focusing the rays of the sun upon his naked arm, giving a
little yelp as he felt the sting of the heat.  Finally, with a laugh, he
handed the lens back to Cunningham; but there was a covetous look in his
eyes as he did so which caused me to utter a word of warning to the
engineer lest he should awake some fine morning and discover that his
burning-glass had mysteriously vanished.

In such manner, and to the accompaniment of quite a number of amusing
little incidents, did Mokalua and Vati become members of our small
community.  And glad enough were we all to have them, for the
awkwardness and inconvenience arising from our inability to understand
each other's speech soon passed away, the two savages manifesting an
extraordinary aptitude to adapt themselves to the situation, and an
equally extraordinary facility in the comprehension of what was required
of them; so that they rapidly became of very material value to us,
catching more fish than the party could consume, gathering our firewood
for us, teaching us new methods of cooking, and assisting us in the more
laborious portions of our shipyard work.  Thus by the time they had been
with us some three or four months we began to wonder how we had ever
contrived to rub along at all without them.

Their one fault was an ineradicable propensity to steal anything and
everything that they could lay their hands upon, especially nails--
which, it will be understood, were of very considerable value to us,
situated as we then were.  But their most serious peccadillo, and the
one which had the most disastrous results, was their theft of a brace of
revolvers and a number of cartridges.  We had no occasion to make use of
our firearms until the two savages had been with us about five months;
then on a certain day we made the disagreeable discovery that South-west
Bay had been invaded by a school of some seven or eight orcas, or killer
whales, the most voracious and ferocious creatures that swim the seas,
being even more terrible than the white shark, although not quite so big
as he is.  When we first became aware of the presence of these tigers of
the sea in our bay we were not greatly concerned, being under the
impression that theirs was only a flying visit, and that they would
disappear in the course of an hour or so, and be no more seen.  But when
on the following day they were seen to be still present, and when,
further, they chose to amuse themselves by snatching the fish off the
hooks, we came to the conclusion that it was time to declare war upon
those orcas, for so long as they remained in the bay we might not dare
to bathe.

Accordingly we armed ourselves with revolvers, put a boarding pike and
cutlass into the hand of each of the savages, and went out in the
catamaran to attack and drive away the orcas.  And a very fierce and
desperate battle we had with them too, for they proved to be full of
fight, charging the catamaran with the evident intention of destroying
it; and during the two hours that the fight raged we experienced several
exceedingly narrow escapes from destruction by the wounded cetaceans,
though we drove them off at last, after killing all but two, while the
survivors were so desperately wounded that they no doubt died very
shortly after reaching the open ocean.

The most important point, however, in connection with this incident was
that the two savages then saw revolvers used for the first time; and the
flash, the report, and, above all, the undoubted fact that in some
mysterious fashion they were able to wound and even to kill at the
distance of a spear-cast, absolutely fascinated them.  Nothing would
satisfy them but that they must possess a revolver apiece, and the very
next day they stole a brace, together with some fifty cartridges; and
having watched us intently, and thus acquired a smattering of knowledge
of how to use the weapons, took to the woods, where, later on, we heard
them popping away in the most reckless fashion.  That, of course, was an
offence which it would never do to overlook; therefore we sallied forth,
captured the culprits, took the revolvers and the half-dozen or so
remaining cartridges from them, and having first read them a severe
lecture--one of many such--upon the heinousness of stealing, endeavoured
to create a lasting impression upon their minds by inflicting upon each
a severe rope's-ending.  Four days later we found that they and their
canoe, together with several small articles--Cunningham's burning-glass
among the number--had vanished.

Now this was likely enough to prove a very serious matter for us, for
several important reasons.  In the first place, Mokalua and Vati had
proved to be individuals possessed of quite a considerable amount of
intelligence, for savages.  They had spent five months with us, during
which they had come to know the island intimately; and doubtless they
had perceived, among other things, that it was capable of supporting
some five hundred fellow savages in what, to them, would be a condition
of ease and affluence.  Also, they knew that there were but five of us,
possessing several things which to them represented such incalculable
wealth that no effort on their part to acquire it would be regarded as
too great.  Therefore we at once jumped to the conclusion that, animated
by a deep sense of resentment at the indignity which we had inflicted
upon them by flogging them, and possibly also spurred on by an
overpowering cupidity, they had determined to risk their very lives in
an attempt to return to their own island, there to report all that they
had seen and learned during their sojourn with us, with the object of
stirring up their fellow islanders to organise an expedition against us.

Strongly impressed with the conviction that this was really what had
happened, Simpson, the sailmaker, and I hastened to stock the catamaran
with provisions and water enough to last us for four days, and forthwith
proceeded to sea, heading in the direction of the island which lay to
leeward of us, in the hope of overtaking the two savages before they
could arrive at their destination, and inducing them, either by
persuasion or by force, to return with us.  And we were fully justified
in hoping that we should be successful, for the catamaran was a
wonderfully speedy craft, especially before the wind; we calculated that
the savages would scarcely average more than four knots per hour
paddling in the open sea, even with the wind in their favour, while the
catamaran would do ten easily.  Consequently we should cover in ten
hours a distance which they would need twenty-five hours to traverse;
and, since they would probably not have more than nine hours' start of
us, we ought to catch them long before they could arrive at their
island.

It was about eight o'clock in the morning when we started, and the
moment that we were clear of the reef I bore up dead before the wind;
and thereafter all that was necessary was to keep the catamaran running
straight before it.  We took it for granted that the fugitives, like
ourselves, would avail themselves of the direction of the wind as a
guide, consequently we assumed that they were somewhere--probably about
thirty-six miles--directly ahead of us when we bore away, and a very
simple calculation enabled us to determine that, if all our data
happened to be correct, we ought to overtake the canoe about two o'clock
in the afternoon.  Therefore for the first four hours of our pursuit we
troubled ourselves only to maintain as straight a course as possible.
At the end of that time, however, or about midday--by which time our own
island was out of sight astern, while the other had not yet hove up
above the horizon--I deemed it advisable to take a look round.
Accordingly, turning over the steering paddle to Simpson, I shinned up
to the catamaran's masthead, and remained there for fully five minutes,
intently scrutinising the surface of the sea in every direction, my
range of vision at that elevation covering a circle of about nine miles
radius.  But there was nothing in sight, at which I was in nowise
surprised, as I estimated that the canoe was still about twelve miles
ahead of us.  I calculated, however, that we were gaining upon her at
the rate of about six miles an hour, in which case she ought to be on
the horizon's verge in the course of another half-hour; therefore at the
expiration of that time I again went aloft, and was just a trifle
disappointed to find the horizon still bare.  However, I was quite
certain that a run of another half-hour would suffice to bring her into
view, therefore at one o'clock I again ascended to the masthead, quite
prepared to see her directly ahead.  But again I was disappointed, for
the horizon was bare in every direction, save for the fact that, as
straight ahead of us as though we had seen and been steering for it all
the while, there was a delicate blue shape, which I instantly recognised
as the upper part of the island that we had seen from the lip of the
crater on our own island.

I was decidedly nonplussed at the fact that the fugitives were still
invisible, and knew not how to account for it.  True, the sea was a
trifle heavy for navigation in so frail a craft as a small canoe, yet
the two savages were experts in the handling of such craft, and it was
therefore scarcely likely that they had met with a mishap of any
description--indeed, all that was needed to ensure their perfect safety
was to keep the canoe dead before the sea, and she would go along
without shipping a drop of water; even I, comparatively inexpert as I
was, would not have hesitated to undertake such a voyage, under the
influence of so powerful an inducement as that which we suspected to
animate the two natives.  There was one other possible explanation, of
which I thought as I stood up there on the swaying yard, and that was
that the fugitives might have secured a piece of canvas, or material of
some kind, out of which they had manufactured a sail; in which case
their speed would no doubt be considerably higher than that which we had
estimated, and all our calculations would need revision.  Considerably
perturbed at the thought, I descended to the deck and mentioned the
matter to Simpson, who agreed with me that it was quite possible our
dark friends might have taken the precaution to provide themselves with
a sail when they had made up their minds to return to their own island--
for we had not allowed ourselves time before our departure to overhaul
our belongings in detail, and ascertain the precise extent of their
depredations.

Even if they had not stolen any of our canvas, they were past masters of
the art of mat making, and might easily have plaited for themselves a
sail of fine grass, which would answer their purpose almost as well as
one made of canvas.  And if they had done that, what would their speed
probably be?  The canoe was only a small craft of about twenty-four feet
long by about four feet beam, and with two men in her she would probably
run before wind and sea at a speed of about six and a half knots.  Then,
still allowing her to have had nine hours' start of us, we came to the
disconcerting conclusion that at the precise moment when we were
discussing the question she must be within ten miles of her destination,
while we still had a run of some fifty miles before us.  In that case,
of course, it was hopeless for us to dream of overtaking her:
nevertheless I did not intend to abandon the chase until I had fully
satisfied myself that the fugitives had made good their escape;
therefore we continued to stand on, hour after hour, until, by the time
that the sun was within half an hour of his setting, we had brought the
strange island "hull-up" on the horizon ahead, and had satisfied
ourselves that there was no canoe between it and us.

It was a considerably more extensive island than our own, being about
twenty miles long from north to south, somewhat rugged of surface, with
plenty of trees dotted about here and there, and wide patches of cleared
ground in between, upon which crops of various kinds seemed to be
growing.  It rose rather steeply from the water's surface to a height of
some fifty or sixty feet, and then went sweeping grandly away to right
and left in a constantly steepening slope, which culminated in a lofty,
isolated peak occupying practically the centre of the island.

When we had run in close enough to note all these details I brought the
wind over the catamaran's port quarter and headed her so as to pass to
the southward of the island, being determined, now that I had come so
far, to sail right round it and see as much as I could of it.

The sun was just dipping beneath the horizon when, having brought the
most southerly extremity of the island square upon our starboard beam,
some two miles distant, we shifted our helm, and, jibing over, brought
the wind on our starboard quarter, hauling up to the northward and
westward to skirt the lee side of the island.  This course soon brought
us in under the lee of the land and into smooth water, when, maintaining
an offing of about two miles, that we might not be becalmed and so
invite the risk of capture by a dash of canoes from the shore, we
quietly coasted along the lee side of the island, which we now
discovered to be roughly crescent-shaped in plan, with a deep
indentation on the west side protected by a barrier reef, and thus
forming a magnificent natural harbour, some eight miles long from north
to south by about six miles wide from east to west.  A fine sandy beach
skirted the whole margin of this indentation, scattered along which, at
brief intervals, we caught sight of some ten or twelve little villages
of palm-leaf huts nestling in the midst of luxuriant coconut groves, the
land behind them soaring steeply away to the summit of the cone.  And
abreast of each village the beach was dotted with canoes, some of which
were big enough to carry forty or fifty men.  But nowhere did we see a
sign of the canoe of which we were in pursuit; and ultimately we were
driven to the conclusion that she had made the run across under sail,
and had secured a sufficiently long start to enable her to make good her
escape.

It was about four bells in the first watch when we ran out from under
the lee of the island and once more felt the full strength of the Trade
wind, which in the interim had freshened up until it was now blowing a
single-reefed topsail breeze; and at once the catamaran began to deluge
us with spray as we brought her close to the wind and started on our
long beat back to our own island.  And now it became necessary for me to
use a little discretion, lest I should miss the island altogether; for
it was far below the horizon, and I had neither chronometer nor sextant
to help me to find it again, all I knew as to its position being that it
lay about a hundred miles dead to windward.  Therefore I held on upon
the starboard tack until midnight, and thereafter tacked every four
hours, knowing that by following this plan we should be certain to pick
it up sooner or later.  And so we did, catching our first glimpse of it
shortly after nine o'clock the next morning, when it hove into view
above the horizon broad on our port bow, rising a little higher as we
brought it abeam, and then gradually sinking again as it swung aft to
our port quarter.  As soon as it sank out of sight we hove the catamaran
about, when it quickly reappeared, rising steadily above the horizon,
and this time showing much higher and more clearly before it began to
sink again.  Finally, about six o'clock, just before sunset, we slid
into North Bay once more and beached the catamaran, much to the relief
of our companions, who were beginning to grow somewhat anxious as to how
our queer-shaped craft would stand the continuous strain of beating to
windward for many hours at a stretch against the strong wind and heavy
sea.

Now that the pursuit was over and had failed, and we were all together
again, we began to realise, as we discussed the incident, just what the
flight of those two natives meant to us.  It meant several things: and
each one of them spelt d-a-n-g-e-r to us in big black letters; danger of
the most imminent and deadly kind; danger which was liable now to swoop
down upon us at any moment, and, if it caught us unprepared, simply to
wipe us out of existence.  In a word, it meant that if those two
fugitives had succeeded in reaching their own island--as we had only too
much reason to believe was the case--we were liable at any moment to an
invasion in force from their fellow islanders; and if we could not repel
that invasion, or, better still, effect our own escape before it
happened, we could hope for nothing short of annihilation.  Long and
anxiously we discussed the question that night; and the decision at
which we finally arrived was that if Mokalua and Vati had indeed reached
their own island it would probably take them at least a week to gain the
ear of the chiefs, tell the story of their own sojourn with us, and stir
them up to such a condition of cupidity as would induce them to
undertake an expedition against us.  And when they had accomplished so
much it would probably take them another week to organise the expedition
and get across to us, possibly even longer, if the Trade wind continued
to blow strongly.  We considered, therefore, that we had about a
fortnight in which to complete our preparations; and the question then
arose whether these preparations should be of a defensive character, or
whether, by working hard, we could complete the schooner, ballast her,
get her into the water, and leave the island before the expected
invasion took place.

Common sense pointed to the latter alternative as by far the wiser of
the two; the only difficulty was that we were by no means sure that we
could accomplish it.  Fortunately for us, although we had put the most
implicit faith in the fidelity of Mokalua and Vati, we had never allowed
them to become aware of the existence of the subterranean passage from
our dwelling cave to South-west Bay: therefore, if the worst should come
to the worst, and we were attacked before we were ready to leave the
island, we might no doubt barricade ourselves into our cavern and make a
good stand there, and perhaps even defend the schooner from destruction,
so long as our cartridges held out; but if the invaders should once
succeed in effecting a landing upon the island, they could, almost to a
dead certainty, prevent us from completing our preparations, launching
the schooner, and getting away in her.  Finally, the matter seemed to
resolve itself into a fight against time, our aim being to complete the
schooner and sail in her for home before the savages should arrive upon
the scene.  In accordance with this arrangement, then, we proceeded with
our several labours, commencing work each day the moment that there was
light enough to see what we were about, and working steadily on until we
could see no longer, encouraged by the thought that although our
calculations seemed to indicate the possibility of attack within about a
fortnight of the flight of the two natives, the force of circumstances
might perhaps afford us a still longer time in which to complete our
task.

And with the passage of the days we began to realise that, work as hard
as we might, we should need nearly double the time which we believed we
had at our disposal if we were to finish our work as it ought to be
finished.  For while the schooner's hull was complete her deck was only
partially laid, and that task had to be completed, together with all
deck fittings, such as the companion way and fore scuttle; the seams
must be properly caulked and paid, the masts stepped and rigged, the
sails finished and bent, the interior fittings, such as bunks, lockers,
shelves, and so on, fixed, the water casks stowed and filled, the
ballast stowed, provisions collected and put on board, and the little
craft generally completed in readiness for sea.  True, many of the jobs
were trivial and did not need much time to attend to them, but in the
aggregate they presented quite a formidable appearance; and lastly, and
most formidable of all, there remained the launching ways to finish, the
cradle to build, and the wedging up to be done.  Taken altogether, the
task seemed to be an impossible one, and our only hope lay in the chance
that our savage neighbours would so far resemble Mokalua and Vati in
character that they would proceed with their preparations for the
invasion which we regarded as inevitable with the same placid
deliberation and absence of haste that had been such strongly marked
characteristics of the two fugitives.

Yet it would not do to count upon this; therefore as soon as we fully
realised the impossibility of completing the schooner and getting away
in her within the fortnight, we so far modified our plans as to devote a
certain amount of time to the putting of our cavern into a condition of
defence.  Fortunately for us, this was a very simple matter; for the
savages knew of only one entrance to the cavern, namely, that in North
Bay, and that was so exceedingly small that it might easily be blocked
from the inside with a few large stones.  And, as luck would have it,
stones admirably adapted for the purpose existed in the cavern itself,
and only needed moving forward close to the entrance, after which--as we
tested by experiments--five minutes' work would suffice to block the
opening so effectually that nothing less than a powder charge would ever
clear it.  Accordingly we divided our weapons and ammunition into two
equal parts, one of which parts we put aboard the schooner, while the
other we deposited in the mouth of our cavern.  Then, having secured
ourselves as far as was possible against attack, we returned to our work
upon the schooner with redoubled energy.

Dawn of the twenty-third day after the flight of Mokalua and Vati found
us in high feather; for the strenuous labour of the preceding three
weeks had brought us to the point that a few hours' further work would
see the completion of our task, the further work required being that
needed to finish the cradle and wedge up, preparatory to launching.  We
had been working systematically, attending first to those matters which
were most urgent, with the result that the schooner was now finished and
ready for sea, with ballast--consisting entirely of as much gold in
nuggets as Cunningham's calculations showed she could possibly carry--
properly stowed, the water casks stowed and filled, provisions on board,
masts stepped and rigged, sails bent--in short, everything completed
except the fitting and equipment of the cabin, and that, we decided,
could be done as easily after our little ship had been launched as while
she remained on the stocks.  On this particular morning, then, we were,
as I have said, all in high feather, for we awoke with the comfortable
assurance that, barring accidents, the schooner would be safely afloat
before we again lay down to rest.

Now, although we had been working so strenuously during the past three
weeks, we had not omitted to take proper precautions against a surprise
on the part of the natives, the most important of these precautions
consisting in the visit of one of us to the summit of the crater the
first thing every morning, from which commanding elevation the sea to
the south-west was carefully scanned, with the aid of Cunningham's
telescope, in search of the expected flotilla of canoes.  The same
precaution was observed the last thing before nightfall; and we decided
that, should the sea prove to be clear on these occasions, there was not
much risk of our being surprised during either of the intervals between.

On the particular morning before referred to it chanced to be my turn to
make the journey up the mountain; therefore, taking the telescope in its
case from the rock projection in the cavern which was its recognised
resting-place, and bidding my companions au revoir, I started out on my
three-and-a-half mile walk to the summit, while the others hurried down
to the beach, and, getting aboard the catamaran, made sail for
South-west Bay, where our shipyard was situated.

Now the whole distance from our cavern to the summit of the crater was
uphill, and the day, in addition to being brilliantly fine, was
excessively hot, for the Trade wind had softened down on the preceding
day, and was now blowing only a very moderate breeze; therefore I did
not greatly hurry myself, for my way lay, practically for the whole
distance to the foot of the crater, through jungle, where, although I
was sheltered to a great extent from the rays of the sun, I was also
shielded from the wind, and before I had travelled a mile I was
perspiring profusely.  But, hot as it was while walking through the
jungle, it was hotter still when at length I emerged from its shelter
upon the bare hillside; and I had no sooner climbed above the level of
the vegetation, and was able to look over the top of it, than I flung
myself down upon a big block of lava, took off my hat, and proceeded to
wipe away the perspiration which was by this time streaming down my
forehead into my eyes and half-blinding me.  And it was while I was thus
engaged that I happened to allow my gaze to wander away out over the
surface of the water in a south-westerly direction; and then I saw a
sight which caused me to spring to my feet with a smothered exclamation.
For, far out upon the sun-flecked blue of the gently ruffled ocean, I
caught a glimpse of first one and then another and another small dark
dot, each of which emitted frequent sparkling flashes which I instantly
identified as the sunlight striking upon the wet blades of swiftly
wielded paddles.  With anxious haste I gripped the telescope case, swung
it round, withdrew the telescope, raised it to my eyes, and focused it;
and there, magnified into unmistakable distinctness by the powerful
lenses, I saw no less than ten canoes paddling straight for our island,
and only some eight miles distant from West Point, as we had named the
headland which projected into the ocean between North and South-west
Bays.  They were head-on to me, therefore I could not very well judge
what size they might be; but I knew that they must be fairly big craft,
each carrying a considerable number of men, judging by the multitudinous
number of flashes that sparkled from their paddles as they swung
rhythmically into and out of the water: and they were all keeping line
too, for the whole ten swung up into view together on the crest of a
sea, and then disappeared again in the trough, with almost mathematical
regularity and precision.  Without a doubt the anticipated invasion of
our island by the savages was about to take place; and, equally without
a doubt too, the invaders must gain a footing upon our territory before
we were prepared to quit it, unless a plan could be devised whereby
their advance might be delayed for some two or three hours.  As these
thoughts flashed through my mind I anxiously scanned the surface of the
ocean for other canoes, but could find only the ten which I had
originally counted.  Then, without wasting time in ascending to the
summit of the crater, I set off at a run and raced at my utmost speed
all the way back to our cavern.

It was downhill all the way, and despite the intense heat I do not think
I was more than twenty minutes in covering the distance.  Once inside
the cavern I provided myself with a sufficient number of torches for my
purpose, lighted half a dozen of them to enable me to see what I was
about, and then proceeded to block the entrance securely from the inside
with the stones which we had already provided for that express purpose.
This done, I opened the case of ammunition which we kept stored in the
cavern, loaded a gun and a brace of revolvers, thrust the latter in my
belt, crammed my pockets and the bosom of my shirt with cartridges, and,
seizing a torch, hurried away through the tunnel to the shipyard in
South-west Bay, where I found my companions strenuously at work upon the
completion of the cradle, blissfully ignorant of the fact that the
savages were at that moment within half a dozen miles of us.

They glanced at me with a somewhat startled expression as I dashed down
the beach toward them with the gun in my hand and the revolvers in my
belt, and my face streaming with perspiration; and Cunningham shouted:

"Hillo, old chap, you're hot, and look as though you had been hurrying.
What's up?  You surely don't mean to say that--"

"The savages are coming?"  I interrupted.  "That's just what I do mean
to say, then.  They are within half a dozen miles of us at this moment--
ten big canoe-loads of them, and they'll be ashore here and about our
ears in two hours from now, unless we can devise some means of
preventing them.  How are you getting on, Chips?  How long will it be
before you are ready to wedge up?"

"Not for three or four hours yet, I'm afraid," answered the carpenter,
pausing in his work to consider the matter.  "You see, we've a good deal
to do yet afore we can finish this here cradle, and the wood, bein'
nothin' but odds and ends like, is comin' a bit awk'ard--"

"Just so, I quite understand," I cut in upon his explanation.  "Well,
carry on, man; don't stop an instant; we can't afford to waste so much
as a single second just now.  Do the best you can with the resources at
your command, and work as you never worked before.  As for me, I'm going
to take out the catamaran to meet those beggars, and see if I can't
hamper them a bit and prevent them from landing here in this bay.  I've
blocked the cavern entrance at the other end, so it won't matter much
where they land so long as they don't come ashore here.  That must be
prevented at all costs.  I shall want one hand with me to sail the
catamaran while I do the fighting.  Now, who can best be spared?"

"Why, I think I am the most useless member of the party--" began
Cunningham.

"No," I interrupted him emphatically; "your engineering knowledge should
come in very usefully in helping Chips to use up those odds and ends of
timber to the best advantage in completing the cradle.  You are the man
for me, Simpson, so jump now.  Get aboard the schooner, open a box of
ammunition, and bring me as many cartridges as you can carry, also
another gun, in case anything goes wrong with this one.  Then join me
aboard the catamaran.  And now, so long, you chaps; I'm off.  Do your
level best to finish off and wedge up as soon as possible; and I'll do
what I can to hinder the savages and keep them from landing here.
Goodbye!" and, so saying, I turned and ran toward the spot where the
catamaran lay with her bows hauled up on the beach.



CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

WE ESCAPE BY THE SKIN OF OUR TEETH.

In a few minutes Sails joined me, with the extra gun and a biscuit tin
full of cartridges; and between us we got the catamaran afloat, swung
her round with her bows pointing seaward, and both jumped aboard.  Then,
while I seized the steering paddle, Simpson sprang to the main halyards
and hoisted the big lateen sail, which at once filled, when we gathered
headway and began to draw away from the shore, heading about south-west
out of the bay; and as soon as the sail was fully set and the halyards
belayed, Sails came aft and took the helm, while I gave the spare gun an
overhaul before loading it.

As we drew out from under the lee of the island and began to feel the
true breeze it became apparent that it was fast freshening up again, for
we could see the heads of the seas bursting into little patches of white
froth here and there, at which I was profoundly grateful; for I felt
that a fresh breeze, dead in their teeth, was likely to hamper the
progress of the savages quite as much as I could hope to do, and every
minute of delay now was worth a gold mine to us.  And that the advance
of the savages was indeed being retarded by the rapidly freshening
breeze soon became apparent, for we were fully three miles offshore when
we at length made out the canoes, about two miles to leeward of us,
heading straight in for the island.

Running rapidly down toward them, we soon neared them sufficiently to
enable us to see that they were big, lumping craft, about sixty feet
long by six or seven feet beam, each canoe being manned by about fifty
savages, every mother's son of whom was wielding a short, broad-bladed
paddle as though his life depended upon it.  Yet the canoes were not
making very much headway, for they were unwieldy--looking craft, with
long, high-peaked, overhanging bows, and sterns which seemed to catch
and hold a good deal of wind, making the paddling of them to windward,
especially against a heavy head sea, exceedingly hard work.

To do anything really effective with these craft, and especially to make
good shooting in the heavy sea that was running, it was necessary to get
to close quarters with them; I therefore directed Simpson to haul up two
or three points to the northward, my intention being to pass the
flotilla on their port beam, come to the wind as soon as we had passed
them, cross their sterns, raking them as we passed, and then follow
them, maintaining a steady fire all the way, and crowding them up to the
northward as much as possible, so that they might not land in South-west
Bay.

Our approach was greeted with yells of defiance from the crowded canoes,
many of the occupants of which dropped their paddles, sprang to their
feet, and hurled their long spears at us as we swept past them at a
distance of some two hundred yards from the nearest canoe.  They were
experts in the hurling of spears, those savages; but it was no part of
my plan to run the risk of getting either Simpson or myself hurt--two of
us against some five hundred left no room for quixotic displays of
daring; and we were careful to keep beyond the range of their spears,
every one of which dropped harmlessly into the water at varying
distances from us, the nearest of them all falling short by about thirty
or forty fathoms.  But if I was anxious that neither of us should be
hurt, I was also anxious to avoid hurting the savages, as far as might
be, my object being not so much to destroy them as to prevent them from
landing on our island, if possible; and I thought that this might
perhaps be done, and the savages compelled to retreat, by drilling their
canoes so full of bullet holes that at least some of them would sink,
when the remainder would become so crowded that it would be found
impossible to continue paddling to windward--for I took it for granted
that if one or two of their canoes sank, their crews would be picked up
by the rest.  Of course there was the risk that, in endeavouring to sink
their canoes, I might wound or even kill a few savages; but that was
their lookout, not mine.

Therefore, when our antagonists opened the ball by casting spears at us,
I retaliated by seizing my gun and aiming at the water line of the
nearest canoe, expecting the bullet to pass right through her, leaving
two holes which would admit quite a quantity of water, unless the
savages happened to possess the means to plug them.  My shot went true,
for as the smoke blew away I saw a small white puncture show in the
bottom of the canoe for an instant before it was hidden by the roll of
the craft.  A loud yell of astonishment greeted my first essay, showing
that these particular savages had never before had experience of
firearms; but the yell was not wholly the result of astonishment either,
for I saw a native clap his hand to his leg, and shrewdly guessed that
the bullet had punctured him as well as the canoe.  I had time to drop
the discharged gun, seize the loaded one, and fire a second shot before
we were fairly past that particular craft; but that second shot was less
successful than the first, for it missed the canoe.  However, it caught
a native, who sprang convulsively to his feet, his hands clutching his
head, as, wheeling half-round, he staggered backward and tumbled head
over heels into the sea.  I naturally expected that his friends would
stop and endeavour to pick him up, but not a bit of it; they merely
uttered another yell, apparently of encouragement to each other, and
drove their paddles into the water with increased energy.

Both guns being now empty, I signed Simpson to come to the wind and luff
athwart the sterns of the flotilla, while I busied myself upon the
recharging of the pieces.  By the time that this was done we were on the
starboard quarter of the most southerly of the canoes, and I immediately
proceeded to test my skill upon her.  Making short tacks across her
stern, I fired half a dozen bullets into her, every one of which hit,
five out of the six wounding and disabling one or more of her occupants
as well as drilling a hole in the canoe herself, with the result that
she began to drop astern of the others, the crews of which were exerting
themselves to their very utmost, having apparently come to the
conclusion that the sooner they could reach the island the better it
would be for them.  Wherefore I attacked the next canoe in like manner:
but now I was less careful than before in the matter of hurting her
occupants, for it began to dawn upon me that these savages had no notion
of standing by to help a disabled consort, and that, do what I would, I
could not possibly prevent some of them at least from effecting a
landing; therefore my business must be to see that as few of them as
possible should set foot on the island.  Incidentally, I found that by
persistently attacking the southernmost canoe I was slowly but surely
effecting one part of my purpose, by causing the whole flotilla to edge
slowly away to the northward, thus diverting them from any purpose that
they might have had of landing in South-west Bay.

Then another plan suggested itself to me.  I saw that the savages were
either destitute of means to plug the bullet holes in their canoes or
had not wit enough to make use of them; but each canoe appeared to carry
several large calabash bowls, which were used as balers: my plan,
therefore, was to shoot promptly at any man whom I saw attempting to
bale a leaky canoe, with the result that the particular canoe which I
happened to be attacking gradually filled and ultimately swamped,
leaving her crew to cling helplessly to her as she floated full to her
gunwale, or to strike out for the island, now some three miles distant.
And since the fellows swam like seals there was no doubt that they would
ultimately reach it--unless a shark happened to encounter them on the
way; but I did not allow the probability of their ultimate arrival on
the island to worry me much, for I felt tolerably certain that, before
that could happen, we should have made good our escape, if indeed we
were going to escape at all.

Our effective antagonists were now reduced to eight canoes and their
crews, who were all hanging together as much as possible for mutual
protection, but were making poor headway against the steadily increasing
wind and sea.  If I could hinder them still further, so much the better;
and the most obvious way to do that was to weaken their crews by
wounding as many as possible: therefore I now resumed my original
tactics of tacking to and fro athwart their sterns, and raking them as
we passed.  And this, I soon found, was a very excellent plan, for it
not infrequently happened that by this mode of attack I was able to make
one bullet do double, and in some cases even treble duty; the result
being that by the time that we all drew up abreast of the island the
entire fleet was in such difficulties that they were scarcely able to
make any headway at all, two of the canoes indeed being so seriously
crippled that at last, notwithstanding their close proximity to the
island, they were actually compelled to bear up and run away to leeward
again, while another of them was swamped, leaving five out of the
original ten still to contend with.

And now my trouble began in earnest, for so desperate were the savages
rendered by the merciless persecution to which they had compelled me, in
self-defence, to subject them, that they made the most strenuous efforts
to get into South-west Bay; and, indeed, it was not until I bore up and
took the extreme risk of running down one canoe that I was finally able
to turn them from their purpose.  But ultimately, after a running
fight--if so one-sided an affair could be so called--four of them
contrived to weather North-west Cape and effect a landing in North Bay.
Then, after chasing them right into the bay, and keeping up a brisk fire
upon them until they landed, to the number of about one hundred and
twenty, and vanished into the woods, we in the catamaran bore up, headed
out to sea again, and made the best of our way back to South-west Bay
and the shipyard, hoping that upon our arrival we should find the
schooner afloat; for we had been gone fully four hours.

But to my intense disappointment, when we entered the bay there was the
schooner still high and dry upon the stocks, with Chips, the boatswain,
and Cunningham all busily engaged in turning over the small pile of
lumber that still remained from the dismembered wreck of the _Martha_.
Presently one of them looked up, saw us coming, and apparently reported
the fact to the others, for Cunningham at once straightened himself up
and came down to the water's edge to meet us.

"Well, Temple," he exclaimed, as the catamaran grounded and I stepped
ashore, "how have things gone with you?  Have you managed to beat off
our friends the enemy?"

"I have not," I answered, just a trifle sourly, I am afraid.  "A hundred
or more of them have landed round there in North Bay; and we may
confidently expect a visit from them within the next half-hour.  But
what the mischief have you fellows been up to all this time?  I fully
expected to find the schooner afloat, under way, and only awaiting our
return to be off!  What have you been doing?  Playing poker, or what?"

"Now, my dear chap, don't you go and turn rusty as well as the rest of
us, or there's no knowing what may happen; for, let me tell you, we're
all just as savage as bears with sore heads," remonstrated Cunningham.
"No," he continued, "we've not been playing poker, or hunt the slipper,
or even kiss in the ring; to put it plainly, we've been trying to do the
impossible.  The long and the short of it is, Temple, that we have used
up our last scrap of available timber, and there still remains a good
half-hour's work to be done on the cradle before we dare start to wedge
up.  We have been nailing and plugging bits together, and working them
in to the best of our ability, until our last nail is expended; and now
we seem to be at a standstill.  I'll be shot if I know how we're going
to get over the difficulty."

"What! do you mean to tell me that after getting as far as that we are
brought to a standstill for the sake of a few pieces of timber?"  I
demanded.  "How much do you require?"

"Oh, very little," was the answer.  "A few feet--ten or fifteen feet of
three-inch stuff would serve--but the mischief of it is that we haven't
got it.  Even the remains of the wreck will not yield us another inch."

"Then," said I, "all that remains is to break into the catamaran, and
take out of her as much as is required.  She has served her turn; we
shall not require her any more if we can get the schooner into the
water; and--"

"Kick me; kick me hard!" shouted Cunningham in an ecstasy of delight, as
he smote me a blow between the shoulders that made me stagger.  "The
catamaran!" he continued.  "Of course.  Oh, what a lot of fools we were
not to have thought of that before!  But," suddenly bethinking himself,
"if we had, it would have been of no use, for you had her.  She is
available now, however, and in ten minutes we'll rip enough stuff out of
her to finish our job.  I know exactly where to find the kind of stuff
we want.  Chips ahoy! bring your tools down to the catamaran, my son;
we're going to break her up!"

The carpenter flung his hand aloft in joyous intimation that he
understood, and at once made a dash for his tools, while Simpson and I
wended our way to the schooner, to see how things looked in that
direction, and also to forage for a morsel of food, for we had eaten
nothing since breakfast, and were feeling pretty hungry.

A single glance at the cradle, which, when wedged up, would lift the
schooner off the keel blocks and throw her weight upon the launching
ways, sufficed to reveal the pitiful straits to which Chips had latterly
been reduced; for worked into it there were scraps of wood less than a
foot in length, fastened to other pieces of similar size with nails or
plugs, and presenting a most flimsy and unsatisfactory appearance.  But
when I came to look more closely I saw that the only unsatisfactory part
of the work was its appearance; it was not nearly so flimsy as at first
sight it had appeared to be.  Chips had evidently fully realised his
responsibility, and had taken care that, let the material be what it
might, there should be nothing faulty about his workmanship.  And I saw
also that, given the necessary amount of material, he would be able to
finish his work in a very short time.

The boatswain routed out some food for us, and while Simpson and I sat
down to eat and drink, Murdock, upon my instructions, went down to the
catamaran--which the carpenter and Cunningham had already attacked--and
brought away from her the two guns and the ammunition that remained from
our engagement with the savages.  And when he had performed this errand
I bade him get aboard the schooner, rout out a few extra guns and a
further supply of ammunition, load the weapons, and then station himself
in the bows as a lookout, with special instructions to keep a wary eye
upon the neighbouring cliffs and report the very first indication of the
approach of an enemy.

The boatswain had scarcely been on the lookout a matter of twenty
minutes when he hailed me.

"Mr Temple," he shouted, "I wish you'd come up here, sir, for a minute,
and bring that there glass of Mr Cunnin'ham's along with ye.  There's
some'at up there on top o' them cliffs that I can't rightly make out,
and I'd like you to come and have a look at it."

Accordingly up I went, with Cunningham's telescope still slung over my
shoulders, and joined Murdock where he stood right in the eyes of the
schooner, peering intently at a particular spot on the top of the
cliffs.

"Now then," said I, withdrawing the telescope from its case, "where is
this mysterious something that you can't make out?"

"Ye see that there big tree with the thick, knobbly-lookin' trunk, up
there, sir?" he demanded, pointing.  "Well, just to the nor'ard of it
there's a bush with a lot of white flowers upon it.  See that?"

I replied that I did.

"Very well," continued my companion.  "Two or three times I've seemed to
see somethin' movin' among them there white flowers, but I can't be
quite--"

"Yes, you are right, I see it; there is something--somebody--there," I
interrupted, having brought the glass to bear upon the spot while
Murdock was speaking.  "Ah! now I have lost it again," I continued, "but
I am certain I saw a dark face peering through the branches.  Here! let
me have your gun.  If there is really anybody there we'll give him a
scare, if nothing worse."

So saying, I took the loaded gun, and, keeping my eyes firmly fixed on
the spot, stretched myself prone on the deck, with the barrel of the
weapon resting upon the rail of the schooner's very low bulwark.
Sighting the piece carefully, I brought it to bear immediately on the
spot where I thought I had seen the face, and then waited patiently for
its reappearance.  But minute after minute passed and nothing appeared;
and presently Cunningham and the carpenter came up the beach staggering
under a load of timber that promised to be amply sufficient for all our
needs.  I began to think that I must have been mistaken, and was about
to lay aside the gun and descend to the beach again, when the boatswain,
who had taken the glass from me and had been intently peering through
it, murmured:

"There 'tis again, Mr Temple--no, stop a minute, it's gone--no 'tain't!
Have ye got your piece bearin' dead upon that spot, sir?"

I answered that I had.

"Then stand by, and when I gives the word just you press the trigger,
sir, please.  Wait a bit; I don't--Ah! there he is--fire!"

On the instant I pressed the trigger, and as the smoke cleared away I
thought I saw a slight momentary disturbance of the foliage about the
spot at which I had aimed, and then all was still again.

"You got him, sir, as sure as eggs is young chickens!" exclaimed
Murdock, still peering through the glass.  "Or, if you didn't actooaly
get him," he amended, "you give him a scare that he won't forget in a
blue moon.  Shall I just slip up there, Mr Temple, and see if I can
find anything?"

"Certainly not," I replied severely.  "We cannot afford to take any
risks.  Besides, what does it matter?  No, you remain here, reload that
gun, keep the glass, maintain a bright lookout, and if you see any
savages attempting to sneak down upon the beach, shoot without
hesitation.  What I am chiefly afraid of is that they will muster up
there in force, and attempt to overwhelm us with a rush.  I am going
below to lend the others a hand."

I found Cunningham, Parsons, and Simpson all working at high pressure
under the bows; for they had of course heard the shot, and did not need
to be told that it indicated the presence of the enemy, though whether
in force or only in the form of a scout none of us could tell.  But the
fact that even one of the savages had already made his way across to our
side of the island was spur enough to our energies, and now we worked as
probably none of us had ever worked before, in an endeavour to complete
the cradle, wedge up, and launch the schooner before the enemy should
muster courage enough to charge home upon us.  If such a thing as that
last should happen--and it would only mean the loss of a few lives by
the savages--nothing could possibly save us.

I had been down on the beach about five minutes when a slight hissing
sound reached my ear, and the next moment a long, triple-barbed, and
exceedingly formidable-looking spear struck the sand and remained
quivering there within about ten feet of us, and at the same instant
Murdock shouted from above:

"Mr Temple--Mr Temple, sir, I wish you'd come up here and take my
place.  They're musterin' up there on top o' the cliff--I can see 'em
movin' about among the bushes--and I ain't ne'er a good enough shot for
the job you've told me off for.  If I shoots and misses once or twice
they'll rush us, as sure as you'm alive, sir; while if two or three of
'em was bowled over it might hold 'em back a bit and give us more time.
Come quick, sir, if you please; I believe they'm gettin' ready for a
rush!"

There was sound sense in what the boatswain said: he was not a good
enough shot, or quite cool enough in the handling of firearms, to stop a
rush, and I therefore determined to act on his suggestion.  Only
Cunningham was quite as good a shot as myself, if not better; therefore
I turned to him.

"Cunningham," said I, "you hear what Murdock says; and he is right.  But
you are the crack shot of the party, so please go up and relieve him at
once.  But before he comes down get him to bring up every gun from
below, and our entire stock of cartridges, and make him load every
weapon and place it handy for you.  Go at once, please; and remember you
must shoot to kill."

"But, my dear chap--" began Cunningham, and then I cut him short.

"Go at once, sir," I exclaimed sharply.  "This is no time for arguing;
and please remember that I command here."

"Right you are, old chap; I understand," he replied, and went without
further ado.  And, as he turned to leave, another spear came whizzing
through the air and stuck in the sand exactly where he had been standing
a second earlier.  Matters were beginning to look serious, for if the
savages had among them--as they certainly had--men capable of hurling a
spear from the top of the cliff as far as the schooner, one or the other
of us might be hurt or even killed at any moment.

A couple of minutes passed, and I heard the voices of Cunningham and
Murdock as they talked together overhead, showing that the engineer had
taken up his post.  Simpson and I were holding a piece of timber in
position, while Parsons secured it, when I suddenly saw a tall savage
step boldly out from among the bushes on top of the cliff, poising a
long spear in his hand.  He gave the weapon a preliminary jerk, as
though to test its balance, and then flung it high above his head in the
act of casting.  I was about to shout to Cunningham, calling his
attention to the fellow, when a gun cracked sharply out overhead, and
the savage spun round upon his heel, staggered backward, and fell
crashing in among the bushes.

"Good shot!"  I shouted.  "I say, Cunningham, keep Murdock up there with
you to reload; we can do very well without him down here."

"All right," came the answer; "I will, if you are sure that you don't
need him.  Ah, by Jove! there's another of them!"

Cunningham's shot took that fellow in the leg, for we saw him clap his
hand to his right one, just above the knee, and go limping away out of
sight.  Apparently the savages believed that the discharge of the weapon
left us temporarily harmless, for another man instantly sprang into view
and hurriedly poised his spear; but Cunningham was too quick for him,
for he, too, dropped and lay still.  Then they lay _perdu_ for a few
minutes, during which we, at work upon the cradle, put in some splendid
work.

Suddenly, with a final tap of his hammer, Chips sprang back and tossed
the tool in the air, cleverly catching it by the handle as it fell.
"Finished!" he yelled, on a note of exultation.  "Now, Mr Temple and
Simpson, get the mauls, and let's wedge up.  It'll have to be a rather
rough-and-ready job, I'm afraid; but once the weight of her is off the
blocks and on to the ways we needn't trouble much.  And now, if Mr
Cunnin'ham can spare the bo'sun, he'll be useful to us.  Come along,
Sails, you and I'll take the starboard side, while Mr Temple and
Murdock takes the port, and we'll see which gets finished first."

I hailed Cunningham, asking if he could spare Murdock, and he replied
that they were at that moment reloading the whole battery of guns, after
which he would send him down.  And presently Murdock came.

"Now then, boatswain," said I, "`wedge up' is the word, so take that
maul and strike with me.  Chips and his mate think they can beat us; but
we'll show them a thing or two.  Now then, strike!"

Forthwith the air began to resound with the blows of iron on wood, as,
with more or less dexterous strokes, we drove the wedges home, one pair
after another; and in about ten minutes we all met under the little
vessel's counter, our work completed.  But the savages evidently
suspected that matters were approaching a crisis; possibly the idea was
suggested to them by the carpenter's triumphant yell of "Finished!" upon
the completion of the cradle, for during that momentous ten minutes
several of them had made desperate efforts to transfix us with their
spears, and as they had now adopted the plan of making the attempt in
groups of half a dozen or more--to all of whom it was manifestly
impossible for Cunningham to attend at the same moment--we four at work
under the schooner's bottom had had two or three exceedingly narrow
escapes.

"Now, Mr Temple," exclaimed the carpenter excitedly, "I'll just take a
look fore and aft under her bottom, to make sure that she's clear
everywhere; and when I sing out `All clear!' will you and the rest
please jump aboard and stand by to cover me with your rifles and protect
me from a rush while I knock away the spur shores and launch the little
hooker?  And you might drop a few ropes' ends over the sides, and
especially over the bows, for me to swing aboard by as soon as she
starts to run down the ways.  And if them bronze-coloured skowbanks up
on the cliffs there tries to run in upon me with their spears while I'm
down under, give 'em toko; for if I'm hurted afore them spur shores is
knocked away, we may have a lot of trouble yet.  Ah! blest if I didn't
think so," as Cunningham's shots cracked out thrice, and two natives
tumbled headlong down the face of the cliff, while a third hurriedly
scrambled back to cover; "they're guessin' that if they don't look sharp
we'll get away from 'em a'ter all, so please keep a keen eye on 'em,
sir."

"Ay, ay, Chips, we will," answered I.  "Now, get along with your
inspection, man, as lively as you please, for I see signs of a movement
among them up there.  Simpson," to the sailmaker, "jump aboard and lend
Mr Cunningham a hand to reload those guns; and when you have done that,
drop a few ropes' ends over the sides for Chips to climb aboard by."

By the time I had finished speaking the carpenter had crept in under the
schooner's bottom and was hastily yet carefully assuring himself that
the vessel's keel had been everywhere lifted clear of the keel blocks.
Less than three minutes sufficed him to complete his examination, when
he shouted the signal "All clear!" and immediately began to pound upon
the heels of the spur shores with his maul, while Murdock and I made a
dash for the ladder which afforded access to the schooner's deck.  But
it was clear that the savages had by this time gained a tolerably
accurate conception of what we were about, and had begun to realise that
unless they acted at once we were likely to slip through their hands
after all; for no sooner did the boatswain and I jump for the ladder
than they set up a fierce yell, and about a hundred of them broke cover
and began to scramble down the cliff face, shouting encouragement to
each other as they swung or sprang from one projection to another,
tossing their spears and war clubs down to the beach beneath, in order
that they might have the use of both hands during their hurried descent.
I naturally expected that Cunningham would open fire upon them
forthwith; but he did not, for he was at the moment busily reloading the
discharged weapons--moreover, it appeared that he had a better plan.

At that moment the savages were moving so rapidly and so erratically as
they swung down the cliff face that accurate shooting would have been
exceedingly difficult; but the instant that the first native reached the
beach and paused for a second to seize a club and a handful of spears
from those which had been cast down from the summit of the cliff, the
engineer, lying prone on the deck, with his weapon resting on the low
rail of the schooner's bulwarks, covered him, and the next instant the
shot rang out and the man toppled over, mortally hit.  Then Cunningham
passed the empty weapon back to Simpson, receiving a loaded one in its
stead, and in like manner bowled over the second and third of the
savages who reached the beach.  But this could not last long, as I could
easily see upon reaching his side, for the savages were now swarming
down the cliff so rapidly and in such numbers that it was impossible to
load the guns quickly enough to cope with them.  As Murdock and I dashed
forward and joined the other two in the eyes of the schooner I saw that
about a dozen of the savages had reached the beach unhurt, and were at
that instant gathering themselves together to make a combined rush.

"Now, lads," said I, "this is where our revolvers are going to come in
useful.  Wait until they arrive within twenty yards of us, and then open
upon them with the `barkers'; but don't get excited and fire wild,
whatever you do--we must make every shot tell.  And--Hurrah, my
hearties, there go the spur shores!" as I heard them clatter down and
felt a sudden tremor thrill through the schooner.  "Now, look out, here
they come!  Watch for the men who pause to hurl their spears, and do
your best to bowl them over.  She's moving, lads, she's moving!  Hurrah!
Another minute and we shall be afloat.  Now, look out, and give 'em
beans!  Here they come!"

Yes; they were coming with a vengeance, not only the dozen who formed as
it were the vanguard of the rush, but some twenty or thirty more, who in
the course of a few seconds had flung themselves down from the rocks to
the soft, yielding sand below, while others were following down the
cliff face at breakneck speed.  They came running and leaping down the
beach in pursuit of the now fast-moving schooner, each man grasping a
single spear in his right hand and three or four more and a war club in
his left, the whole of them yelling like demons.  At that moment Chips
appeared under the bows, and the sight of him was greeted by the savages
with a howl of exultation, for they seemed to think that since he was
down on the sand they had him in their power.  But the carpenter knew
perfectly well what he was about, and as the stem of the gliding
schooner slid past him he made a spring at her wire bobstay, caught it
first with one hand, then with the other, pulled himself up and flung
his legs over it, and then rapidly hauled himself up it to the bowsprit
end, which he reached just as the schooner plunged into the water, swung
himself astride the spar, and so worked his way inboard.  But it was
touch and go with him, for the moment he showed himself about a dozen of
the leading natives pulled up short and prepared to hurl their spears at
him, and I am convinced that but for the hot revolver fire which we
instantly opened upon the daring savages, bowling three of them over and
so seriously disconcerting the aim of the others that they missed,
Master Chips would, even at the last moment, have lost the number of his
mess.  But with the plunge of the schooner into the water all danger was
over, for the little craft held her way in the most wonderful fashion,
making so long a stern board into the waters of the bay that she shot
far beyond the extreme range of the savages' spears before she finally
came to rest.

Meanwhile her canvas was all loose and ready for setting; therefore the
moment I felt her to be water borne I dashed aft to the tiller, at the
same time shouting to the others to man the foresail and fore staysail
halyards and hoist away: and by the time the foresail was hoisted the
vessel was beginning to lose sternway, whereupon I jammed her tiller
hard-over to port, and thus canted her with her head to the northward.
This caused her head sails to fill, whereupon she quickly gathered
headway, when, putting the helm hard up, I headed her out to sea, while
the others proceeded to set the jib and mainsail; and within ten minutes
of her first plunge into the water the little _Nautilus_--as we named
her--was clear of the reef and fairly in the open sea.

There were several trifling jobs that we would have preferred to finish
off before proceeding to sea, several articles that we would fain have
carried away from the island with us, had we been afforded the
opportunity; but the presence of the savages of course precluded this,
and therefore the moment that we were under way and clear of the western
extremity of the island we flattened in our sheets, fore and aft, and
proceeded to the northward, close-hauled on the starboard tack on our
way to Honolulu, which was to be our first port of call.

Naturally the first and most engrossing question claiming our attention
was that of the behaviour of our little ship, and we had not been under
way a quarter of an hour before we were all agreed that she far exceeded
our most sanguine expectations; she was a magnificent little sea boat,
riding the long Pacific surges as buoyantly as a gull, very stiff under
her canvas, and extraordinarily fast and weatherly.  The only thing that
caused us any concern was that we found she was leaking to a somewhat
alarming extent; but we were quite prepared for that, as she had been
standing so long on the hot beach that her planks had shrunk somewhat,
opening her seams.  She "took up" however during the course of the
night, after keeping us busy at the pump for the first three or four
hours of our voyage, and after that we had no further trouble with her.

The island was a mere faint blue smudge on the horizon astern when the
sun when down on the evening of that eventful day, and on the ninth
morning following we safely arrived at Honolulu.  Here, thanks to
Cunningham's hundred and forty sovereigns, which he had contrived to
hold on to through all our vicissitudes of fortune, we found ourselves
possessed of money enough to carry us round the Horn and as far as
Baltimore, where we had decided to call on our way home.

We remained in Honolulu four days, making arrangements for our long and
adventurous voyage round the southern extremity of the great American
continent, and then gaily started, disregarding the strenuous warnings
of the many friends made by us during our brief stay.  And adventures
enough and to spare we had, enough to fill another book of this size;
but that, as a certain writer has remarked, is another story.  It must
suffice me now to say that we reached Punta Arenas, in the Strait of
Magellan, fifty-three days after leaving Honolulu, stayed there two
days, and safely arrived in Baltimore harbour two months, to the day,
after leaving Punta Arenas.

We had a little difficulty in finding "Marthy", the relict of the late
lamented Captain Ephraim Brown, but we found her at last, introduced
ourselves, broke to her as gently as possible the news of her husband's
death, and then unfolded to her the story of the pearls.  What between
the news of her loss, and that of the enormous wealth coming to her
through her late husband's good fortune, the poor old soul was driven
nearly crazy for a time; but she was a woman of strong common sense and
a wonderfully practical turn of mind, and in the course of three or four
days she rallied her faculties sufficiently to decide that she would put
the whole of her affairs in the hands of a firm of lawyers of undoubted
integrity, which, we agreed with her, was about the wisest thing she
could do.  Accordingly we handed over the pearls to them, leaving them
to arrange the complicated question of duty, etcetera, and left
Baltimore for England after a stay of just a fortnight.  During our
sojourn in Baltimore a heavy easterly gale had swept the Atlantic for a
full week; then came a spell of fine weather and moderate westerly
winds, which carried us clean across the "Pond" in twenty-two days, our
arrival at Southampton, "all well", occurring on 27 August, 1864.

Of course I was now a rich man, and did not need to trouble myself about
completing my indentures, or obtaining another berth; but I nevertheless
made a point of reporting myself at the offices in London of the owners
of the _Zenobia_, where I was very cordially received.  And here I had
the satisfaction of learning, first, that the _Zenobia's_ longboat had
been picked up within twelve hours by a homeward-bound ship from
Calcutta, thanks to which fortunate circumstance Captain Roberts's life
had been saved--as well as those of all the other occupants of the boat;
and he was now as well as ever, and again in command of his ship, which
had been captured some seven weeks after the occurrence of the mutiny,
following upon an unsuccessful attempt to "hold up" an Australian
clipper, in which attempt Bainbridge, the instigator of the mutiny, had
been shot dead.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Turned Adrift, by Harry Collingwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TURNED ADRIFT ***

***** This file should be named 24859.txt or 24859.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/8/5/24859/

Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
