Project Gutenberg's The Flemmings And "Flash Harry" Of Savait, by Louis Becke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Flemmings And "Flash Harry" Of Savait
       From "The Strange Adventure Of James Shervinton and Other
       Stories" - 1902

Author: Louis Becke

Release Date: March 29, 2008 [EBook #24953]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLEMMINGS ***




Produced by David Widger





THE FLEMMINGS and "FLASH HARRY" OF SAVAIT

From "The Strange Adventure Of James Shervinton and Other Stories" - 1902

By Louis Becke

T. FISHER UNWIN, 1902

LONDON




THE FLEMMINGS




CHAPTER I

On a certain island in the Paumotu Group, known on the charts as Chain
Island, but called Anaa by the people themselves, lived a white man
named Martin Flemming, one of those restless wanderers who range the
Pacific in search of the fortune they always mean to gain, but which
never comes to them, except in some few instances--so few that they
might be counted on one's fingers.

Two years had come and gone since Flemming had landed on the island
with his wife, family, and two native servants, and settled down as a
resident trader at the large and populous village of Tuuhora, where he
soon gained the respect and confidence--if not the friendship--of the
Anaa people, one of the proudest, most self-reliant, and brave of any
of the Polynesian race, or their offshoots. For though he was a keen
business man, he was just and honest in all his transactions, never
erring, as so many traders do, on the side of mistaken generosity, but
yet evincing a certain amount of liberality when the occasion justified
it--and the natives knew that when he told them that tobacco, or
biscuit, or rice, or gunpowder had risen in price in Tahiti or New
Zealand, and that he would also be compelled to raise his charges, they
knew that his statement was true--that he was a man above trickery,
either in his business or his social relations with them, and would not
descend to a lie for the sake of gain.

Flemming, at this time, was about forty years of age; his wife, who
was an intelligent Hawaiian Islander, was ten years his junior, and the
mother of his three half-caste children--a boy of thirteen, another of
ten, and a girl of six. Such education as he could give them during
his continuous wanderings over the North and South Pacific had been but
scanty; for he was often away on trading cruises, and his wife, though
she could read and write, like all Hawaiian women, was not competent to
instruct her children, though in all other respects she was everything
that a mother should be, except, as Flemming would often tell her, she
was too indulgent and too ready to gratify their whims and fancies.
However, they were now not so much under her control, for soon after
coming to the island, he found that one of the three Marist Brothers
living at the mission was able to, and willing to give them a few hours'
instruction several times a week. For this, Flemming, who was really
anxious about his children's welfare, made a liberal payment to the
Mission, and the arrangement had worked very satisfactorily--Father
Billot, who was a good English scholar, giving them their lessons in
that language.

I must now make mention of the remaining persons constituting the
trader's household--the two servants--one a man about thirty years
of age, the other not more than eighteen or nineteen. They were both
natives of Arorai (Hurd Island), one of the Eingsmill Group, and
situated something less than three degrees south of the Equator.
They had both taken service with him on their own island six years
previously, and had followed his and his family's fortunes ever since,
for they were both devotedly attached to the children; and when, a year
after he had settled on their island, misfortune befell him through
the destruction of his trading station by fire, and he found himself a
ruined man, they refused to leave him, and declared they would work
for him without payment until he was again in a position to begin
trading--no matter how long it might be ere that took place.

For some months after the loss of all his property, Flemming worked
hard and lived meanly. Most fortunately for him, he had a very good
whaleboat, and night after night, and day after day, he and his two
faithful helpers, as long as the weather held fine, toiled at the
dangerous pursuit of shark-catching, cutting off the fins and tails, and
drying them in the sun, until finally he had secured over a ton's weight
of the ill-smelling commodity, for which he received L60 in cash from
the master of a Chinese-owned trading barque, which touched at the
island, and this amount enabled him to leave Arorai, and begin trading
elsewhere--in the great atoll of Butaritari, where owing to his
possessing a good boat, sturdy health, and great pluck and resolution,
his circumstances so mended that he came to look on the incident of the
fire as the best thing that could have happened.

In appearance these two men were like nearly all the people of the
Kingsmill Group--dark-skinned, strongly built, and with a certain
fierceness of visage, born of their warlike and quarrelsome nature, and
which never leaves them, even in their old age. The elder of the two,
whose native name was Binoke, but who had been given the nickname of
"Tommy Topsail-tie," had this facial characteristic to a great degree,
and was, in addition, of a somewhat morbid and sullen disposition,
disliking all strangers. But he was yet the veriest slave to Flemming's
children, who tyrannised over him most mercilessly, for young as they
were, they knew that his savage heart had nothing in it but adoration
and affection for both them and their parents. Nobal, the younger man,
who also had a nickname--"Jack Waterwitch" (taken from a colonial
whaler in which he had once sailed) was of a more genial nature, and
had constituted himself the especial guardian and playmate of the little
girl Medora, who spoke his native tongue as well as himself; while Tommy
Topsail-tie was more attached, if it were possible, to Flemming's eldest
boy Robert, than to any other member of the family.

After two or three years' successful trading in the northern islands of
the Kingsmill Group, Flemming had sold out his trading interests very
satisfactorily, and, always eager to go further afield, had sailed for
the Paumotu Group, choosing Anaa as his home, for he thought he should
like the people, and do very well as a trader, for the island was but a
few days' sail from Tahiti in the Society Group, where there was always
a good market for his produce, and where he could replenish his stock of
trade goods from the great mercantile firm of Brander--in those days the
Whiteleys of the South and Eastern Pacific.

One afternoon, about six o'clock, when work at the trading station had
ceased for the day, and the store door had been shut and locked by Mrs.
Flemming, the trader was seated on his shady verandah, smoking a cigar
and listening to the prattle of his little daughter, when his two boys
raced up to him from the beach, and noisily asked him permission to take
the smallest of the boats (a ship's dinghy) and go fishing outside the
reef until the morning. They had just heard some natives crying out
that a vast shoal of _tau tau_--a large salmonlike fish, greatly prized
throughout the South Seas--had made their appearance, and already some
canoes were being got ready.

"Who is going with you, boys?" asked Flemming, looking at their
deeply-bronzed, healthy faces--so like his own, though his hair had now
begun to grizzle about his sunburnt temples.

"Jack and Tom, and two Anaa men," they replied, "they sent us to ask you
if they could come. They have finished the new roof for the oil-shed,
and want to go very badly. Say 'yes,' father."

"All right boys. You may go. Tell your mother to give you plenty to eat
to take with you--for it's only six o'clock, and I suppose you won't be
home till daylight."

The delighted boys tore into the house to get their fishing tackle,
whilst their mother, telling them to make less clamour, filled an empty
box with biscuit, bread, and tinned meats enough for the party of
six, and in less than ten minutes they were off again, shouting their
goodbyes as they raced through the gate, followed by a native woman
carrying the heavy box of food.

Martin Flemming turned to his wife with a smile lighting up his somewhat
sombre face.

"We shall have a quiet house to-night, Kaiulani," he said, calling her
by her Hawaiian name.

"Which will be a treat for us, Martin. Those boys really make more noise
every day. And do you know what they have done now?"

He shook his head.

"They have a live hawkbill turtle in their room--quite a large one,
for I could scarcely move it--and have painted its back in five or six
colours. And they feed it on live fish; the room smells horribly."

Flemming laughed. "I thought I could smell fresh paint about the house
yesterday. Never mind, 'Lani. It won't hurt the turtle."




CHAPTER II

At seven o'clock on the following morning the boys had not returned,
and Martin Flemming, just as his wife brought him his cup of coffee, was
saying that they probably were still fishing, when he heard a sound that
made him spring to his feet--the long, hoarse, bellowing note of a conch
shell, repeated three times.

"That's a call to arms!" he cried, "what does it mean, I wonder. Ah,
there is another sounding, too, from the far end of the village. I must
go and see what is the matter."

Scarcely, however, had he put his foot outside his door when he heard
his boys' voices, and in another moment he saw them running or rather
staggering along the path together with a crowd of natives, who were all
wildly excited, and shouting at the top of their voices.

"Father, father," and the eldest boy ran to him, and scarcely able to
stand, so exhausted was he, he flung himself down on the verandah steps,
"father, Jack and Tom, and the two Anaa men... been stolen by a strange
ship... we must... we must save them."

Hastening inside, Flemming returned with a carafe of cold water, and
commanding the boys not to try to speak any more just then, he poured
some over their wrists, and then gave them a little in a glass to drink.
When they were sufficiently "winded," they told him their story, which
was, briefly, this.

In company with two canoes, they had put out to sea and began fishing.
Then they parted company--the boat pulling round to the other side of
Anaa, where they fished with fair success till daylight. Suddenly a
small white-painted barque appeared, coming round the north end of
the island. She was under very easy canvas, and when she saw the boat,
backed her main-yard, and ran up her ensign.

"They want us to come aboard," said Bob, hauling in his line. "Up lines
everybody."

His companions at once pulled up their lines, and took to the oars, and
in a few minutes they were alongside the ship, and an officer leant over
the side of the poop, and asked them to come aboard.

The boys ascended first, the four natives following; the former were at
once conducted into the barque's cabin, where the captain, an old
man with a white moustache, asked them their names, and then began to
question them as to the number of natives on the island, &c., when they
started to their feet with alarmed faces as they heard a sudden rush of
feet on deck, followed by oaths and cries, and Walter the younger of the
two, fancied, he heard his brother's name called by Jack Waterwitch.

"Sit down, boys, sit down," said the captain, dropping his suave
manner, and speaking angrily, "you can go on deck and be off on shore
presently." As he spoke a man came below, and made a sign to him.

"All right, sir."

The captain nodded, and then told the boys to go on deck and get into
their boat. They at once obeyed, but the moment they reached the deck
they were surrounded by five or six of the crew, who hustled them to
the gangway, and forced them over the side, despite their struggles, and
their loud cries to their native friends, of whom they could see nothing
whatever.

The boat's line was cast off, and as she fell astern the boys saw that
a number of sailors were aloft, loosing her light sails, and in a few
minutes she was some distance away from them, heading to the eastward
with a light breeze. As quickly as possible the two boys set the boat's
sail, and sailing and pulling, they ran straight for the weather side of
the island, crossed over the reef into the lagoon, and gave the alarm to
the first people they met.

"Good lads," said Flemming, "you have done all that you could do. We
shall see presently what can be done to save our men."

Then turning to his wife, he bade her get ready enough provision for
his three boats, and have them launched and manned by their usual crews,
whilst he went to the mission to consult with Father Billot and the
chiefs, for he had already heard from one of the excited natives that
the barque was still very near the land, and almost becalmed; and he
knew that the Anaa natives would to a man assist him in recovering the
four men from captivity.

Half way to the mission house, he met the priest himself, hurrying along
the shaded path, to tell him the further news that the two canoes which
had accompanied the boat had just returned, after narrowly escaping
capture by the barque. It appeared that they, too, had seen the barque
crawling along under the lee of the land and close in to the reef, just
as daylight broke, and from the number of boats she carried--she had
two towing, as well as three others on deck--they imagined her to be
a whaler. They paddled up alongside without the slightest suspicion
of danger, and three or four of their number in the first canoe were
clambering up the side when they suddenly sprang overboard, just as
three or four grapnels with light chains were thrown from the bulwarks
over the canoes so as to catch their outriggers, and capsize them. Most
fortunately, however, only one of the grapnels caught--it fell upon the
wooden grating or platform between the outrigger and the hull of
one canoe, and was quickly torn away by the desperate hands of the
natives--in less than a minute both canoes were clear of the ship, and
racing shoreward without the loss of a single man. No attempt was made
to follow them in the barque's boats, her ruffianly captain and crew
evidently recognising that there was no chance of overtaking them when
the land was so near.

"The villains!" exclaimed Flemming, as he and the priest set off at a
run to the house of the head chief, who had just sent an urgent message
for them to come and meet him and his leading men in counsel, "she must
be a slaver from the coast of South America."

The consultation with the chiefs was a hurried one, and a resolution
to board the barque and recapture the four men if possible, was quickly
arrived at. Over thirty canoes, and five or six boats, manned and armed
by nearly two hundred of the picked men of the island, and led by Martin
Flemming and three chiefs, were soon underway, and passing out through
the narrow passage in the reef, went northward till they rounded the
point, and saw the barque about five miles away. She had every stitch of
canvas set, but was making little more than steerage way, for only the
faintest air was filling her upper canvas.

The canoes and boats, at Flemming's suggestion, approached her in a
half-circle, his own boat leading. It was his intention to recover the
men if possible, without bloodshed, and he would first make an attempt
to board the slaver--for such she was--and alone try to achieve the
men's liberation by pointing out to the captain that his ship would be
captured and destroyed by the infuriated natives if he refused. If he
did refuse there would be a heavy loss of life--of that he (Flemming)
was certain.

Apparently no notice was taken by the barque of the approaching
flotilla, until it was within three quarters of a mile, then she hauled
up her mainsail, came slowly to the wind, and began firing with two of
the four guns she carried--nine-pounders. Flemming at once ordered all
the other boats and canoes to cease pulling and paddling, and he went on
alone. He was not again fired at till he came within a quarter of a mile
of the vessel, when a volley of musketry was fired, together with the
two heavy guns, both of which were loaded with grape. How any one of
them in the boat escaped was a marvel, for the bullets lashed the water
into foam only a few yards ahead, and some, ricochetting, struck and
damaged two of the oars.

To advance in face of such a fire would be madness. The barque evidently
carried a large and well-armed crew, so he slewed round and pulled
towards the little fleet, as those on the slaver yelled derisively, and
again began firing with the nine-pounders, and small arms as well.

And then, to his bitter rage and disappointment, a puff of wind came
over from the westward, and the barque's sails filled. In ten minutes
she was slipping through the water so quickly that she was leaving them
astern fast, and in another hour she had swept round the south end of
the land, and they saw her no more.

Sad and dejected, he and his native friends returned to Tuuhora, and
drawing up their boats and canoes, went to their homes in silence.




CHAPTER III

TEN years had passed, and fortune had proved kind to Martin Flemming and
his family, who were now, with the exception of the eldest son, settled
on the island of Barotonga, one of the Cook's Group.

For some years after the abduction of the four unfortunate natives,
Flemming had tried every possible means of ascertaining their fate, and
at first thought that he would succeed, for within a few weeks after
the visit of the barque to Anaa, there came news of similar outrages
perpetrated by three vessels, through the Ellice, Line Islands and
Paumotu Group. One of these vessels was a barque, the others were brigs,
and all sailed under Peruvian colours, though many of the officers were
Englishmen.

In one instance they had descended upon the unsuspecting inhabitants of
the island of Nukulaelae in the Ellice Group, and carried off almost the
entire population, and at Easter Island--far to the eastward, over
three hundred unfortunate natives were seized under circumstances of the
grossest treachery and violence, and manacled together, taken away to
end their days as slaves in working the guano deposits on the Chincha
Islands, off the coast of South America.

Though not then a rich man, Flemming at his own expense made a long and
tedious voyage to the Ghinchas. By the time he arrived there nearly a
year had elapsed since the four men had been stolen, and he found that
both the British and French Governments had compelled the Peruvian
Government to restore all of the wretched survivors--there were but
few, alas!--to their homes. Over one hundred of the wretched beings had
perished of disease in the hot and stifling holds of the slavers; scores
of them, attempting to regain their liberty, had been shot down, and the
fearful toil in the guano pits of the Ghincha Islands carried off many
more.

At the Chincha Islands he was unable to gain any definite information
about the four men, but was told that the British Consul at Gallao might
be able to tell him what had become of them--whether they had died or
had been among those restored to their homes. So to Gallao be went, for
he was ever bearing in mind the grief of his children at the loss of
their dear "Tommy Topsail-tie" and "Jacky Waterwitch," and his promise
to them that if they and their Anaa companions were alive he would bring
them back.

But a bitter disappointment awaited him at Gallao--for the Consul, who
had been largely instrumental in forcing the Peruvian Government to
liberate the captured people, gave him absolute proof that none of the
four men had reached the Ghinchas, for he had obtained a great deal of
information from the survivors, all of which he had carefully recorded.

"Here is what Vili, a native of Nukulaelae, told me, Mr. Flemming. He
was one of those who were captured by the barque, and was rather well
treated by the captain on account of his speaking English, being put
into the mate's watch as he had been to sea for many years in whale
ships. He says:--

'After we of Nukulaelae had been on board the barque for about twenty
days, we came to an island in the Paumotus, where the captain tried to
capture two canoes full of natives but failed, though quite soon after
he seized four from a boat, and they were carried down into the hold
and ironed, for they had fought very hard and all were much hurt and
bleeding. I spoke to them and they told me that they had been out
fishing with the two sons of a white man, who was a trader on the
island. The captain did not hurt the two boys, but let them go. Then a
lot of canoes and boats came off and the ship fired her cannons at them,
and drove them away.

'Next day we met another ship, a small schooner, flying the German flag,
and her captain came on board our ship and had a long talk with our
captain, and presently an officer and six men came down into the hold,
and took the irons off nine men and drove them on deck. Among these men
were the four who were taken from the boat. The captain of the schooner
paid our captain money for them, and took them on board his vessel,
which then sailed away.'

"Now, Mr. Flemming," resumed the Consul, "that is all I can tell you.
I have written to the British Consul at Apia in Samoa, and at Levuka in
Fiji, asking them to endeavour to find out the schooner's name and trace
the nine men. I have no doubt but that she was some Fijian or Samoan
'blackbirder,' and that the poor devils are working on some of the
plantations in either Fiji, Samoa or Tonga. There is, therefore, good
reason for you to hope that you will succeed in your search. I shall
gladly give you all the assistance in my power to facilitate your
enquiries."

Returning to Anaa, Flemming, through the aid of the French authorities
in Tahiti, placed himself in communication with the British Consuls in
Fiji and Samoa, telling them the details of the capture of the four
men and of their transference with five others to another vessel, and
enclosing a sum of money--all he could spare--to be given to Tommy
Topsail-tie so that he and his three companions might be enabled to find
their way back to Anaa.

At the end of another long weary year of hopeful expectation, he
received replies from the Consuls, returning the money he had sent, and
saying that after most careful inquiries, they could learn nothing of
the nine men; but that they (the Consuls) had strong reason to believe
that the schooner to which they had been transferred was a notorious
German "blackbirder" named the _Samoa_, though the captain and the crew
swore they knew nothing of the matter.

"It is quite possible," they said in their joint report, "that some or
all of the men are on one of the German plantations in Samoa or Tonga,
and that you will yet discover them. But the German Consuls will give
us no assistance, and absolutely decline to permit us to send any one to
visit the plantations, unless the managers or owners are agreeable. And,
as you can imagine, the owners and managers are _not_ agreeable, and
have declined in terms of great rudeness to even supply us with the
names of any of their labourers, or the names of the various islands
from which they come."

But even in face of this Flemming did not despair, and told his wife and
children, who could not restrain their tears when they read the Consuls'
report, that he would not let the matter rest. He had several friends
in Samoa and Fiji--merchants, traders and ship captains, and to them he
wrote asking them to institute enquiries quietly, and let him know the
result.

After spending another five years on Anaa, during which time he had
heard nothing of the missing men, he determined to settle on Rarotonga,
where there was an excellent opportunity of making money. His eldest
boy by this time was almost a grown man, and was earning his living as a
supercargo of a trading vessel, running between Auckland in New Zealand
and the various groups of islands in the South Pacific.




CHAPTER IV

In the quiet little harbour of Mulifanua, situated at the western end of
the island of Upolu, a fine-looking brigantine was lying at anchor, and
the captain and supercargo were pacing the deck together enjoying their
after-breakfast pipes.

The brigantine was the _Maori Maid_ of Auckland, Captain Heselton,
and the supercargo was young Robert Flemming. The vessel had run into
Mulifanua Harbour owing to her having struck on a reef a few days
previously whilst beating up against the south-east trades from Wallis
Island to Leone Bay, a port on the island of Tutuila, one of the Samoan
Group, and as she was leaking rather seriously her captain decided to
run into Mulifanua, put her on the beach, and get at the leak or leaks.

"There is no need for you to stay on board, Bob," said Heselton
presently to his young supercargo. "Go ashore and stay ashore until we
are ready for sea again. All going well we'll find out where the damage
is by this time to-morrow, and be afloat again in a few days. But there
is nothing to keep you aboard, and you might as well put in your time
shooting or otherwise enjoying yourself; why not go and have a look at
Goddeffroy's big plantation? It's only about a couple of miles away."

"Thank you, captain, I think I shall. As you know for years past I have
always been hoping that during one of our cruises, I might come across
some native or other on one of these plantations who might be able to
tell me something about those four poor fellows who were collared by
that Peruvian barque ten years ago. And this plantation of Goddeffroy's
is one of the biggest in the South Seas--there are over seven hundred
labourers, Line Islanders, Solomon Islanders, New Britain niggers and
heaven knows what else."

"Well, you'll have a good chance now. And look here, Bob--take your
time, a day or two more or less doesn't matter to us. I shall have
plenty to do even after I get at this confounded leak. The rigging wants
setting up badly, so we may be here any time under a week."

"Right. I'll go and have a look at the plantation; and if the manager is
a decent sort of a Dutchman he might put me up. If he's a hog--which
he probably is--I'll go to the native village, sleep there to-night and
have a day's pigeon-shooting to-morrow."

Just then a boat was seen putting off from the shore, manned by Samoans,
but steered by a white man, who as soon as he came on deck introduced
himself as the local trader. He was a quiet, good-natured old fellow--an
Englishman--and as soon as he learned of the mishap to the brigantine,
at once offered to get a gang of natives to assist in beaching her; and
then pressed Flemming to make his house his home during the stay of the
vessel.

"Thank you," replied the young man, "I shall be very pleased. I want to
have a look at the big plantation here and try to have a yarn with some
of the Eingsmill Island labourers." Then he told the trader, who was
much interested, the object he had in view.

"I'm sure that the manager will let you talk to any of the labourers,"
he said, "for he's one of the 'White men' kind of Dutchmen. His name
is Knorr. He succeeded a regular brute of a man who used to flog the
plantation hands right and left. A lot of them have run away during the
past six or seven years and have taken to the mountains. They are all
armed, and sometimes, when they are in want of food, will lay the Samoan
villages under tribute, and if any resistance is shown, they set fire to
the houses. The Samoans are terribly afraid of them, for there are two
or three cannibal Solomon Islanders among them, and a Samoan has a holy
terror of a man-eater."

"Why don't the Dutchmen capture the beggars?" asked the captain. "There
are enough of them in Samoa."

The old trader laughed--"Ay, too many, sir; too many for us poor English
traders. But they have tried, time and time again, to capture these
fellows, but only got badly mauled in two or three fights. There is a
standing reward of two hundred dollars for every one of them, dead or
alive, and about a year ago ten flash young Samoan _manaias_{*} set out,
well armed and well primed with grog, to surprise the escapees, who were
known to be living in an almost inaccessible part of the mountains. Only
four of the ten came back; the other six were shot down one by one as
they were climbing the side of a mountain, and these four were made
prisoners by the outlaws, who gave them such a fright that they will
never get over it. It was as good as any novel to hear them talk about
it, I can assure you."

     * Warriors or rather would-be warriors--young men whom the
     local white men usually speak of as "bucks,"--i.e., flashy,
     saucy fellows.

"Go on, tell us the whole yarn," said the skipper of the _Maori Maid_,
as he pushed a decanter of brandy towards his visitor, and take a cigar.
"It's pleasant to meet an Englishman in these Dutchman-infested islands,
especially when he has a good yarn to spin."

"The yarn isn't a pleasant one, captain," said the trader. "It's a
d------d unpleasant one, but it's true, sir."

He lit a cigar and then resumed: "Well, after six of these flash young
fellows were shot down, the other four dropped their rifles and cried
out, _Fia ola! Fia ola!_ (Quarter! Quarter!) and in a few minutes about
a dozen of the escapees made their appearance, took away their rifles
and cartridges, and tying their arms behind their backs made them march
in front of them up the mountain-side till they came to a bit of a
thicket in which were four or five small huts. Telling their prisoners
to sit down, half of their number went away, returning in half an hour
with the six heads of the men who had been shot.

"Take these heads back with you," said one of the outlaws, who could
speak Samoan, "and tell all Mulifanua that we are strong men. We fear
no one, for we have plenty of guns and cartridges, and five hundred men
such as you cannot take us. And say to the chief of the village, that on
every fourth day, food for us must be brought to the foot of the eastern
spur of the mountain. If this be not done, then shall we kill all whom
we meet--men, women or children. Now go and tell the man who flogged
us that some day we shall cook and eat his head, for we are very strong
men.'

"Well, the four poor trembling beggars were liberated, and carrying
the six heads of their comrades, they went back, and their story so
terrified the people of Mulifanua that no further attempt was ever made
to capture the outlaws. And although the Germans don't know of it, the
villagers are to this very day, gentlemen, supplying these dangerous
devils with food, and I know for a fact that sometimes two or three of
them come down from the mountains and sleep in the village without fear.
They have never troubled me; but very often a native boy or girl will
come to me and buy a 28-lb. bag of shot, caps and powder, and I know
perfectly well that it is for the 'wild men,' as the people here call
the escaped men. Every one of them has not only a rifle, but a shot-gun
as well, for they one night broke into the plantation store and carried
off all the rifles and guns they could find."

"Take care, Bob, that they don't take some pot shots at you," said the
captain, with a laugh, as his supercargo rose to get ready to go ashore
with the trader.

"They would if they thought Mr. Hemming was a German from the
plantation," said the trader, seriously, "so you had better not go too
far away when you are shooting, unless you take a native guide with you.
For, as I have said before, these men and the people of the village
are now, I really believe, in secret friendship, or rather alliance--an
alliance born out of terror on one side and savage desperation on the
other."

A few minutes later young Flemming and the trader were being pulled
ashore.




CHAPTER V

The German manager of the great plantation proved to be, as the old
trader had said, "one of the white-men kind of Dutchmen." He received
the young supercargo most hospitably, and insisted upon his remaining to
lunch, and when Flemming told him frankly of the long quest for the four
missing men, he at once became deeply sympathetic.

"You shall see every one of the six or seven hundred natives I have
working for me, Mr. Flemming. They are all now scattered about in
different portions of the plantation, but at five o'clock, when they
knock off, I shall have them all mustered. But I am almost certain that
you will not find any one of the nine who were transferred from the
Peruvian slaver to the German 'black-birder,' for I have always taken
an interest in these people, and know pretty well from where they all
come. My predecessor here was very rough with them--the less I say about
him the better--and there is now quite a number of runaways living in
the bush. They have defied all efforts to capture them. Who they are,
and where they come from, I cannot well tell, for the former manager
never kept an accurate account of the numbers of new arrivals brought
here by the various labour vessels, nor did he specify in his books, as
he should have done, from what particular islands they came. 'Natives'
he considered to be a sufficient designation, and 'three years' or
'six years' indicated the time for which they were engaged. He left the
identification of themselves and their islands to the captains of the
various vessels which, at the end of their time, take them back again."

"I wonder if it is possible that the four men I am looking for are among
the outlaws," said Flemming.

"Possible, quite possible," replied the manager, "but you will never be
able to see them if they are. The gang is very desperate and determined,
and though they have no animus against me personally, they would shoot
me, or you, or any white man who attempted to get into communication
with them."

After a little further conversation with the manager, Flemming said he
would have a few hours' pigeon-shooting, returning in time to see the
plantation hands mustered. Knorr wished him to take a Samoan guide, but
the young man laughingly reminded him that he was half a native himself,
and from his infancy almost had been used to wandering about the
mountain forests of the islands of Micronesia and Polynesia; so, bidding
his host good morning, he shouldered his gun and set off, and in another
hour was ascending the first spur of the mountain range, which traverses
the island of Upolu from one end to the other.

He had a reason for declining the services of a guide, for he had
determined to attempt to reach the outlaws' refuge, and, at the risk
of his life, finding out if Tommy Topsail-tie and Jack Waterwitch were
among them. The old trader had told him that one of their number was a
very big man, whose legs, back, and neck were tattooed as the Kingsmill
Islanders tattoo, and he (Flemming) had formed the idea, since his
conversation with the manager of the plantation, that this big man was
Binoke--the dear friend of his boyhood's days, the ever-wanted "Tommy
Topsail-tie" of his brother and his sister Medora, the man who, with
Jack Waterwitch, had stood to his father and mother in their poverty and
distress, and had toiled night and day for them without recompense.

As he walked over the soft carpet of fallen leaves which covered the
mountain-side so thickly that no sound came from his footsteps,
he listened carefully. He knew that he was proceeding in the right
direction for the outlaws' refuge--the direction the plantation manager
had impressed on him to avoid--and after a two hours' stiff climb he
found himself on the summit of the spur and overlooking the harbour. Far
below him he could see the _Maori Maid_ being hauled on to the beach,
and eight miles away the beautiful little island of Manono lay basking
in the sun on a sea of deepest, glorious blue.

Suddenly he heard a sound, a faint, soft creeping on the ground
somewhere near him, and he knew that it was the sound of a human
footstep, and that he was watched.

He laid down his gun, and stood up and pretended to closely scan
the thick, leafy canopy of the mighty trees overhead, as if he were
searching for pigeons. Then his voice rang out clearly, and echoed and
re-echoed in the grey and silent forest aisles.

"Binoke, Binoke! 'Tis I! Nobal, Nobal! 'Tis I who call! Tis I, Papu
(Bob), of Anaa! I, who have sought thee long. Binoke! Nohal!"

Then came a sudden rush of feet and brown, naked bodies from all around,
and in another moment the young man was almost lifted off hid feet by
Tommy Topsail-tie, who, clasping his mighty arms around him, pressed him
passionately to his bosom.

"My boy, my boy!... See, 'tis I, Binoke, thy friend, thy slave, thy
Binoke!" and then the savage creature wept as only wild people such as
he was weep from excess of joy.

In a few minutes Flemming was hurried along by the friendly hands of
six or eight of the "wild men" to their refuge further up on the
mountain-side, where he found not only "Jack Waterwitch," but one of
the Anaa natives, who had been carried off ten years before; the other
native of Anaa, he was told by Tommy Topsail-tie, had died a year or two
previously. There were, he found, twelve natives in all--Topsail-tie,
who was their leader, Jack Waterwitch, the Anaa man, four Solomon
Islanders, and five others from various islands.

For an hour or more the young man conversed with his old friends, who
delightedly agreed to leave their mountain retreat and go on board the
brigantine as soon as she was ready to sail. The remaining eight men,
however, refused to leave, although Flemming told them that they could
all come down from the mountain at night-time, and be very easily stowed
away on board, and that even if they were discovered the captain would
be able to protect them, should the German manager make any demand
for them to be delivered over to him. But all his arguments were in
vain--they shook their heads and said that never, again would they go,
willingly or unwillingly, upon the deep sea.

Then the supercargo and Topsail-tie made their plans, and after spending
another hour or so with the escapees, Flemming shook hands with them
all, and guided by Nobal, returned to the base of the mountain.

Here he parted from his companion, who quickly plunged into the forest
again, and reached the plantation just as the manager was mustering the
plantation hands for his inspection. Not deeming it advisable to tell
his host of the discovery he had just made, he yet tried to display as
much interest as possible, and after walking up and down the triple rows
of men and looking at them rapidly one by one, he said that there was no
one of them whom he had ever seen before. Then the manager dismissed the
men, and Flemming, thanking him for his kindness, hurried on board and
told his story to Captain Heselton.

Two days afterwards the _Maori Maid_ was sailing slowly out through
Mulifanua passage. Flemming, with the skipper beside him, was standing
on the poop, looking for'ard.

"Tell them they can come up on deck now, boatswain," he cried, "we are a
good mile off the land."

And then the three of the four men from whom he and his brother had
parted ten years before rushed up from the hold, knelt at his feet, and
laughing and sobbing like children, threw their brown arms around his
legs.

Binoke rose, and stretching out his huge right arm towards the rising
sun, turned his black eyes on "the boy" he so loved.

"Is it to the east we sail, Papu?"

"Ay, to the east, Binoke, far, far to the east, to a fair, fair land
with green mountains and falling streams. And there awaits us my father
and mother, and my brother, and Medora. And they will be well content
with me, for never hast thou and Nobal been forgotten."





"FLASH HARRY" OF SAVAIT

Nearly thirty years ago, when the late King Malietoa of Samoa was
quietly arming his own adherents and conciliating his rebel chiefs in
order to combine against the persistent encroachments of the Germans,
I was running a small trading cutter between Upolu and Savaii, the two
principal islands of the group.

One day I arrived in Apia Harbour with a cargo of yams which I was
selling to an American man-of-war, the _Resacca_. I went alongside at
once, had the yams weighed and received my money from the paymaster,
and then went ashore for a bathe in the Vaisigago River, a lovely little
stream which, taking its rise in the mountains, debouches into Apia
Harbour. Here I was joined by an old friend, Captain Hamilton, the local
pilot, who, stripping off his clothes, plunged into the water beside me.

As we were laughing and chatting and thoroughly enjoying ourselves,
a party of natives--young men and boys--emerged from the trees on the
opposite bank, and casting off their scanty garments, boisterously
entered the water and began disporting themselves, and then to my
surprise I saw that their leader was a white man, tattoed in every
respect, like a Samoan. He appeared to be about thirty years of age, was
clean-shaven, and had bright red hair.

"Who is that fellow?" I inquired.

"One of the biggest scoundrels in the Pacific," replied my companion,
"'Flash Harry' from Savaii. He deserted from either the _Brisk_ (or the
_Zealous_) British man-of-war, about seven years ago, and although the
commanders of several other British warships have tried to get him, they
have failed. He is the pet _protege_ of one of the most powerful chiefs
in Savaii, and laughs at all attempts to catch him. To my knowledge he
has committed four atrocious murders, and, in addition to that, he is
a drunken, foul-mouthed blackguard. He only comes to Apia
occasionally--when there is no British man-of-war about--and paints
the town red, for although he is merely a loafing beachcomber, he is
liberally supplied with money by his chief, and possesses an extensive
harem as well. He simply terrorises the town when he breaks out, and
insults every timid European, male and female, whom he meets."

"Why doesn't some one put a bullet through him?"

"Ah, now you're asking! Why? Porter" (a respectable Samoan trader)
"told him that he would riddle him if he came inside his fence, and the
scoundrel knows _me_ well enough not to come into my place with anything
but a civil word on his foul tongue; but then you see, Porter and I
are Americans. If either or both of us shot the man no commander of an
American man-of-war would do more than publicly reprimand us for taking
the law into our own hands; but if you or any other Englishman killed
the vermin, you would be taken to Fiji by the first man-of-war that
called here, put on your trial for murder, and, if you escaped hanging,
get a pretty turn of penal servitude in Fiji gaol."

We finished our bathe, dressed, and set out for Hamilton's house on
Matautu Point, for he had asked me to have supper with him. On our way
thither we met the master of a German barque, then in port, and were
chatting with him in the middle of the road, when Mr. "Flash Harry" and
his retinue of _manaia_ (young bucks) overtook us.

The path being rather narrow we drew aside a few paces to let them pass,
but at a sign from their leader they stopped. He nodded to Hamilton and
the German captain (neither of whom took any notice of him) then fixed
his eyes insolently on me and held out his hand.

"How do yer do, Mister. You're a nice sort of a cove not to come and see
me when you pass my place in your cutter"--then with sudden fury as I
put my hands in my pockets--"you, you young cock-a-hoopy swine, do you
mean to say you don't mean to shake hands with a white man?"

"Not with you, anyway," I answered.

"Then the next time I see you I'll pull your ------ arm out of the
socket," he said, with an oath, and turning on his heel he went off with
his following of bucks. All of them were armed with rifles and the long
beheading knives called _Nifa oti_ (death-knife), and as we three had
nothing but our fists we should have had a bad time had they attacked
us, for we were in an unfrequented part of the beach and would have been
half murdered before assistance came. But in Samoa in those days street
brawls were common.

"The next time you _do_ meet him," said Hamilton as we resumed our walk,
"don't give him a chance. Drill a hole through him as soon as he gets
within ten paces, and then clear out of Samoa as quick as you can."

* * * * *

Quite a month after this I had to visit the little port of Asaua on
the Island of Savaii; and as I was aware that "Flash Harry" was in the
vicinity of the place on a _malaga_, or pleasure trip, I kept a sharp
lookout for him, and always carried with me in my jumper pocket a small
but heavy Derringer, the bullet of which was as big as that of a Snider
rifle. I did not want to have my arm pulled out of the socket, and knew
that "Flash Harry," being twice my weight almost, would give me a sad
time if he could once get within hitting distance of me, for like most
men-of-war's men he was very smart with his hands, and I was but a
stripling--not yet twenty.

I had come to Asaua with a load of timber to be used in the construction
of a church for the French Mission, and in the evening went to the
resident priest to obtain a receipt for delivery. As he could not
speak English and I could not speak French we had to struggle along in
Samoan--to our mutual amusement. However, we got along very well, and I
was about to accept his hospitable offer to remain and have sapper with
him when a young chief whom I knew, named Ulofanua ("Top of a High
Tree") came in hurriedly and told us that "Flash Harry" and ten or
fifteen young men, all more or less drunk, were coming to the village
that night with the avowed intention of boarding the cutter under the
pretence of trading, seizing all the liquor and giving me a father of a
beating--the latter to avenge the insult of a month before.

Laughingly telling the priest that under the circumstances discretion
was the better part of valour, I bade him goodbye, walked down to my
boat, which was lying on the beach, and with two native sailors pulling,
we started for the cutter, a mile away. The night was beautifully calm,
but dark, and as I was not well acquainted with the inner part of Asaua
Harbour and could not see my way, I several times ran the boat on
to submerged coral boulders; and, finally, lost the narrow channel
altogether.

Then I told one of my men, a sturdy, splendid specimen of a native of
the Gilbert Islands named Te Manu Uraura ("Bed Bird") to come aft
and take the steer oar, knowing that his eyesight, like that of all
Polynesians, was better than that of any white man.

"Come here, Te Manu, and steer, I'll take your oar. Your eyes are better
than mine."

The poor fellow laughed good-naturedly, and I little thought that this
simple request of mine would be the cause of his being a cripple for
life. He came aft, took the steer oar from me, and I, seating myself on
the after thwart, began to pull. We were at this time about thirty yards
from the beach, and between it and the inner reef of the harbour. We
sent the boat along for two or three hundred yards without a hitch,
and I was thinking of what my cook would have for my supper, when we
suddenly plumped into a patch of dead coral and stuck hard and fast.

Knowing that the tide was falling, we all jumped out, and pushed the
boat off into deeper water as quickly as possible, just as half a dozen
bright torches of coco-nut leaves flared up on the shore and revealed
the boat dimly to those who were holding them.

At first I imagined that the chief of the village had sent some of his
people to help us through the channel, but I was quickly undeceived when
I heard "Flash Harry's" voice.

"I've got you now, my saucy young quarter-deck-style-of-pup. Slew round
and come ashore, or I'll blow your head off."

One glance ashore showed me that we were in a desperate position. "Flash
Harry," who was all but stark-naked--he had only a girdle of _ti_ tree
leaves round his waist--was covering the boat with his Winchester rifle,
and his followers, armed with other guns, were ready to fire a volley
into us, although most of them were pretty well drunk.

"They can't hit us, Te Manu," I cried to the Gilbert Islander, whose
inborn fighting proclivities were showing in his gleaming eyes and
short, panting breaths, "most of them have no cartridges in their guns,
and they are all too drunk to shoot straight. Let us go on!"

Te Manu gripped the haft of the steer oar and swung the boat's head
round, and then I and the other native at the bow oar--a mere boy of
sixteen--pulled for all we were worth just as "Flash Harry" dropped on
one knee and fired.

Poor Te Manu swayed to and fro for a few moments and then cried out, "He
has broken my hand, sir! But go on, pull, pull hard!"

Under a spattering fire from the beachcomber's drunken companions we
pulled out into deeper water and safety, and then, shipping my oar, I
sprang to Te Manu's aid. The bullet had struck him in the back of the
right hand and literally cut off three of the poor fellow's knuckles.
I did what I could to stop the loss of blood, and told him to sit
down, but he refused, and although suffering intense pain, insisted on
steering with his left hand. As soon as we reached the cutter I at
once hove up anchor and stood along the coast before a strong breeze
to Matautu Harbour, where I was able to have the man's hand properly
attended to. He never recovered the use of it again except in a slight
degree.

I never saw "Flash Harry" again, for a few months later I left Samoa
for the Caroline Group, and when I returned a year afterwards I was told
that he had at last found the country too hot for him and had left the
island in a German "blackbirder" bound to the Solomon Islands.

*****

Quite six years had passed, and then I learnt, in a somewhat curious
manner, what became of him. One day in Sydney, New South Wales, three
captains and myself met for lunch at the Paragon Hotel, on Circular
Quay. We were all engaged in the South Sea trade, and one of the
company, who was a stranger to me, had just returned from the Solomon
Islands, with which group and its murderous, cannibal people he was very
familiar. (He was himself destined to be killed there with his ship's
company in 1884.) He was a young man who had had some very narrow
escapes and some very thrilling experiences, some of which he narrated.

We were talking of the massacre of Captain Ferguson and the crew of the
Sydney trading steamer _Ripple_, by the natives of Bougainville Island
in the Solomon Group, when our friend remarked--

"Ah, poor Ferguson ought to have been more careful. Why, the very
chief of that village at Numa Numa--the man who cut him down with a
tomahawk--had killed two other white men. Ferguson knew that, and yet
would allow him to come aboard time after time with hundreds of his
people, and gave him and them the run of his ship. I knew the fellow
well. He told me to my face, the first time I met him, that he had
killed and eaten two white men."

"Who were they?" I asked.

"One was a man trading for Captain MacLeod of New Caledonia; the other
chap was some beachcombing fellow who had been kicked ashore at Numa
Numa by his skipper. I heard he came from Samoa originally. Anyway the
chief told me that as soon as the ship that had put the man ashore had
sailed, he was speared through the back as he was drinking a coco-nut.

"When they stripped off his clothes to make him ready for the oven, they
found he was tattoed, Samoan fashion, from the waist to the knees. Then,
as he had red hair, they cut off his head and smoke-dried it, instead of
eating it with the rest of the body; they kept it as an ornament for the
stem of a big canoe. A white man's head is a great thing at any time for
a canoe's figurehead in the Solomons, but a white man's head with red
hair is a great _mana_" (mascotte).

Then I told him that I had known the man, and gave him his antecedents.

"Ah," he said, "I daresay if you had been there you would have felt as
if you could have eaten a bit of the beggar yourself."

"I certainly do feel pleased that he's settled," I replied, as I thought
of poor Red Bird's hand.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Flemmings And "Flash Harry" Of
Savait, by Louis Becke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FLEMMINGS ***

***** This file should be named 24953.txt or 24953.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/9/5/24953/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
