Project Gutenberg's The Canadian Girl at Work, by Marjory MacMurchy

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Canadian Girl at Work
       A Book of Vocational Guidance

Author: Marjory MacMurchy

Release Date: April 11, 2008 [EBook #25046]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CANADIAN GIRL AT WORK ***




Produced by This ebook was produced by: K. Nordquist,
Charles Bidwell, David T. Jones & the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net







The Canadian Girl at Work


_A BOOK OF VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE_

By

MARJORY MacMURCHY


Prepared at the Instance of the Minister of Education
for Use in Ontario School Libraries

[Illustration: logo]

Printed by Order of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario

TORONTO

Printed and Published by A. T. Wilgress,
Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty

1919

Copyright, Canada, 1919, by the
MINISTER OF EDUCATION FOR ONTARIO




PREFACE


The object of _The Canadian Girl at Work_ is to assist girls in finding
satisfactory employment. The further aim of showing them what constitutes
a right attitude toward work and toward life through work, underlies the
account of each occupation. The book is meant for girls, and for the
assistance of fathers and mothers, of teachers, and of those who are
interested in questions of training and employment.

The life of the average woman is divided, generally, into two periods of
work, that of paid employment and that of home-making. No adequate scheme
of training for girls can fail to take account of this fact. They should be
equipped with knowledge and skill for home-making, and assisted in making
the best use of their years in paid work. Happily, it appears from an
investigation of the conditions affecting girls as wage-earners that the
knowledge which helps them to be good home-makers is necessary to their
well-being in paid employment. Technical training and skill are not more
helpful to a girl at work than specialized knowledge in matters of food,
clothing, health, and daily regimen. Lack of training in home-making is
probably the greatest drawback which a girl in paid employment can have.
Her business during her first years of paid employment may not require much
skill or experience, but her living conditions require all the specialized
woman's knowledge that training can give her.

To bring about in the life of a girl a satisfactory connection between
paid employment and home-making, and to show the home employments in
their rightful place as occupations of the first importance, are necessary
objectives in any book of this character.

When considering the employments of to-day as part of their own lives,
girls of the twentieth century may well look back through the long ages
to women's work in the past.[1] The study of anthropology appears to
indicate that in primeval ages women began the textile industry and,
possibly, agriculture. There seems to be no doubt that they were primitive
architects, and that they tamed some of the smaller domestic animals. They
had most to do with the preparation of food and may have introduced the
use of herbs and medicines. They were spinners, weavers, upholsterers,
and sail-makers. Most of these employments were taken up by men and
specialized and developed almost past imagination. It is evident that
women have always worked, and worked hard. If they had not done so, the
race would not have reached its present position, and women themselves
would have remained undeveloped, without a realization of their own
possibilities.

The history of Anglo-Saxon times shows women engaged in spinning, weaving,
dyeing, and embroidering, carrying on these industrial arts in the home,
side by side with the work of the house. The work of women in home
manufactures was a by-industry, not occupying the worker's whole time, but
nevertheless an important occupation. Later, women were employed in many
kinds of industrial work as assistants to their husbands and fathers. It is
doubtful if wages were paid for such work. Employment of this kind is not
to be thought of merely as a romantic or picturesque accompaniment of home
life. Houses and comforts centuries back were not such as they are to-day;
and the work of women was toil, side by side with men who toiled also.

The modern factory did not originate industrial work. The factory carried
many industries away from the home where they had originated; and women
followed their work to large establishments where they were trained to
work collectively. The statement can be made with truth that machinery
has made it possible for women to perform work for which their strength
would otherwise have been insufficient. Through the industrial revolution
brought about by factory work, the general body of women workers became
wage-earners, rather than unpaid workers who contributed to the financial
earnings of their fathers and husbands.

In Canada, the process of development of women's work in the past fifty
years has been rapid. The grandmothers of the women of this generation
carded wool and used spinning wheels within the memory of workers of less
than middle age. One old woman who died not many years ago told how she
used to bake in an oven out-of-doors and had dyed homespun with butternut.
The soap cauldron stood on the levelled stump of what had been once a
forest tree. Candles were moulded in iron moulds. Household industries were
carried on expertly in the homes of pioneers by the women of the family.

When these days had gone, there followed other days in which the children
of the pioneers devoted themselves to the schooling so highly esteemed but
rarely enjoyed by their parents. The boys, after school life, turned
to business, railway employments, teaching, banking, farming, became
ministers, lawyers, doctors, or gave their thoughts to politics.
The girls taught school, were milliners or dressmakers, went into shops,
or became the wives of nation builders in every walk of life. A few were
nurses, journalists, doctors, or missionaries.

The work of that generation has been followed by a century in which
Canadian girls are invited to share in nearly every form of activity. This
great freedom with its many opportunities has come for noble ends. What the
girls of to-day must strive to do is to take up their work with a vision of
what it may be made to mean--men and women in co-partnership laying the
foundations of a new earth.

It is probable that the social and domestic conditions of the earliest
workers were far below those of the average worker of to-day. But, although
present conditions are better than those of the past, the process of
amelioration should be greatly advanced by this generation. The increasing
opportunities of girls, both in home-making and paid employment, are likely
to become a contributing factor in the humanizing of every form of
industry. We have learned to realize the possibilities of machinery.
What we must do now is to imagine and realize the possibilities of the
individual worker. This can be done only through study, experience, and
actual work in industrial occupations which offer employment to women.

The woman of the home has work of unrivalled value. She has to study new
standards of living, to help to control the food supply, to improve the
health of children, and to lower the rate of infant mortality. A standard
of living in each community might be tabulated by women home-makers. Such
information should be available in each locality and should be accessible
to all classes in the community. How are workers--girls, boys, men, or
women--to know on what sums individuals and families can live and maintain
health and efficiency in one district or another, if these matters are not
studied, determined, and published for their use?

[Footnote 1: Acknowledgment is made to Miss B. L. Hutchins' _Women
in Modern Industry_. G. Bell & Sons].




CONTENTS



                                                               PAGE

Preface                                                         iii

CHAPTER

     I. Thinking About Work                                       1

    II. The Girl Who Works in a Factory                           4

   III. The Saleswoman                                            9

    IV. The Girl at Work in an Office                            15

     V. Learning After the Position is Found                     20

    VI. What Every Girl Needs to Know                            24

   VII. The House Worker. Domestic Science                       28

  VIII. The Teacher                                              33

    IX. The Work of a Nurse                                      39

     X. Dressmakers and Seamstresses                             45

    XI. The Milliner                                             50

   XII. Making One's Own Clothes. Home Millinery                 53

  XIII. Telephone and Telegraph Girls                            56

   XIV. Hairdresser and Manicurist. Waitress                     61

    XV. Farm Work for Women                                      65

   XVI. The Librarian                                            71

  XVII. Work for the Girl at Home                                76

 XVIII. The Home Employments                                     82

   XIX. Journalism. Writing. Advertising. Art. Handicrafts.
        Designing. Photography. Architecture. Landscape
        Gardening. House Decorating and Furnishing.
        Music. Acting. Dancing                                   88

    XX. Banking. Law. Medicine. Dentistry. Pharmacy.
        Chemical Industry. Civil Service. Social Work            94

   XXI. Going into Business for One's Self                       99

  XXII. New Work for Women                                      102

 XXIII. Money and Wages                                         107

  XXIV. Spending. Saving. Investing                             112

   XXV. Health                                                  116

  XXVI. A Girl's Reading                                        121

 XXVII. Necessary Work                                          126

XXVIII. What One Girl Can Do for Another                        129

  XXIX. Civic Duties and Responsibilities                       133

   XXX. The Best Kind of Work                                   138

List of Occupations                                             141

Bibliography                                                    146

Index                                                           149




THE CANADIAN GIRL AT WORK




CHAPTER I

THINKING ABOUT WORK


Thinking about work is the beginning of one of the happiest and most useful
of our experiences. Through work there comes to us the pleasure of a
growing knowledge of the great world and its wonders, the delight of
intercourse with other people, and the happiness of friendship with our
fellow-workers. Work well done is a doorway to whatever good things we most
desire. Best of all, perhaps, to the girl who is earning her living, is the
satisfaction of feeling that she is a useful citizen, doing her part in the
development of Canada.

Canadian girls have a wide field from which to choose their particular form
of occupation. To choose wisely is a duty we owe to ourselves and to our
country--to ourselves, because a wise choice helps to secure our happiness
in work; to our country, because she has a right to the best we can offer
her in return for the peace and freedom in which we live under her laws.

Every year new varieties of employment and new positions in old employments
are being added to the field of work for girls and women. Work at home is
being systematized, and new devices are increasing the efficiency of the
work of a home. Among the girls who are beginning work to-day are some who
will develop further the management of the home on modern economic and
social lines. Forward-thinking people anticipate a great advance which will
be made by the girls of the twentieth century in the management of homes.

But what of the workers outside the home? Opportunities of employment
are steadily increasing. Already women are making a business of growing
vegetables and flowers, are engaged in the work of poultry farms,
bee-keeping, and in dairy production. Women are undertaking the work of
chemical experts in factories. Girls are driving motors and collecting
waste. They are shopping experts, employment experts, house furnishers,
agents for renting houses, and one woman has become an expert in testing
flour for a great milling industry. These are new employments. Hundreds of
thousands of girls and women are at work in the long-established women's
employments, as factory workers, saleswomen, stenographers, house workers,
telephone and telegraph operators, waitresses, milliners, dressmakers and
seamstresses, teachers, and nurses.

Some opportunities for employment are close at hand; others are farther
away. Sometimes it is best to begin with the nearest work. But in any case
the girl should take time to think of her employment. There are various
helpers to whom she may turn when she is beginning to think about work--her
father and mother, her teachers, the Government Employment Bureau, a good
private employment expert such as may be found in the Young Women's
Christian Association, or an older friend who is able to advise her and,
finally, the girl should help herself. She should think carefully of the
kind of work it seems likely that she may get to do and ask herself what
employment she finds most attractive and whether she has some aptitude
for it.

The following are some of the questions a girl should ask herself when she
is thinking of her employment: Shall I be able to improve and become more
skilful in my work? Will the work give me good companionship? Are the
surroundings clean and comfortable, and will they be good for my health
and the health of other workers? Is the employment likely to give me a
fair wage?

The statements made about wages in different employments apply generally to
the scale of wages paid in one particular city. No one set of figures can
be given which will state accurately the wages in many cities and towns and
country districts. The value of wages cannot be estimated properly by the
girl unless she knows at the same time what her living expenses are to be.
She must know, too, the standard of efficiency required in the employment.
These questions are discussed specially in Chapters XXIII and XXIV. When
the girl reads any statement concerning wages, she should remember that the
figures given represent only an approximate estimate. That is, while these
wages have actually been paid in one place, the same wages will not be
offered in these employments in every part of the country. Generally
speaking, the figures quoted represent mid-war wages.

The most important fact for the girl to learn about employment is that
when she does well-chosen work in the right spirit, she will find in it
happiness and usefulness. Through her work she will learn what an
interesting place the world is, and because she is a worker she will be
the companion of great workers who are advancing civilization every day.
She may feel sure that there is work for her to do, that she will find
work good, and the world a friendly place.




CHAPTER II

THE GIRL WHO WORKS IN A FACTORY


A girl's first impression of a factory is likely to be that it is a busy
place. The people at work and the work itself will seem strange to her.
She may even feel that she will never get used to her new surroundings.
But she should not allow herself to be discouraged. Although she may have
forgotten her first day in school when she was a little girl of five or
six, no doubt the schoolroom seemed to her then a very strange place, but
how quickly it became familiar and homelike.

The girl will enter the factory as a learner. Her wages will not be high,
but she will be paid for her first week, although it is hardly likely that
her work at first will be worth the money she receives for it. One of the
more experienced factory employees will be given the task of training her.
So the girl beginning work in a factory is really learning as she did at
school although now she is getting wages. The factory finds it worth while
to train beginners, and it does so in the hope that they will become
capable operators who will be in their places regularly.

One of the most important truths for the girl in the factory to realize is
that the more there is to learn about her work the better her future will
be as a worker. If there is so little to learn that she needs only a few
days to become independent of any training, then she will be sure to find
unskilled girls and low wages in this place of employment. She should not
be satisfied permanently with such work. The best positions are for skilled
employees and, therefore, every girl ought to become a skilled worker.
To be a skilled worker means that you can command good wages and that you
are more certain of steady employment than an unskilled employee, since
your employer will wish to retain your services even when the work in the
factory is slack. The girl, therefore, should not be anxious to find that
there is little to learn about her work. When she discovers that it will
be some time before she can carry on all the operations required, then she
may be sure that she is learning an employment which will be of value to
her. It is exactly the same as in school. No one was ever so clever as to
be able to learn to read in one day, yet we all know how well worth while
it is to be able to read.

How is the girl to choose the industry in which she hopes to find work?[2]
She should make inquiries about a factory before she enters it. She may
have a friend who is working in a whitewear factory, or a biscuit factory,
or who is making boxes. The friend probably will be willing to speak to the
foreman or forewoman about the girl's employment. But she should notice
the surroundings in which she means to work. Is the workroom light and
airy? Are the conditions under which she must work sanitary? Are the
workers respectable and well-behaved? If she is to work where there is
machinery, it should be properly guarded, so that she will not be in
danger. She should not choose a factory where the hours are longer than
the average nor one where over-time is encouraged. The management also
should be fair and considerate.

The kind of work carried on in the factory should give her an opportunity
to become a skilled worker. If the girls employed are all young girls
earning only a low wage, and there is little chance of promotion, then,
while it may be convenient for her to begin in such a factory, she should
not be content to stay there. She must be sure to make herself a skilled
worker, with a good chance of promotion and a fair certainty of receiving
a higher wage than is usually paid to a beginner.

When the girl knows the kind of factory for which she ought to look, she
may very well ask herself what qualifications she should possess in order
to become a successful factory worker. She should be healthy, of good
average physical strength, quick in her movements, with some natural
mechanical ability, good eyesight, and quick, steady hands. If she is to
begin where there is power machinery, it is an advantage to have had some
practice in running power machinery. Such practice she can get at a trade
or a technical school, most of which have night classes. Otherwise there
is not very much that a girl can learn about the actual work of a factory
before she enters it. She must make up her mind, however, to learn when
once she is in the factory. She should learn as many different operations
as possible. Nothing so increases the value of a worker as to be able to
fill a number of different positions. She should try to understand as much
of the business of the establishment as possible. Then she will find
herself taking a keen interest in the work and she will be better able to
enjoy her own part in it.

The girl's first wage in a factory is not likely to be large enough to
cover all her expenses. But, when she is a skilled worker, her wage should
provide her with reasonable necessaries and comfort and leave a margin for
saving, emergencies, and improvement. Every worker should realize that good
conditions are an important part of what one gets for one's work. It is
advisable to be satisfied with a little less money in an establishment
where opportunity is given for promotion, the guarding of health, and
recreation, and where the surroundings are clean and attractive, sometimes
even delightful, rather than to get a little more money, and be driven
beyond one's strength, or compelled to spend a great part of the day in
unpleasant surroundings. Lunch and rest rooms, a separate locker for her
clothes, books to read, an open tennis court or other opportunity for play,
are greatly valued by the girl at work, as they constitute, in reality,
a bonus in addition to her wages.

As soon as she is experienced, the girl in the factory is almost certain
to find herself on "piece-work." That is, instead of being paid a daily
or weekly wage, she will receive a set price for each article or "piece"
completed.

Speed in piece-work as a rule is a means by which she can earn high wages.
The wages of a beginner in a city may be eight or nine dollars a week;
wages vary, however, according to the locality and the character of the
work. The wages paid to experienced operators vary in a number of cases
from fifteen to twenty dollars a week. Exceptional workers who have special
ability earn more. With regard to piece-work, the girl should have
sufficient judgment not to force herself beyond her strength. She may lose
her health by a few years' overwork and become unable to support herself.
The speed of the worker is a subject for careful study both by the girl and
her employer. The girl will find that she can maintain high speed for a
certain length of time only and that her output actually will be greater,
week in and week out, if she slackens when she begins to feel a strain.

The most successful girl will not change about readily from one place to
another. If a girl is certain that she can improve her work and her
position, and if she has come to a careful decision, feeling sure that her
present conditions are not what they might be, then she will be wise to
change her place of employment. But the young girl who changes every few
weeks or months is in danger of spoiling not only her prospects as a paid
worker, but her whole life. While this danger is found in other
employments, it is perhaps greatest in the case of the factory worker.

"Some of the finest people I know," said a well-known factory owner not
long ago, "are at work in our factories." This may be said as truly all
over the country. It applies equally to men and women workers. Generous,
unselfish, efficient women and girls, as are many of these workers, are
a source of strength to their families and the country. They are using
their lives wisely and well, whether they continue as paid workers or
leave the factory to take charge of the care of a home.

[Footnote 2: To write down even the names of the industries which are
carried on in factories with the help of girls and women would occupy
much space. A few of the more important places of industry in which
girls are employed are whitewear factories and other factories which
have to do with the making of clothes, factories where food is prepared
for household use, twine factories, paper-box establishments, cigar and
tobacco factories, bookbinding establishments, brush-making factories,
manufactories of leather, carpets and rugs, boots and shoes and buttons,
cotton and woolen-mills, and knitting mills. These are only a few of the
factory employments, but the list shows how necessary the work of girls
and women is to the nation's industry.]




CHAPTER III

THE SALESWOMAN


The employment department of a big store is the testing place through which
many girls who mean to be saleswomen must pass before they reach the store
itself. Naturally the girl should be careful to do herself justice when she
goes to the employment department. The head of the department will be
certain to note her appearance carefully. The girl should make sure that
she is cleanly and neatly dressed; she should speak quietly and politely;
and she should show that sincere willingness to be cheerful, obliging, and
agreeable which she will find one of the best aids in her life both at work
and at home. To enter a store no particular training is required. The girl
leaving school when she is fourteen, fifteen, or sixteen, who is able to
read and write correctly and who has a thorough knowledge of the common
rules of arithmetic can hope to obtain a position in a store.

Having once obtained a position in a large store, the girl will find
herself part of an establishment where perhaps hundreds or thousands of
people are employed. It is probable that her position will be an easy one
suited to her age, without much responsibility, and with small pay, but,
if she shows interest and willingness to learn, she will be in line for
promotion. There are many positions which carry with them great
responsibility, and correspondingly large wages. A girl's chance to
occupy some day such a position depends largely on herself. She should
try to understand as much as possible about the store and its methods and
rules, and she should make her work part of the successful work of the
establishment.

In a large store the younger girls are employed as messenger girls, parcel
girls, markers, or, after some time in a store, a younger girl may help in
the care of the stock. The payment received in these positions is small.
Indeed, the problem of the youngest girls in the store is not an easy one.
The girl herself should try to realize that this big store in which she is
employed must be to her what the high school or college is to other girls
who stayed at school when she went to work. Here, in the store, she should
continue her education, which is to take the practical form of a business
training.

Unfortunately, some of the girls thus employed are indifferent to their
work. These are the inattentive, listless girls who look about them idly,
instead of attending to the needs of possible customers, or who spend more
than half the time talking to their friends visiting the store or to their
fellow-workers. One large establishment reports that only one third of
their staff become skilled in salesmanship. Another famous firm of
employers says that twenty-five per cent. of their girls do not improve,
another twenty-five per cent. are only fairly satisfactory, while fifty
per cent. are satisfactory. The girl who enters the employment of a store
should determine to become a skilled saleswoman.

Fortunately, the work of the saleswoman is steadily rising in its standing
as a good occupation. It is becoming skilled employment. Already there are
a number of schools which teach salesmanship, and many of the larger
departmental stores have courses of instruction for their salespeople.
The managers of these stores say that this training pays both the store and
its staff of employees. After training the employees make better wages and
the store earns a higher percentage. Any girl who wants to be a saleswoman
should, if possible, take a course in salesmanship either at a business
college, a trade school, or at a Young Women's Christian Association, or
she should try to find a position in a store where there is a school for
employees.

Our young saleswoman will study her store, she will take lessons in
salesmanship, she will be interested in her work and eager to learn. Such a
girl will find that the place of her employment is a world in miniature,
where she can study life and human nature and where she may become a useful
and well-equipped member of society. No girl who is a good saleswoman can
fail to learn how to deal with many different kinds of people and to have
many opportunities of making friends among her fellow-workers.

It is not difficult for the average girl to become an efficient saleswoman.
To recapitulate--she should be neat and pleasing in appearance, quick to
learn, willing to obey, with good manners and bright intelligence, and she
should be interested in her work. She should have a "head for figures," a
knowledge of correct English, and ability to work quickly and courteously
at the same time. She should, of course, have a thorough knowledge of the
commodity she is selling. The more accurate her knowledge of materials,
the better saleswoman she will make. She should also take a personal
interest in the wants of her customers. Her object is to sell articles
which will give satisfaction.

The average earnings of saleswomen at times seem disappointingly small.
It should be remembered, however, that the indifferent or careless girl
lowers the average. The successful saleswoman, after some years of work,
may earn from fifteen to twenty dollars a week. A great many girls earn
less. The beginner may get five or six dollars a week or, if she is in an
establishment which pays no employee less than a certain amount, she may
get seven or eight dollars. The girl who earns less than eight dollars a
week after a year or two years is not a successful saleswoman and is not
likely to be kept on in any well-managed store. The saleswoman who is
dissatisfied with her wage may ask at any time to have reference made to
her actual sales, of which an account is kept. Wages are based on sales.
Sometimes a commission is paid on sales over a certain amount. In any case,
the girl feels that there is a direct connection between her successful
salesmanship and her wages. Character, skill, tact, and energy are all
required for successful salesmanship. The saleswoman who really gives
herself to the work of serving and satisfying her customers finds her
employment an exacting one.

A saleswoman may be promoted to have charge of stock; she may become
assistant buyer or head of a department; and in somewhat rare cases she
may become a buyer. These are all responsible positions requiring unusual
business ability and character. The salaries are high. If a saleswoman has
excellent business ability, she may, after years of experience, become an
important influence in the management of the store. Some departments offer
greater opportunities than others. The more expensive the article to be
sold, the more is required from the saleswoman. A very young girl will
not be found selling coats and cloaks or expensive suits and dresses.
"The customer who is spending a large amount of money wants to have
confidence in the judgment of the saleswoman," is the saying of an expert
in store management.

The large department store, while it affords training and opportunity
to the girl who intends to become a competent saleswoman, employs many
girls and women in occupations other than salesmanship. In the store there
is a large clerical staff, including stenographers, who may receive
promotion to the position of private secretaries and bookkeepers.
Telephone and telegraph operators are among the employees. The store
shoppers act in connection with mail orders and orders received by
telephone. The advertising department employs writers, artists,
proof-readers, and card and sign writers. Milliners are employed in the
millinery department and fitters and dressmakers in the alteration
departments. Manicurists and hair-dressers carry on their special
occupations, and waitresses are employed in the store lunchroom or
restaurant. Trained nurses have positions in the store hospital and visit
employees in their homes. Machine and handworkers carry out special orders
in making curtains, cushions, lampshades, etc. A store school employs
teachers of salesmanship and store system.

Many girls are employed as saleswomen in smaller stores which need only a
few employees. The system of the great store is not so necessary in a small
establishment, yet the individual saleswoman in the small store holds a
responsible position. Sometimes a girl with business ability becomes in
time assistant manager, or even part owner, of such a store. Ideas and
initiative will tell wherever they are found, and the girl who is really
interested in salesmanship will succeed in a large store or in a small one.

The hours are fairly long, sometimes longer than the average in women's
occupations, but they are no longer than the hours required in many
professional and other employments in which women are engaged.

The well-advised saleswoman will have interests outside of her work. She
should study some interesting branch of knowledge and cultivate a hobby.
She will find both pleasure and benefit in belonging to a club or other
association. One of the most interesting developments in the large
business establishment where numbers of men and women are employed is
the organization for comradeship and improvement. Thrift is encouraged;
opportunities are provided for exercise; sometimes those on the staff of
such an establishment are offered housing of an attractive kind at
moderate prices. The girls of the establishment may be provided with a
club house.

Altogether, the character of this employment is complex and interesting.
It is an attractive occupation, in which the girl is brought into
relationship with people with whom she can help to develop a sociable,
co-operative life, tending to improve her own character and usefulness
and that of others.




CHAPTER IV

THE GIRL AT WORK IN AN OFFICE


The girl who hopes to succeed in office work should be able to spell
correctly and should have a good general English education. It is true that
some girls have taught themselves to spell correctly after they have
entered business offices; and ambitious, sensible girls, who find that
letters dictated to them contain words the meaning of which they do not
know, study until their vocabularies are greatly enlarged and improved.
But, while they are learning, the employer is not receiving the service
to which he is entitled.

The only practical way for the average girl to enter a business office is
by studying stenography. But to have a really satisfactory school training,
the girl who means to be a stenographer should be ready to pass the
entrance examination into a college or university. Three or four years'
attendance at a high or secondary school is a necessary preparation for
first-class office work. The girl who is a college graduate is not too
well equipped to be a stenographer. Even if a girl is compelled, by the
necessity of earning her living, to begin office work early, still she can,
by determination, courage, and hard work, equip herself with a good
business education. But it is only the exceptional girl who can do this.
The girl who wishes to engage in office work should have three years, if
possible, in a good secondary school, before she enters a business college.

The business college should be chosen carefully, and the girl in training
should attend the classes for nine months or a year. This is the least time
required for satisfactory training. Unfortunately, too many students take
only six months, or even three, at a business school. The result is that
they begin work only partly equipped with training for the office. Many
employers complain that stenographers are incompetent and careless.
One reason for this is that they have not had sufficient training; their
stenography, typewriting, and other instruction have been only half
mastered. Office work would be a better employment for girls if these
half-trained and incompetent workers were not lowering wages, irritating
employers, and limiting the work and responsibility with which girls
would be entrusted if the average stenographer knew her work thoroughly.

The girl who leaves a business college to enter an office should not feel
that there is nothing more to learn. No one can be a thoroughly competent
stenographer until she has been a year at work in an office. The school
teaches her how to handle her working tools. But the real problems of
office work are solved only in the office. There are endless details to
be mastered. Every office has its own rules and customs and its own
methods. It is necessary to learn how to meet people and deal with them.
The girl must study the people with whom she works. She must learn how
her employer likes to have his work done. The best workers keep on
learning year by year.

Many of the qualities which go to make the ideal home-maker belong to the
ideal worker in an office. The business girl will need self-control and
tact. Her manners should be quiet and agreeable. An office is a place for
work; and part of the usefulness of a business girl is in helping to make
it a good place in which to work. She should therefore understand order and
method. She should be tranquil and well poised. She should get her work
done quickly without seeming to be in a hurry. Such a girl is a treasure
in an office.

The business girl should be dressed suitably for her occupation. One of the
first lessons for her to learn is that no employer is likely to believe
that she can do good work if her general appearance is careless or untidy.
Her dress should be quiet and pleasing, and it should not distract her
attention from her work. A workmanlike dress can be very attractive.
Business girls as a rule show taste and judgment in choosing their clothes
and in keeping every detail of their appearance neat, suitable, and
pleasing. Thrift in the matter of dressing and a suitable appearance
are necessary factors in the success of a business girl's work.

The business girl must be trustworthy. She cannot be a success if her
employer is in doubt as to whether she may talk about office business
outside. Her memory should be good. It is a great help to have someone
at hand who can remember a business conversation, where to find documents,
addresses, and other memoranda. The girl will find that it is
unsatisfactory to spend much time in social conversation. If she wishes
to earn and keep the good opinion of her fellow-workers and her employer,
she will attend to work, with only an occasional remark on anything not
connected with office affairs.

The salaries earned by business girls vary greatly. There are girls at
work in offices who are paid as little as five, six, or seven dollars a
week. But these girls are very young, they are badly trained, unable to do
good work of any kind, and they should hardly be called stenographers. They
can address envelopes, do a little typewriting, answer the telephone, and
so on. The well-equipped office girl should realize that she must keep up
the standard of her employment, as one which needs thorough training and
competent, well paid workers, so the work of the girl in business may
remain a highly-respected and desirable occupation.

The supply of first-class office workers is never sufficient to meet the
demand. A common wage for younger competent stenographers who have had
some experience is twelve dollars. Experienced stenographers may get
fifteen, eighteen, twenty, or twenty-five dollars, according to the
positions they occupy, the character of the work, and the responsibility
involved. Girls with managing ability may be promoted to hold important
positions. They may become assistant managers of offices or confidential
clerks or secretaries. Women in these positions receive salaries of from
two to three thousand dollars a year. In an exceptional case a woman who
is a manager may receive four or five thousand. But such positions and
such women workers are rare indeed. Eighteen dollars a week is regarded
as a good salary for a capable stenographer of some years' experience.
The average stenographer receives as a rule two weeks' holidays with
wages. This is an important consideration for it helps to secure her
health and general well-being.

It is often said that a small office offers the best opportunity for a
clever girl to win promotion. She is given work of all kinds to do and can
make herself indispensable to her employer. On the other hand, the work
may be easier in a large office since it is organized on well-established
lines. Salaries, generally speaking, are higher in large offices, but
there are fewer opportunities for promotion.

An unusually competent office girl with some capital may become a public
stenographer. But, in order to succeed, she must have business ability and
should understand clearly what she can afford and what she cannot afford
in office equipment, rent, and so on. The work of a public stenographer is
very exacting. Many stenographers are employed in the service of the
Government. In general, an examination is required for a position in the
civil service. The work and hours are regular and not exacting, and the
pay is good. Many girls, however, find work in a business office more
interesting, and opportunities for promotion are also better.

Some girls who have not the ability to become expert stenographers, may
be exceptionally good typists. Such girls may find employment in typing
letters from phonographs or dictaphones. Work with multigraphs,
adding-machines, or comptometers is required in larger offices. Special
positions may be obtained by girls who are of a mechanical turn or who
have considerable manual dexterity. The girl who devotes herself to
bookkeeping, if she has special ability, may occupy an important business
position.

In whatever capacity she may be employed, the earnest and competent
office-worker will find herself highly valued and well paid for her share
of responsibility in the world of financial and commercial development.




CHAPTER V

LEARNING AFTER THE POSITION IS FOUND


The first few days, sometimes even the first few weeks, are often a little
difficult for the girl who has found a position and goes to work for the
first time. But she can take with her a few simple resolutions which will
make most of her difficulties disappear and which may even change them into
helps rather than hindrances. She can remember that all the responsible
people she knows have had these same difficulties and have overcome them.
This thought will encourage her to believe that what others have done she
can do also. There is much that she may gain from this new position. It is
like an open door whereby she may enter a new world.

The girl who is in her first position will find that she must adjust
herself to conditions very different from those of home and school life.
At home all her personal concerns have been of supreme importance, and
she has been the object of unceasing love and care. At school her best
interests have still been consulted, and she has been taught how both to
work and play. She now begins to give back value for the care which has
been taken of her at home and the teaching which she has received at
school. After she is able to work for herself, it is really no one else's
duty to support her. She cannot expect that busy people in the office or
workroom will stop to listen to her. If she is feeling dull or discouraged,
or if something has gone wrong in her private affairs, these things have
nothing to do with her fellow-workers. They also have their private
affairs. Therefore she must learn to be cheerful, not to talk about her own
troubles, and to be, in brief, a grown-up, sensible, considerate person.

Two illustrations may help the girl to understand this difference between
life in paid employment and school days or life at home. A girl once was
offered a position in a large establishment by the man who was the head
of the business. She had certain training and gifts which made him believe
that she could do good work in his business. After her appointment she
found that she was under the direction of the manager's chief of staff,
who, as she soon discovered, had wanted someone else. She began to think
out the position in which she found herself. "It is quite plain," she said
to herself, "that the chief is a more important person than I am. He is not
going to lose his position because he does not like me. It would not be
just or right or good business if he did. The truth is that if I do not
get on with him and convince him that I can do good work I am going to be
a failure. It is part of my business to get on with the chief of staff."
She had made the important discovery that it is wise to put oneself in the
background and to work harmoniously with one's associates. After a year's
hard work she had the satisfaction of being told by her chief, that,
notwithstanding his early dissatisfaction with her appointment, she had
won his approval, for she had convinced him of her efficiency.

The other illustration can be given in a few words, but it teaches a truth
about paid employment which many girls need to learn. One day a woman
called to see an important public man on a matter of business. When she
came he was dictating a letter. He saw his caller as soon as he had
finished. Before the conversation had well begun, his secretary came to
the door and asked him to what address he wished the letter sent. When the
secretary had gone out again, the man looked at his visitor and said
laughing, yet with an expression of annoyance, "I cannot teach my secretary
that it is her work to look up addresses. She is here to save me trouble.
I am not here to save her trouble. But I cannot get her to understand
that." The girl in question was behaving in her work as if she had been a
spoiled child at home. It is to be hoped that she would have been ashamed
to ask her mother, for instance, to tell her an address which she could
look up for herself. Yet this girl was being paid to find addresses as
part of her work.

The girl who is beginning paid employment will have to learn largely from
others how her work ought to be done, but she must learn to depend on her
own observation. Questions must be asked occasionally, but it is unwise to
ask too many. Ask information only from those who are willing to answer.
Everyone in the world of work is busy as a rule, and comparatively few
people will stop their work to explain to someone else how a task ought to
be done. There are two classes of workers--those who require direction
always, and those who are able and willing to take responsibility. The girl
at first begins under direction but, as soon as she is familiar with what
she has to do and understands a good deal of the purpose of her work, she
should try, if possible, to develop responsibility. It is a good plan to
study how other people do their work. There is sure to be someone among
one's fellow-employees who is a specially good worker. Study the methods
and character of this worker and learn from your observation how to do your
own work. The girl in a new position should resolutely avoid association
with lazy, indifferent, and idle fellow-employees. One of the first lessons
for her to learn, and sometimes one of the hardest, is that her time is not
her own. It belongs to her employer, who is paying for her work. Therefore
her own social engagements have no claim on her working hours.

It is apparent that certain qualifications and characteristics ensure
success in paid work--good temper, self-control, common sense, kindness,
and a sense of what is fair are of inestimable value to the girl worker.
Moreover, she must be in earnest in her determination to find work and keep
it. She should have some secondary employment at which she can work if her
regular employment is slack. And through all the changes and difficulties
of her working life, a girl should know how to keep well, for health is a
great asset.

She should add to these essentials a feeling of responsibility and a desire
to understand the problems of management in the business in which she is
employed. In addition, let her have that sense of honour which will keep
her from a betrayal of confidential information. The loyal worker is always
valued and respected.




CHAPTER VI

WHAT EVERY GIRL NEEDS TO KNOW


The world the girl has to live in is the everyday world we know. Some
people say that the world is commonplace, and so it is if we look at it
from one point of view. But the truth is that the commonplace and the
wonderful are so closely joined together that it is impossible to separate
them. The girl needs commonplace gifts to live in the world, or she will
not prosper. She needs also to be able to see and understand the wonderful
side of life. To appreciate both the commonplace and the wonderful should
be part of her endeavour. A great deal depends on her training. What shall
we choose for her? She may work at home or in paid employment, but she
needs certain training, because she is a girl, just as a soldier needs
training, because he is a soldier.

First, the girl ought to know how to keep well. Good health is a precious
possession, and we may have a great deal to do with whether we are strong
and healthy or weak and half-ill most of the time. If the girl is to be a
home-maker, she needs good health. What a sad place a home is if the
home-maker is a constant sufferer! If the girl is in a shop, a factory, an
office, a telephone exchange, a school, or a hospital, unless she is a
reasonably healthy girl her success in her work is greatly lessened, if
indeed it is possible for her to succeed at all. If she is an actress or
an artist, she undergoes a constant strain on her nervous energy. Artists
and actresses need good health, possibly more so even than the average
woman in paid employment. So, no matter what the girl is to do, she should
be healthy.

But she requires certain definite kinds of knowledge, so that she may know
how to keep well. The first is knowing what to eat. There is scarcely
anything that interferes more with the health and success of the girl
worker than ignorance of what is nutritious food. A woman who is very fond
of girls who work and who knows hundreds of them, said once that she would
like to give every girl she knew this knowledge about food. There is no way
of acquiring it except by learning. Our ideal girl will learn food values
and how food should be prepared. Every girl in the world, no matter who she
is, is better off for this knowledge. It is part of the foundation of good
health. The girl in business requires a special warning to be sure that her
luncheon gives her sufficient nourishment for her work.

In order to be healthy, girls must know, also, how to dress. This should
include some knowledge of the making of clothing, how to cut out, and how
to sew, and also some skill in mending and re-modelling. Looking into the
future for the well-being of our ideal girl, we see that her appearance as
well as her health depends not a little on her skill as a wise buyer and
maker of clothing. Her early income as a worker is not likely to be large.
It may be very small. It will need all her skill to make the best use of
this income.

In order to acquire skill in the management of food and clothing and so
ensure her health, a girl must understand the management of money. Some day
she will have the spending of an income. Either she will earn the income in
paid employment, or it will be part of her work as a home-maker to manage
the spending of the house money. Now, money cannot be spent wisely except
by planning. The girl should learn how to divide her income, to allot so
much for food, so much for clothing, so much for shelter, so much for
improvement, recreation, and holidays, so much for the dentist and the
doctor, so much to be saved, so much for religious obligations and
benevolence, and for safety a margin over, because there are always
unforeseen calls on one's income. This planning for the proper division of
her income may sound at first a little bewildering. But after all, what is
it but learning what we can afford to spend? We begin by buying a little
carefully, and as we go on we acquire knowledge and skill. Few things which
the twentieth century girl can learn will stand her in better stead in
everyday life, or help her more constantly, than knowing how to spend her
income wisely, honestly, and helpfully.

We have spoken at some length about food and clothing as they affect
health. Quite as important to health are rest and recreation. A girl needs
not only plenty of refreshing sleep, but play also and what most people
call "good times." It is a mistake to suppose that we can be healthy
without play. Often when we are out of sorts, sad, depressed, and gloomy,
and our friends are sorry for us and think something dreadful must have
happened to make us so unhappy, all that we need in reality is sleep,
fresh air, exercise, and play. It is not being a heroine to be sad.
Most real heroines are happy people. There is nothing heroic in making
other people depressed by our gloomy faces. The ideal girl is healthy
and happy, she sleeps eight hours or more at night, and plays a
reasonable part of her time. To play all the time is very dull, even more
dull than to work all the time. But each day, if possible, one should have
some happy play time.

Then, too, the ideal girl will try to see that she helps others to be as
healthy and happy as she is herself. Part of the value of knowing how to
keep well is that it teaches us how to keep other people well. We should
know how others should be fed and clothed and cared for. The girl of the
twentieth century needs some knowledge of nursing. It is not necessary
for her to be a trained nurse, but she should have some of the knowledge
and skill of the trained nurse.

Among the things that every girl needs to know is something of the
importance of friendship. The best gifts in the world are love, kindness,
faithfulness, sincerity, and purity. It is through our relations with
other human beings and our love for them that we begin to understand the
love of God.




CHAPTER VII

THE HOUSE WORKER--DOMESTIC SCIENCE


A young woman who is now the author of two successful novels earned the
money she needed to attend a teachers' training school by working as a
domestic servant. It was the quickest and most convenient way for her to
earn a certain sum of money. Her decision and independence of character
kept her from hesitating for a moment to make use of this employment. One
young woman who is a capable real estate agent takes a position as an
experienced general servant when her usual business is slack. A woman at
the head of a large business, which she originated and developed herself,
earned her living as a domestic until she was twenty-five years old. There
is no reason why any of us should be kept from doing good domestic work if
it is the most suitable and convenient employment for us.

The disadvantages of domestic work, as it is generally arranged at present,
are that the house worker is required to live away from home; her own
special sleeping and living accommodation is sometimes not of the best; she
has comparatively little time that is absolutely her own; she feels that
she is placed at a social disadvantage as compared with other girls who are
her friends and who are earning a living in other paid work, and she may be
lonely, as a consequence of being often the only paid worker in the
household. These are facts to be considered. But it is possible that a
re-arrangement of household work, undertaken by modern employers and clever
modern girls, who have a gift for household management, as well as
character and initiative, may provide a solution for these disadvantages.

The advantages of domestic work include good wages, and more comfortable
living conditions than the average paid worker can secure for herself. The
house worker has also variety in work, freedom to move about at her work,
and freedom from the rigid rules necessary in big business establishments.
She is afforded an opportunity to become a highly skilled worker, and she
can find a permanent position if she is competent and wishes to remain in
one place. Above all, the house worker is getting the best training for
home-making.

The wages of the house worker include board, lodging, and washing, and
often some part at least of her working clothes. She has two weeks'
holidays with wages. She may save in a year a quarter or a third as
much money as the entire earnings of her girl friends. At twelve dollars
a week, working forty-two weeks in the year, the girl in a factory can earn
five hundred and four dollars, out of which she has of course to pay all
her expenses. The house worker who is earning twenty-five, thirty or
thirty-five dollars a month can easily save two hundred dollars in a year,
and a number of them do so. Girls in other paid employments, who pay board
and lodging, washing, and carfare out of ten or twelve dollars a week,
are practically unable to save anything.

A competent house worker is beyond the fear of unemployment, while the
possibility of unemployment or of being laid off for a number of weeks is
an anxiety to many other paid women workers. When she marries and has a
home of her own to take care of, the house worker is at a great advantage.
She can take up the work of a home easily, and her management is a success
from the beginning.

The accomplishment most frequently required from the domestic worker is
ability to cook. The girl who has a natural gift in this direction should
take pains to develop it. She may have to begin to earn her living when she
is quite young. In this case she should apply for a position as second maid
in a household where a cook is kept, and she should be careful to learn
from the cook all that she needs to know in order to become a professional
expert in cooking. Or she should look for a position as house worker with
an employer who is herself a good housekeeper and who is willing to train
her.

The improvement of housework conditions is largely in the hands of
household employees. If a young woman is an excellent cook and a competent
household manager, she can make practically her own conditions with women
employers. If she prefers to live at home or in a room of her own outside
the house where she is employed, she can explain to her employer the hours
that she is willing to be on duty and how the work of the house can be
arranged so that she can accomplish the greater part of it during these
hours. She will be certain to find some intelligent woman employer who
will agree to her conditions. Only the first-class worker, who can plan
and carry out her plans successfully, will be able to do this; and every
woman employer may not see the benefit of such an arrangement. There are
a number of households where the woman in charge will be glad to accept
service during half the day, but here also the house worker must be first
class. The trained domestic worker of high qualifications, able to do her
work to perfection, and to consider intelligently how the work of the
household can be organized, will add greatly to the standing of this
employment.

The house worker should have a fairly good general education. The better
her general education, the more successful she is likely to be. She should
be intelligent, obliging, and adaptable. She should have a strong sense of
honour, for she is largely on her own responsibility, and the welfare of
the home is often trusted in her hands. The ideal household employee should
have some of the qualities of the artist. The work of a fine cook is
artistic, and the perfect care of a house requires both the eye and the
hand of an artist. No woman can be a success as a paid house worker who is
not kind. She often has some part of the care of children, and it is wrong
to have an ill-tempered or unkind person in charge of, or in company with,
children. Besides this, the care of a house, the cooking of food,
cleanliness, and the work of adapting oneself to the wants of others cannot
be carried out well and cheerfully unless the worker responsible for this
work is kind.

Wages are unusually good in domestic work as compared with other
employments for women. Some girls, however, are underpaid. A girl may
receive, for instance, twelve dollars a month. No girl with initiative or
knowledge of housework needs to remain in such a position. Wages vary from
twenty, twenty-two, to twenty-five, thirty, and thirty-five dollars,
according to the locality, the nature of the work, and the skill of the
worker. A first-class cook commands high wages. So also does a first-class
managing housekeeper. A general servant of ability and character, who
undertakes most of the work of a household, with the exception of the
washing, will receive twenty, twenty-five or thirty dollars. In some parts
of the country her wages may be higher. If trained workers, who have
special gifts for household management and who feel that they can do better
in this employment than any other, would undertake the re-organizing of
house work, this occupation should take its rightful place as one of the
best occupations for the average woman.

From a consideration of domestic service we naturally pass on to those
occupations of girls which grow out of a knowledge of "domestic science."
The study of domestic science is making itself felt in the homes of the
country and is opening up many avenues of employment for girls. The
management of clubs, hotels, restaurants, tea-rooms, cafeterias, and
lunch-rooms in connection with colleges, departmental stores, and banks,
affords employment for those who have the gifts and training necessary.
Special cooking for invalids, the supplying of specialties, such as
marmalade, pickles, preserved fruit, canned fruit and vegetables, salted
nuts, cakes of various kinds and other dainties is work which is being
carried on successfully by numbers of women and girls. The girl, in
considering employment, should remember that she will be at an advantage
in any specialized women's employment and that the world is offering her
opportunities for good work which a few years ago had not been dreamed of.
The occupation of house work, household management, cooking, all the arts
of the home, will well repay the enthusiasm and energy of every girl who
has a gift in this direction. What the girl with ability for this work
needs to bring to her problem is, not only enthusiasm and energy, but
originality and initiative. "I have a real gift," she should say to
herself; "how can I make the best use of it?"

Universities have established departments of domestic science, and there
are also domestic science training schools. Numbers of graduates find
positions as instructors. Many other positions are open to the domestic
science graduate. Practical experience is required in most of these
openings. After graduating it is advisable to find a position as an
assistant. In this way the young woman in this occupation will become
fitted to hold the most responsible and remunerative posts. There are
possibilities in household work and domestic science which have not yet
been realized.




CHAPTER VIII

 THE TEACHER


Two girls were playing a game of tennis together. One of the girls was a
skilful player, but the other knew little of the game. In a few minutes
the skilful player came to the side of the net where the other stood.
"See," she said, "this is the way to hold your racket. This is the way to
strike the ball." The unskilled player grasped the idea, and immediately
much pleasure was added to the game for them both.

A singer was giving a lesson to one of her pupils. She explained to her
carefully how to stand, how to breathe, and how to let her voice flow
easily and naturally from her throat. The pupil's voice became to her
thereafter something more than it had ever been before.

Two men in a business office were discussing whether or not they should
undertake a new enterprise. One of the men, seeing that the other man had
not yet perceived the principle underlying the business situation, drew a
sheet of paper in front of them on the desk and made on it a series of
calculations. "I understand now," the other man said, "I see the risk and
how you have made provision for meeting it."

The skilful tennis-player, the trained singer, the able business man were
sharing their knowledge with others, showing them how to make the best use
of their powers. That is to say, they were teaching others. Every person
is to some extent a born teacher, but some men and women make teaching
their life work.

Many girls teach for a few years before entering some other occupation.
Perhaps they earn money in this way to take a course at a college or
university, and afterwards they may either return to teaching or enter
some other profession. There are other girls who are what we call "born
teachers." They love more than anything else, guiding, training, and
helping children. It is no trouble to them, but rather a delight, to
show and direct, gently, repeatedly, untiringly, along the path of
knowledge. Girls who are born teachers should receive every encouragement
to devote themselves to teaching until they have homes to look after and
children of their own to teach. Many good teachers teach only for a few
years and do excellent work. But it is to the "born teachers" that we
must look for the happiness of the school and its highest development.

The girl who means to be a teacher should look forward to spending a number
of years in school. She will enjoy this, for the teacher must be a student
and must love studying. It may be that her family cannot afford to keep her
at school. Then she can do what so many other girls have done. She can go
to work to earn money for her own support, and while doing this she can
save part of her earnings so that later she may return to school. The
school vacation in summer offers opportunities for paid work, and every
girl of energy and determination can find work to do.

The girl who is to be a teacher should never be satisfied with a minimum
of learning. If this is her attitude toward school, then she should never
be a teacher; because no girl or woman can be a good teacher who does not
love to learn. The office of a teacher is a sacred trust, since she is
responsible for the future well-being and happiness of little children.
So if the girl does not love to learn, she should find some work other
than teaching.

Provincial Governments in Canada have charge of education, and each
Province has its own regulations, carefully framed, to provide good
teachers for the children of the Province. The girl who is to be a teacher
must pass a series of examinations, the first two of which are for teaching
in lower grades and higher grades of the public schools. The graduate of a
university has a standing which enables her to teach classes in high
schools and collegiate institutes.

The girl may continue her studies while she is teaching in a public school,
and she may either take her next examination without attending further
classes, or, when she has saved enough money, she may return to school for
a few sessions before trying her examination. The girl who has energy and
ability and who loves study is often able to obtain an excellent education
for the teaching profession in this way. It is necessary, however, to warn
girls who find study very difficult, that it is doubtful if they should
think of trying to pass this series of examinations. If they love teaching
and have a true gift for it, they will probably be able to take the first
examinations, which are comparatively easy. The higher examinations may be
beyond their reach. This fact should not depress them. Their work is with
the little children, and there is no better work in the world.

The most important qualities for a teacher are a sympathetic understanding
of human nature, a keen sense of justice, and a sense of humour. These are
great qualities, but the girl who means to teach should notice that they
may be both acquired and developed. Any one who gives all her energies and
gifts to teaching will find that the work is a strain. The teacher should
not allow her work to become set in a fixed routine. She should guard
against becoming autocratic and unprogressive. She should never cease to
be herself a student. Each day should add a little to the sum of her
knowledge. She may begin the study of new subjects, and thus keep a
certain freshness in her mental attitude. More important, however, than
the knowledge gained from books, is her interest in the life of the
community in which she is living.

The salary of the teacher varies according to the community in which she
lives and the grade of teaching in which she is occupied. It may be taken
as a general rule that teachers do not become wealthy. They are not highly
paid, considering the time spent in preparing to teach and the quality of
their work. Their salaries, however, almost invariably ensure them a fair
average of comfort in food, clothing, and shelter, an opportunity to save,
to continue their studies, to travel a little, and to enjoy their holidays,
which are longer than the holidays of the average worker. A teacher's
holidays are necessary for mental and nervous recuperation and should
include some study and improvement in aims and methods of work. The rewards
of the profession are not in money and leisure merely. Teachers have the
respect and affection of the community to a degree enjoyed by few other
workers.

If a girl begins to teach in the schools of a city, she will enter a
thoroughly systematized and complex organization. In the city the teacher's
salary is increased automatically year by year if her work is satisfactory.
In towns and villages salaries are lower, but living expenses are lower
also. In partly settled districts and districts where there is as yet
little appreciation of the value of good teaching, salaries are low.
Maximum salaries for women who have taught for a number of years in the
public schools and have unusual ability as teachers may be as high as nine
hundred or one thousand dollars. These women teachers, with their ability,
would probably make more money in other occupations, but their work would
hardly be of the same service to the community, nor would they have the
same feeling of satisfaction in doing it. The salaries of women in high
schools and collegiate institutes vary from seven or eight hundred dollars
to eighteen hundred, two thousand, or twenty-four hundred. Women who are
lecturers and professors in colleges and universities are paid amounts
similar to the higher salaries in collegiate institutes.

The average salaries of women teachers in the public schools of Ontario
for 1917 were as follows: Cities, $795; towns, $628; incorporated
villages, $573; rural schools, $580.

Besides the ordinary teaching of the class-room, girls may be attracted to
the teaching of special subjects. The girl who studies for kindergarten
work needs to have an active imagination, a sympathetic understanding of
child nature, a happy disposition, and both vocal and instrumental musical
training. There are also domestic science teachers, teachers of special
classes for handicapped children, teachers of manual training, sewing,
millinery, music, physical training, arts and handicrafts, and commercial
subjects. The girl of special opportunities and gifts may become a teacher
of languages. Other girls may teach privately in households. Others, if
they have capital and some business ability, may establish small private
schools of their own in neighbourhoods where such schools are required.
Recreation centres and playgrounds, settlements, the training of foreign
children, call for unusual or special gifts and energies from girls and
women who teach. There are also executive and administrative positions in
large schools and school systems which may be obtained by women teachers
of experience.

There are still discoveries and advances to be made before perfect training
and education can be secured for our children. Girls who teach may hope to
aid in making these discoveries. Patient work, constructive imagination,
and enthusiasm are required in the great enterprise of advancing education.
As an inspiration, the lives of great teachers invite young teachers of
this century to follow their examples of devotion and leadership. It is not
many years since a woman teacher in Montreal saved as many of her children
as she could and stayed to shepherd the other little ones who perished with
her in the burning school. The name of Sara Maxwell is an inspiration to
every Canadian child who hears her story. She gave her life to protect and
comfort her pupils and became one of that great number of teachers who have
proved that theirs is a high calling.




CHAPTER IX

THE WORK OF A NURSE


There are many wise sayings about the trained nurse, two among which may
be given here. One of these was spoken by a woman who is herself a
distinguished trained nurse, and the other by a woman in a public position
who has met many people and is a good judge of character. The nurse said,
"Trained nursing will make a woman very good or it will harden her." The
other woman said, "I have never known a nurse who was not glad to be a
nurse and who was not thankful for a nurse's training." These two sayings
show that the work of a trained nurse is no ordinary occupation. The girl
who becomes a nurse-in-training is preparing to enter an employment which
will have a great effect upon her character.

A girl must be twenty, in some hospitals twenty-five, years of age before
she is accepted by a training school of good standing. If she prefers to
enter a school connected with a children's hospital, she may be accepted
when she is twenty. The work of a nurse calls for physical strength and
endurance, and it has been found that girls under twenty or even under
twenty-five are not strong enough to stand the strain of hospital work.
A very strong healthy girl under twenty may say, "Oh, but I am strong
enough to stand the strain." She is mistaken. It is not only physical
strength which is required, but physical endurance, and these extra years
are needed to develop this endurance. If a girl who hopes to be a nurse
leaves school when she is seventeen or eighteen, the best work she can
undertake in order to prepare for nursing is work in her own home.
Another way in which she may spend part of her time profitably is in the
reading of good books, so that she may store her mind with thoughts and
information which will be helpful to her in dealing with her patients.
No woman who is a nurse can be too well read, or too well informed in art,
music, biography, history, and the public affairs of the day. If a girl,
who feels that nursing is her real work, prefers to earn her living between
the time when she leaves school and the day that she is accepted as a
probationer, she may enter some other calling, and meanwhile may add to her
useful knowledge both of people and of work. She should also save some
money, for while the training of a nurse is not expensive, still as
probationer and, later, as nurse-in-training, she will need money for
necessary expenses.

The intending nurse should make a few financial calculations before
she begins her course of training. The hospital will give her exact
directions as to the clothes she will need for her work while she is a
probationer. She will require some spending money, and she should be
provided with a good stock of clothes, especially underwear, shoes, and
stockings. When she is accepted as a nurse-in-training, she may be given
by the hospital a monthly allowance which is supposed to provide her with
clothes and the books required for her studies. This sum varies in
different hospitals. Generally speaking, it is fifteen or twenty dollars
a month. In any case, the sum will be hardly sufficient to cover all her
expenses, although it is wonderful on how little money nurses-in-training
have been able to manage. Some hospitals do not give their
nurses-in-training any money and require that the nurse should pay
a sum for her instruction. It is usual for these hospitals to provide
nurses-in-training with uniforms, caps, and aprons.

Most training schools require from applicants an educational standard of
four years in a high school or matriculation status. Young women who are
college graduates may take the training of a nurse after they leave the
university. The business girl or the girl in any other occupation who
means to be a nurse and who has left school before reaching the necessary
standard can prepare for her training by attending evening classes or
studying by herself or with a friend.

The intending nurse should choose with great care the hospital in which
she means to train. The standing of the hospital will have a marked
influence onher career as a nurse. Some hospitals are justly famous for
the excellent training which they give. The usual length of time required
is three years. A number of hospitals, however, have courses of two years.

The time of probation lasts three, four, or six months. During this time
the probationer will be tested for endurance, neatness, earnestness, and
ability. No probationer who is untidy or who is wanting in personal
cleanliness is accepted in a training school. The professional appearance
of the nurse is essential to her success. Few women are more attractive
in appearance than a nurse in uniform.

Nurses-in-training live in a nurses' home which is one of the hospital
buildings. In these buildings the nurse will spend by far the greater part
of her time for two or three years. The hospital is a world in itself, and
the nurse will have few interests outside its walls. Most nurses regard
their years of training as a time of growth and wonderful experience, and
the average nurse is very happy during this time, although a great deal of
the work is not pleasant and almost all of it is hard. The nurse learns
that work of any kind may come within her province. She will have to do
anything which helps toward the recovery of her patients or contributes
to their comfort. Some of her experiences will teach her resolution and
bravery. Speaking of such experiences a nurse once said: "As long as you
can do anything to help, you can manage. It is the being able to help
that matters." The life of the nurse-in-training is regular, and the
hospital regime is such that as a rule nurses-in-training are healthy.

The nurse should have good health and a good constitution. In some cases,
however, a girl may be in poor health because she has no definite
occupation or object in life. Training as a nurse has often helped to
establish good health. The girl who applies at a hospital training school
requires a doctor's certificate, and the doctor will be able to tell her
whether she is strong enough to undertake the work of a nurse. She should
be a girl of strong character, steady nerves, clear mind, and good
judgment. She must acquire the habit of obedience if she does not already
possess it. A nurse, like a soldier, is under authority and has to carry
out directions exactly as if they were commands. In her work she will need
tact, discretion, and firmness, and with her firmness she must be always
and unfailingly kind. Her voice and manner should be as pleasing as
possible. No unkind or rough woman should ever have anything to do with
the work of nursing.

Short courses in nursing are given in some cities by the Young Women's
Christian Association. The St. John Ambulance also has given instruction
in nursing for a number of years. Since the beginning of the War, various
courses have been arranged for Red Cross nurses. The honourable work of
what are known as V. A. D. (Voluntary Aid Detachment) nurses proves how
valuable any good instruction in nursing is, not only for the individual,
but also for the community. It is not too much to say that the whole
service of nursing in the world would not have been adequate if it had not
been for the training and work of volunteer nurses. The War has proved
beyond all question the extraordinary value of the trained nurse.

After graduating from the training school, the nurse may undertake private
nursing or she may follow her profession in institutional work. Private
nursing is exacting, and the nurse must be strong and capable. Her hours
are longer and much more irregular than when she was in training, and often
she will be on her own responsibility. She will feel, however, that she is
doing work of great value, and she will win the regard of many of her
patients and their families. The good standing of the training school is
an assistance to the nurse when she looks for cases. If she is favourably
known to doctors, she is likely to have as much work as she can manage.
Hospitals often engage their graduates to return for private cases. A usual
charge for a graduate nurse is from twenty-one to thirty-five dollars a
week according to the nature of the case. A nurse in private work cannot
work uninterruptedly throughout the year. Her name is on a nurses'
registry, which is generally conducted by an association of nurses or by a
private individual. Returns from these registries show that the average
nurse is employed about ten months in the year. Many graduate nurses earn
from eight to nine hundred dollars a year in private nursing, while some
earn a thousand or twelve hundred, but this is exceptional.

Nurses who are not graduates are sent out by some registries. Their charges
vary according to the case. These women are sometimes called convalescent
nurses and, in cases where a graduate nurse is not required, they fill a
real need in the community.

As a general rule, a trained nurse does not continue in private nursing
longer than ten or twelve years. Frequently, at the end of that time, her
health necessitates a change of occupation. Others continue their work
successfully for many years.

Many trained nurses prefer institutional rather than private nursing. Head
nurses in hospitals receive from thirty to sixty dollars a month. There are
also nurses who superintend private hospitals. A few nurses of executive
ability, business knowledge, and experience in nursing, become
superintendents of hospitals, but not of the largest hospitals. A number
are heads of training schools. Such leading nurses receive salaries
varying from one thousand to two thousand dollars a year, with living
expenses in addition. The work of a woman superintendent who is a trained
nurse includes the financial management, responsibility for the nurses,
training of the nurses, the care of patients, and the oversight of the
hospital. Few individuals are equal to such work and responsibility. Other
trained nurses become matrons and housekeepers in private hospitals,
sanitaria, and colleges. Some are district nurses. Public health nurses
assist in supervising the health of a city and give instruction in
cleanliness, sanitary science, and the care and feeding of infants.
Private schools, colleges, factories, and departmental stores employ the
services of trained nurses.

A few children's hospitals give short courses in training for children's
nurses--an employment for which many girls are specially fitted. This
course must not be confused with the regular instruction of the trained
nurse, as it is not on a level with the profession of trained nursing.
A children's nurse with hospital training will receive twenty or
twenty-five dollars a month; in some instances such a nurse is paid
higher wages.




CHAPTER X

DRESSMAKERS AND SEAMSTRESSES


The head of a dressmaking department in a large store in a city, when
asked how she prepared herself for her position, told this story. "I never
took any lessons; but I had always made my own dresses and my sisters'.
I remember walking down the street of the little town where I lived, one
day after my father died, and as I passed the door of the best dressmaking
shop in the town, it occurred to me that the man in charge of the store
had often said that he would gladly pay me good wages if I would work for
him. I made up my mind while passing his shop that day that I would not
work for him, but that I would open a dressmaking establishment of my own.
I did so, and it succeeded from the first. After a few years I thought I
should like to move to the city. I applied for the position here and was
appointed."

A second instance shows how a girl may have ability which she has not at
first understood how to use. In this case the girl was anxious to enter
another occupation. She wished to be a painter and had studied for some
years both in Canada and abroad. Needing to earn some money, she found
that she could sell dress designs to a manufacturing establishment, but
there was not a large demand for such work in the city where she lived.
Accordingly, she and another girl, also an artist, took a studio in a city
which was a centre of fashions, and together they worked on dress designs
for exclusive shops. They both had some money saved, and one of the girls
had a small, regular income. The first girl proved to have a very rare
sense of colour and design. It is now her work to make colour combinations
and provide the ideas for original designs, while the second girl, who is
a good draughtsman, executes the coloured drawings. These girls are now
recognized as two of the best costume designers in the city where they are
working.

It is apparent, then, that the girl with good eyesight, clever hands, and
a fine sense of colour and form, is likely to be a success as a dressmaker.
But how is she best to prepare herself for her chosen occupation? She
should practise sewing, either by hand or machine. She should cultivate
steady application to such work, and she should not object to spending a
good part of her time indoors. She should have a certain amount of taste
and some ingenuity in carrying out her own ideas or the ideas of others.
Manual skill, originality, and artistic ability are required by the
successful dressmaker. The girl who means to make dresses for others,
should, herself, dress quietly and in good taste.

If the girl is able to continue at school and has a natural gift for
dressmaking, the best way for her to learn her trade is to spend some
years at a technical school. Here she will be taught sewing in all its
phases--fitting, finishing, designing, the choice and use of materials,
and the business details of dressmaking. The dressmaker cannot learn her
trade once for all and go on repeating operations which do not require
originality. Styles change, and season by season she will have to adapt
and carry out alterations in fashion which will tax all her ability.
If she cannot give more than two years to learning her trade in school,
she is still at a great advantage when she enters a dressmaking
establishment. She will understand all the different processes and will
be able to work in the various sections, thus gaining far more rapidly
in experience than if she had had everything to learn from the beginning.
Actual trade experience will teach her a great deal. If, however, she is
obliged to leave school at fourteen, she should at least have had the
advantage of the instruction in sewing which is given in the public
schools. It is probable that she may be obliged, when she enters a
dressmaking establishment, to act as a messenger girl. She should make
sure, however, that she is not used for running messages only. It would be
better for her to accept less pay, with the understanding that she is to
be taught the details of dressmaking, than to earn more money and have no
opportunity to learn. The more she tries to understand and imitate the work
of experienced dressmakers, the better will be her training. The custom of
having apprentices has fallen rather into disuse, and the girl will find
the learning of her trade left largely to her own initiative. As soon as
she begins to have some skill in the operations of the workroom, she should
attend evening classes in sewing, fitting, finishing, and designing. She
should wait, however, until she is sixteen or seventeen before she attends
these classes. While she is learning from other dressmakers, she will have
sufficient work for a few years.

The first work she will be given to do will be finishing the underside
of dresses, felling and binding, sewing on buttons, pulling out basting
threads, and working button-holes. After this, the younger workers begin
to specialize in skirt-making, waist-draping and waist-finishing.
The designing and cutting are the work of a head dressmaker. There are
also sleeve makers and their helpers, embroiderers, and collar makers.
One of the younger workers is called the shopper and is sent to wholesale
and retail establishments to buy furnishings, trimmings, and materials of
various kinds.

The working hours in large establishments are eight, eight and a half, and
nine hours. Smaller businesses have hours from eight to six o'clock.
Dressmaking is somewhat seasonal, and the dressmaker must reckon, to some
extent, on slack time. Generally speaking, there are two dull months in
summer and one in winter.

A messenger girl may begin at from five to eight dollars a week.
A dressmaker who does machine work and who does not specialize in other
work, may earn ten dollars a week. Other wages range, according to the
worker's ability and the work she can do, from twelve to fifteen, and from
sixteen to eighteen dollars. Head dressmakers who cut out and design,
receive salaries of thirty dollars a week in large establishments, less in
smaller establishments. In somewhat rare cases a head dressmaker is paid
more than thirty dollars a week.

The experienced dressmaker, who is at the same time a good business woman,
may conduct an establishment of her own which will bring her in anything
from one thousand to six thousand a year and over. But she must be able to
manage matters of capital and credit, understand buying, and succeed in
winning the favour of her clients. Custom dressmaking is being increasingly
limited to high-class and exclusive work. The small and highly specialized
dressmaking factory is affecting the custom trade. Girls, therefore, who
are thinking of dressmaking as an occupation, should examine opportunities
in the exclusive factory, since this branch of the industry is becoming
increasingly important.

Another department of dressmaking to which no reference has yet been made
in this chapter is the work of the seamstress who sews by the day in the
homes of her employers. If she is really a competent dressmaker, her
employment is assured. But it is a mistake for a girl or young woman
without training or experience, or without a dressmaker's gifts, to
undertake dressmaking by the day. A dressmaker--to define the term--is one
who understands cutting, fitting, and making dresses sufficiently well to
undertake the occupation as a trade. A girl should be at least eighteen or
twenty before she becomes a day seamstress. In this work she is on her own
responsibility and is handling goods of some value, so that she needs
judgment as well as knowledge. The rates of payment are from a dollar and
seventy-five cents to two dollars and a half a day, meals included.
Sometimes the home dressmaker may be paid even three dollars or more a day,
but in this case she must be quick, and her work must be exceptionally well
done. The ordinary seamstress should be a neat sewer and should know how
to fit, but she is not expected to design or to make elaborate costumes.




CHAPTER XI

THE MILLINER


Millinery, like dressmaking, is partly a factory trade. But it is also,
like dressmaking, carried on in shops and in departmental stores. The
average girl is interested in hat-making, and is able to turn out a hat
which she can wear with satisfaction. But a first-class milliner is really
an artist. Her hands must be skilful and quick, her touch light and sure.
She must have a sense of colour and form, and originality and creative
ability. A girl who combines these gifts with business ability is likely
to make a success of an establishment of her own.

Training for this occupation may be obtained in several ways. The girl who
can afford to remain at school may take a course in millinery at a trade
or technical school. She may then obtain a position in a millinery
establishment as a maker of hats, and will receive a beginner's salary
according to the quality of her work. She should have no difficulty in
advancing rapidly in her occupation if she has the necessary gifts.

The girl who leaves school at fourteen may find a place as messenger girl
in a millinery shop or a millinery department. Some milliners make a
special point of training their own helpers, and any girl who enters an
establishment of this kind will receive valuable instruction. There is a
danger, however, that the girl in some shops will find her work confined
to running messages. In this case she will not become a trained milliner
and her prospects of advancement are poor. She should, therefore, see that
she is being taught her trade. It is usual for an apprentice to work for
two seasons without pay, and if she is being well taught she should be
satisfied. In places where living expenses are high, as in large cities,
girls are often allowed a small sum per week while they are learning.

The young milliner's first work is learning how to make bands for hats and
to make and sew in linings. Making frames for hats follows--the frames are
of wire and buckram. The girl has next to learn how to cover frames with
materials of different kinds--silk, velvet, lace, chiffon, etc.--and she
as a result learns to know intimately and to handle skilfully delicate
and costly fabrics. From being an apprentice she becomes an assistant
maker and then a maker of hats. She may then be promoted to the work of
a trimmer. The work of the trimmer is considered one of the most difficult
stages in the creation of a hat. The girl who aspires to this work must
have an eye for beauty of line and she should know how to harmonize the
trimming to the shape of the hat. In smaller establishments the trimmer is
also the designer. The girl who has original ideas is always the most
important in an establishment. For this reason the designer commands the
highest salary.

Assistant milliners may earn wages varying from seven and eight to fifteen
and eighteen dollars a week. In an exclusive business a first assistant may
get as much as twenty-five dollars a week, but she will need to be a good
saleswoman and a successful manager in the workroom. The milliner in charge
of a department or one who is managing an exclusive millinery shop of
recognized standing, receives a high salary. As a rule the woman who buys
abroad and does so with judgment and skill is in receipt of the largest
income that is given to a milliner. These cases are all exceptional. A
moderate millinery establishment owned and managed by a woman is likely to
produce an income of one thousand, fifteen hundred, or two thousand dollars
a year.

Experience shows that ability to sell hats counts for almost as much as
ability to create. Tact, skill, patience, must be combined with the genuine
gift required to find the hat which will be most becoming to a customer, or
to know how to alter a hat so that it may suit the taste of the purchaser.
Once it is proved to a customer that the milliner has this gift, her custom
is assured.

A point of the first importance to the girl who means to be a milliner is
the fact that millinery is a seasonal trade. The spring and fall trade may
give her employment for seven or eight months only in the year. In the
better millinery establishments the girls are laid off without wages six
weeks or two months. In large departmental stores other positions are found
for the girls and they may be without employment for only a few weeks. But
the girl must understand that if she is earning ten dollars a week for
thirty weeks in the year as a young milliner her income is only three
hundred dollars. For this reason it is wise for the young milliner to have
a second occupation. She may spend her summer months working in an hotel
as a waitress or caring for children or picking fruit. In the winter slack
season she may find a position as a saleswoman. If she can afford to remain
at home, she may spend the time in replenishing her own wardrobe, and
sewing for members of her family. She may also get some orders for making
hats from friends and relatives. She should use the slack season to attend
classes in design and salesmanship, skill in which will increase her
efficiency and her earning power.




CHAPTER XII

MAKING ONE'S OWN CLOTHES. HOME MILLINERY


In the chapter on "What Every Girl Needs to Know" we found how important
it is that girls should have a good deal of general knowledge of the
cutting and fitting of clothes, design, what constitutes right line and
beauty, the characteristics and uses of materials, and what is called
style, which is really often only good design and good workmanship. Girls
should welcome every opportunity to learn skill and judgment in spending
their allowances or their wages. The girl who buys wisely is able to make
the same amount of money give her twice the return in value which a
foolish girl who buys carelessly receives from her ill-considered
investments.

It is a wise plan, therefore, for every girl to learn a good deal about
dressmaking and to be able to cut out and sew many of her own garments.
She should also study buying. The best teacher she can have in learning
how to buy is generally her own mother. But sometimes her friends will be
able to give her help in this way. Girls who work in factories where
clothing is made, and girls in shops and stores, learn from their work
when blouses, coats and skirts are skilfully cut and well made. But this
is part of the general knowledge that every girl should have. One girl
can easily help to teach another who in return will be able to assist her
friend in other ways. Not to be equipped with this skill in dressmaking
and in buying makes the girl largely dependent on others as far as her
clothing and appearance are concerned, and in this way she may be placed
at a disadvantage both in her work and in her life at home.

For the same reason every girl should learn something about the making of
hats and of the materials used in millinery. To be able to make her own
wearing apparel is one of the principles of economy for the girl. She may
be able with this knowledge to provide herself with a becoming hat for a
small amount of money. She will know, too, whether the amount asked for a
hat is reasonable, and will often be able to resist an extravagance
because she will be able to tell that she is being asked to pay a
considerable sum of money for an article which is intrinsically not worth
the expenditure. The girl who can make her own dresses, blouses and other
wearing apparel and who is an adept in home millinery possesses knowledge
which has a direct money value. She is much better off financially than
any girl who cannot sew and who is not able to trim her own hats.

The wage-earning girl has often a very small income in the first years of
her experience in paid employment. She can afford to spend only very small
sums for her coats, blouses, skirts and hats. Often she tries to make her
necessary clothing in the evening after her paid work is over. It is very
difficult for her to do this if she has had no training in dressmaking or
in millinery. But if she has learnt how to cut out and to sew and how to
trim her own hats, work which otherwise would have been extremely difficult
becomes interesting and successful. It is well to remember also that girls
with very little money, if they must buy their clothes because they do not
know how to make them, are compelled to buy only the cheapest things which
wear but a short time.

For the worker who is well established in her employment and has a good
income, home dressmaking and millinery become questions of health, time
and energy. This worker should make the best use of her strength. It is
often wiser for her to pay someone to do this work for her since she can
afford to do so, though she sometimes may regret the days when she found
time to enjoy making a blouse or trimming a hat. She has, however, the
satisfaction of knowing that without this special knowledge of dressmaking
and millinery she would not be able to buy wisely the wearing apparel
which she requires.




CHAPTER XIII

TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH GIRLS


The telephone girl who enters her employment in a city gains the first
knowledge of her trade in a school which is maintained by the company.
She fills out an application, stating how old she is, how long she has been
at school, and whether she is living at home or boarding. She should be
sixteen or seventeen years old, and it is better if she has had one or two
years in a high school. Her work will require accuracy, and she must be
quick in thought and action. There should be no defect in her speech, and
she should be at least five feet in height since she requires a good reach
on the telephone board. Girls who go into this work should have strong
nervous systems. The necessity for rapid and constant action, the strain on
thought and nerve, and the call for resourcefulness and coolness, all of
which are connected with the work of a telephone operator, are a constant
drain on nervous energy.

The girl remains at the training school two weeks or longer and during
this time she is paid by the company exactly as if she were at work.
Payment varies in different parts of the country. But the girl at school
generally receives a beginner's wages.

In small towns and country districts, the beginner learns to be a
telephone operator by substituting for the regular operator. There is less
pressure in telephone work outside of cities, and there is more room for
initiative than in a large city exchange.

Telephone exchanges in cities are large airy rooms, well lighted, well kept
and ventilated. These rooms are pleasant places in which to work, and the
telephone company provides lunch and rest rooms for its staff. A matron
takes general charge of the girls, and a dietitian looks after the food
provided and advises the girl employees with regard to their health.
In the rest room are comfortable chairs and a lounge. The management
provides tea, sugar and milk and the dishes in the lunch room. The girls
may buy cold meat, bread and butter, biscuits and other food for a small
charge. The hours are eight in the daytime and seven for night operators;
this length of working day is regarded as the utmost which can be required
from girls in telephone work. There are two rest periods in the day,
besides time for lunch.

In the school the young operator is trained to answer requests for numbers,
to make and break connections, and to keep account of calls. She is taught
to enunciate clearly and to speak courteously and agreeably. She learns to
know the board and its numbering. The board is divided into sections and
each section comprises a complete multiple. Each multiple consists of eight
panels, the panels being divided into "banks." Each bank contains a hundred
"jacks," every one of which represents a customer. When a connection is
made, the telephone operator connects one jack with another by means of a
cord and two plugs. By the time the girl is an experienced operator, she
has become accustomed to the little flashing lights constantly appearing
in front of her, which mean that a connection is asked for.

The operator in a city begins with ten or eleven dollars a week. In two
or three years if she is a satisfactory operator she should be earning
fifteen. A supervisor receives from sixteen to eighteen or twenty.
The duties of the supervisor are to walk up and down behind the girls at
the board so that she may be certain they are giving satisfactory service,
to check delays, and to help in difficulties. For instance, if a call comes
through from a fire or accident, the operator will often give it in charge
of the supervisor immediately so that there may be no delay. The chief
operator who is responsible for the whole service and who has the
management of the working force is paid from twenty-four to thirty
dollars a week, according to the size of the exchange and the amount
of work involved.

Skilled operators are often employed in private exchanges and when they
are competent they earn from twelve to fifteen dollars a week or more.
The most important switchboards are in hotels, apartment houses, public
and governmental offices, stores and private offices. The work is often
exacting and in many cases requires executive ability and resourcefulness.
The operator is expected to answer calls, make connections, answer
questions and keep account of the number of calls made. Sometimes important
business depends on the good-will, executive energy, judgment and quick
thought of the girl at the switchboard. A young woman of strong vitality
and good mind--where she has responsibility and can use initiative--finds
this work fascinating. Such a worker sometimes wins important promotion
because she is able to show that she can manage both people and critical
situations and has business and financial judgment.

    *    *    *    *    *

Telegraphy also offers employment for girls, but not to the same extent
as the telephone exchange. The automatic machine has made a considerable
change in this occupation. The Morse operator is now employed to a much
smaller extent than formerly. There are still a number of men and women
who are Morse operators, but they are being replaced to a certain extent
by girls who operate automatic machines. The machines are extremely
ingenious and do away with the necessity for the operator to understand
or use a code.

Telegraph companies in some cases maintain a school for the instruction of
Morse operators, and girls who enter telegraphy receive a weekly wage while
at the school, as is the case with girls in the telephone school. In some
cases instruction is given during work in the operating room. Schools are
at central points only. If the girl who wants to learn telegraphy lives
in a small town or in the country, she must be taught by the telegraph
operator. A number of girl operators are to be found in country offices.
The writer remembers specially two of these girls. One was in a telegraph
and cable office down by the sea. She had been a telephone operator and
had learned telegraphy from the telegrapher in the same office. The other
girl was in an inland railway office, and had learned from her brother,
who had held the position before her. Both these girls were earning good
salaries.

The hours in a telegraph office in the city are from eight to six, with a
luncheon hour. The room in which the girl is at work is crowded with
machines and people. There is a good deal of noise and a great pressure of
business, much of which is important. The girl needs to be thoroughly
interested in her work and to have steady nerves in order to do well in
telegraph operating. It will take her several years to become a competent
Morse operator. An automatic machine is operated by a typist. The companies
apply a simple psychological test by means of which they can judge whether
the applicant has the power of concentration necessary for accuracy and
success in this employment.

Many girl operators have charge of agencies in different parts of towns
and cities. These girls have agreeable work under no great pressure in a
quiet place, although with a certain amount of responsibility.

The wages paid girls who operate automatic machines vary according to the
age, ability and efficiency of the workers, and the locality where the
work is done. Typists may begin at seventy-five dollars a month, with
increases up to eighty-five. Girls in training as Morse operators are
called check girls and may receive thirty, thirty-five or forty-five
dollars a month with an increase in the second year to fifty dollars.
Women who are Morse operators belong to the same union as the men and
receive the same wages. In larger places they begin at eighty-five
dollars a month and receive increases up to one hundred and twenty-three
dollars and twenty-five cents.

Both telephone and telegraph operators are in a sense public servants, and
may win the respect and gratitude of their clients. They sometimes suffer
from a lack of appreciation of their really arduous work; but as a rule
the public recognizes good service. These workers often show loyalty under
trying and exacting circumstances. On many occasions girls have risked
death from fire and flood by staying at their posts to warn others of
danger. During the Great War there have been instances of telephone and
telegraph operators performing services as faithful and as brave as many
of the deeds on the battlefield.




CHAPTER XIV

HAIRDRESSER AND MANICURIST. WAITRESS


Hairdressing and shampooing, manicuring and chiropody, are almost
exclusively the work of girls and women. There has been a decided
improvement in these employments, and any girl who takes a serious
interest in making herself a thoroughly trained worker in one of these
lines of work, provided she has the gifts which are needed, is likely to
find her occupation becoming more and more necessary and esteemed.

To be entirely successful in work of this kind a girl should have engaging
personal qualities. Just as a doctor or nurse with abundant personal
vitality gives health and encouragement to patients by being in the same
room with them, so the girl who gives massage after a shampoo quiets and
soothes the client with whom she is working and who has come in for a rest
as well as to have her hair shampooed. A girl with this power to soothe is
a helpful person. She will never lose a customer who can remain with her
if the customer has once experienced the difference between an ordinary
treatment and the superior work of the girl who is gifted by nature with
a personality which both soothes and invigorates.

While a girl may begin her training as young as sixteen, it is better if
she is nineteen or older. Some experienced women say that no girl should
begin work of this description younger than twenty. She should apply for
a position as a helper in a shampooing and manicuring establishment or
with a chiropodist. Sometimes the pupil is expected to pay a fee of
twenty-five dollars or more for three months' instruction. But in many
good establishments it is held that the work of a beginner is very soon
worth something. It is not necessary, therefore, for the girl to pay a fee
in order to become trained. She may find a place where she will be paid a
fair wage for a beginner within a short time after she has been accepted.
But if the beginner pays no fee for her instruction, the head of the
establishment will expect rightly that the assistant will remain in her
employ two or three years at least so that she may repay the time and care
which have been given to her training. In a year and a half a good
assistant should be earning from ten to twelve dollars a week, and in two
or three years her weekly wages are likely to be fourteen or sixteen
dollars. If she takes some responsibility in managing the work and
workrooms, she may earn as much as seventeen or eighteen dollars a week.
In some establishments tips are allowed. The girl should understand,
however, that as a rule wages are lower where tips are permitted. It is
better for her to be employed in the best kind of establishment where the
highest wages are paid. In such an establishment tips are unusual.

The helper is likely to begin by taking care of the rooms and toilet
articles, washing brushes, combs, etc., and carrying out miscellaneous
orders. The attractiveness of the rooms depends on the perfection of
these details.

After some years spent in a good establishment the young woman may
undertake appointment work. She should choose carefully the district in
which she means to work, so as not to interfere with any other shampooing
or manicuring business. She should not take away customers who belong to
the business where she was trained. She will need to have some money
saved in order to provide herself with the necessary articles which she
has to carry with her, as well as tonics and lotions. Her expenses will
also include a telephone, carfare, printed cards, and so on. She should
estimate her expenditures carefully to determine how much she is making
over all expenses by the week, the month, and finally by the year.
The summer months are likely to be slack, and this should be taken into
account. She should arrange her appointments so that she may make the best
use of her time and energy, and she must keep appointments punctually.
A successful business of this kind may realize a weekly return of from
twelve to eighteen dollars. Such a worker by the time she has saved some
capital to invest may be able to start an establishment of her own,
but she should do so only after a careful calculation of the expenditure
required.

    *    *    *    *    *

The modern tea-room has changed to some extent the occupation of the
waitress. The modern lunch room in the same way makes a feature of the
class of girls who attend on customers. They are expected to be especially
quiet, deft and well mannered, and they should be dressed with that entire
suitability to their occupation which is a mark of the well-bred girl.
These girls have often been brought up with no special occupation in
view--possibly they had not expected to earn a living by paid employment.
But the opportunity comes to find work in a tea or lunch room, which is
owned or managed by a woman friend, and they gladly enter on their new
occupation, pleased as every normal girl should be to be busy and to earn
an income. It is possible for the girl who has duties at home to spend part
of her day as a waitress in a lunch and tea room. The same gifts and
knowledge which make her a success in her work at home cause her to be
prized as a waitress. She understands how a table should be set. Quickly
and deftly she lays the table after each customer has been served. Her
touch and movements are noiseless and pleasing to watch. She is interested
in what each customer wants. She is thoughtful and has a good memory, is
good tempered and not impatient. She has an instinct for placing and
arranging food so that the man or woman at the table feels that he or she
is being waited on by an intelligent, well-mannered person. In spite of the
high standard of the service required, the pay is rather small. It may not
even cover all the girl's expenses. She has the advantage, however, of
limited hours and leisure to carry on her duties at home.

The work of the regular waitress is in an hotel, restaurant, women's club,
or in the dining rooms connected with apartment houses and private hotels.
Women who work in such places should be neat and smart in appearance and
should wear dresses of a uniform standard, generally black with white
aprons, cuffs and collars. A good home training is of great assistance to
them in their work. They should have common sense and good judgment, and
be polite to customers and fellow workers. Perseverance, intelligence and
physical strength are required by waitresses. A girl who is naturally
erect, with a good carriage and graceful walk, is at an advantage in this
occupation. She needs to be kindly and thoughtful and to take pleasure in
serving her customers. She has to understand and remember her customers'
checks, and the amount of the checks she hands in ought to equal the
average cash sales of other waitresses. Many customers make a point of
coming to the same waitress every day, and she should remember where they
prefer to sit and how they like to be served.

One advantage in this work is that the worker is given two, sometimes
three meals, in addition to her payment in actual money. In a number of
establishments the tipping system prevails, which provides a girl with an
added source of income. The average Canadian girl, however, dislikes being
tipped, and there are many objections to the tipping system.




CHAPTER XV

FARM WORK FOR WOMEN


Among those who choose work on the land as a special employment are girls
and women in the country who have the opportunity to give either part of
their time or all of it to farm work, and others from the city who prefer
an outdoor life. The problems of the city girl or woman who wishes to
engage in farm work are how to acquire skill and experience in her
business, capital for land and equipment, labour, transportation and a
market. The girl on the farm can solve these problems with an advantage
of fifty, seventy-five, or one hundred per cent. as compared with the girl
who migrates from town or city to carry on independent productive work in
the country.

Most girls and women in the country are familiar with farm life, and know
beforehand what they require for success in any kind of farm work. Eggs,
poultry, cream, butter, vegetables and fruit are sent to market by women
who are also home makers. There is, also, a growing movement among a few
able country women to make their productive work so extensive as to
constitute one-half or one-third of the whole work of the farm. Thus in
some instances a third of the farm land may be devoted to a poultry farm;
and its management is in reality an extensive business, undertaken with
all the thought, planning and attention which are given to a large farm
project. Productive work of this character is successfully carried on by
a few women.

A restricted number of women who have lived previously on farms and are
thoroughly familiar with farming conditions have undertaken farm management
successfully. Such women are exceptional and there is no present indication
that this employment will be taken up to any large extent by women. The
farm manager must be strong enough to do her own work when she is unable
to procure assistance, and she may at times have to live alone.

The girl who lives on a farm and who has the endowment needed has an
exceptional opportunity to engage in productive work on her own initiative.
She should secure a plot of land on the farm for her own use. When the
other labour on the farm is being done, it takes little extra time and
exertion to do what cultivating is necessary on the girl's plot of land.
In this way she can arrange with little trouble and at little expense for
any manual labour which is beyond her own strength. A girl or a woman who
goes into the country from the city to engage in independent productive
work finds the problem of labour one of her greatest difficulties. In this
as in other respects the girl whose father or brother is a farmer is at an
advantage.

A young woman thus situated has her land secured as her share of family
good will, or at a small rental after her business has begun to pay. An
arrangement, as has been pointed out, can easily be made for the manual
labour required. She has an opportunity to learn her work thoroughly, and
to experiment, before she actually goes into business. She can arrange for
necessary fertilizers at an advantageous rate. Finally, the means of
transportation to market, and the market itself which has been found for
the products of her father's farm, often can be used for the products which
the girl has chosen to raise on her plot.

If she is particularly attracted to flower-growing, the girl on the farm
may devote herself to growing violets for market. She must study violets
carefully. She should be an authority on the subject. She should learn to
understand their appearance, habits and diseases. She should know just what
to do for her plants, how to feed and tend them, how to get the best
results, how to make a violet blossom the best blossom of its kind that can
be offered for sale. Besides this, she must know how to pick violets, how
to grade them, how to pack them, and when and where and how to send them to
market. It would appear practically certain that if the farm produce is
sent to market, the girl may send her violets, properly handled and packed,
at the same time, and she will be likely to find a ready demand for her
flowers, if she offers fine violets for sale.

A woman who is a bee-keeper writes as follows of how a woman may acquire
skill in this country employment. "A good beginning for the woman who is
to keep bees is to read Maeterlinck's 'Life of the Bee.' If after reading
such a book the girl or woman who thinks she would like to be a bee farmer
is still further interested in bees, then she may decide to go into bee
culture.

She should offer herself as apprentice to an up-to-date bee-keeper as soon
as the spring work begins and stay with him to the end of the season.
The following spring, if still inclined for the work, she should buy from
her employer two, four or six prosperous colonies of bees. If she prefers
to do so, she may take a short course in bee-keeping at the Ontario
Agricultural College, Guelph.

Characteristics which the bee-keeper needs are a cool head and steady
nerves. She should also have determination to succeed and some
indifference to pain.

Some difficulties which may be encountered are bad choice of location,
winter losses and poor seasons. There is heavy lifting to be done, but
generally a lad in the neighbourhood can be hired to come for part of
the day to help. By ingenuity a good deal of the lifting can be avoided.

The advantages of bee-keeping are a healthful, outdoor occupation which
takes one's mind off real or imaginary worries, with a certainty of small
profit in spite of set-backs and large profits in favourable seasons.
Bee-keeping is a good occupation for the woman who is suited to it, but
not every woman can be a successful bee-farmer.

When the bee-keeper's work calls for larger space she may rent outyards
from farmers in the locality. Her market is likely to be found near where
she lives. Those who know that she keeps bees will bring her orders.
Bakers use a considerable amount of honey. If the bee-keeper lives near a
good road for motorists, she may put up a sign saying 'Honey for sale,'
and the demand probably will be larger than she can supply."

A woman who moved from the city to the country is now favourably known as
a grower of flowering plants for marketing. She began as a student of wild
flowers and became a wild flower specialist. The first money she made from
flowers was earned as the result of her wish to give to a missionary
society. She bought seeds from a reliable dealer, parcelled them out in
selected varieties, and sold the packages. She also planted the seeds in
her own garden and studied the plants carefully. The occupation grew until
it took up most of her time. A larger garden was obtained and expert
knowledge was acquired gradually in the growing of perennials. The demand
for her plants grew steadily. When she made a change from a city garden to
a country place, greater expenditure was necessary, and the cost of labour
became a serious item. But the beauty of outdoor life and love for her
special work have counter-balanced all difficulties. Her business is now
well-established and successful.

The principal difficulty, according to one authority, for girls and women
in the business of farm production, is that they have to find out that
they must learn to understand facts with which they think they are already
familiar. A girl on a farm, for instance, makes up her mind to undertake
poultry farming as a business. She may be of the opinion that she knows
all about poultry, from the kind of buildings which ought to be used to
the nature of any disease likely to attack poultry. This believing that
she knows all about poultry, or vegetables, or fruit, when in reality a
good part of the knowledge she has is imperfect, will be a great obstacle
to the girl in such work. The girl of good judgment will set to work to
study her subject with enthusiasm and perseverance. As a rule people who
understand a subject best are slow to believe that they know all there is
to know on that subject.

The girl or woman who hopes to leave town or city life to engage in work
in the country should have a certain amount of capital, not less, it has
been said, than five thousand dollars; but the amount of capital required
depends on the locality. A greater amount than five thousand dollars may
easily be necessary. She will also need a small income, since she may not
be able to support herself wholly by this work for a number of years, if
indeed she does so ultimately. She should be strong physically and should
enjoy manual labour. She should be fond of an outdoor life and of whatever
kind of work is involved in her enterprise. She should like animals and
growing things, and be able to live without constant social stimulus.

The Ontario Agricultural College at Guelph has trained a number of young
women in different branches of agricultural production. Short courses may
be taken during the year, and the special classes during the summer months
are most useful and popular.

The special need for production which developed during the War induced
many girls and young women, including a number of women students from
universities, to volunteer for farm work. During the summer months some
hundreds of young women engaged in fruit picking and worked in canning
factories under government supervision, and were lodged in club houses
managed by the Young Women's Christian Association. Others undertook
various forms of work connected with agriculture, meeting with success in
their employment and with public approval. In the summer of 1918 a special
course of instruction for young women in farm work was arranged at the
Ontario Agricultural College, and later regular courses were established
throughout the year. Women now may qualify for the degree of Bachelor of
Science in Agriculture at the Ontario Agricultural College and at Macdonald
College, Quebec. Wider opportunities for women in agricultural employment
are thus being recognized.




CHAPTER XVI

THE LIBRARIAN


Library work, although unusually attractive, does not employ a great many
workers. The work is pleasing, it is valuable to the community, and the
associates with whom the librarian works are trained and intelligent.

Almost any girl who loves books and reading may be attracted to library
work. She should test herself first to see if she has other necessary
qualities before she makes up her mind to train as a librarian. A girl
who really dislikes detail and who fails in detail work is hardly likely
to succeed in this occupation. The usefulness of a library depends on a
constant routine of work faithfully performed by its staff. An assistant
does not spend her time in reading new books, although the best type of
library worker must always find time for reading. The librarian is
working for the interests of others. Her mind should be sensitive and
alert to the needs of the public. She must love books, but it is equally
true that she should be a lover of humanity. If she feels only impatience
and irritation when she is asked to leave some routine work to find a
special volume for a boy or girl, man or woman worker, or some old person
who has come into the library to read, then she should not be in library
work.

The standard of education required for a librarian is constantly being
raised. The entrance examination to a university is often required as the
minimum in academic training. A librarian cannot be too well or too widely
educated, and it is generally agreed that sound scholarship is required in
a library. This point should receive careful attention from the girl who is
thinking of library work. A position as an untrained assistant is not
easily found. More and more, it is becoming a profession for men and women
who are college graduates and who in addition have taken professional and
technical training in a school for librarians.

Training in library work may be obtained in different ways. The girl may
enter a library as an assistant where she will be taught the methods of the
library in which she is working. As has been said, she should be interested
in books and people. She should be neat, accurate and quick in her work,
widely read and well informed. The payment which she will receive may not
at first be sufficient for her support, so that she will need either to
have saved some money earned in another employment, or to be able to live
at home, remaining partly dependent on her own people until she has
acquired skill as a librarian.

After she has worked in the library as an assistant, she should attend
classes in a school for librarians. The library training school, conducted
under the authority of the Department of Education for Ontario, has a
course of several months, with lectures, instruction, and practice work.
Library boards frequently grant leave of absence to librarians and
assistants so that they may attend this school. Application for admission
should be sent to the Inspector of Public Libraries, Department of
Education, Parliament Buildings, Toronto.

Library schools in the United States give courses of one and two years in
all the branches of librarianship. These schools require for entrance
either that the applicant has a standing equal to the second year in a
university, with a knowledge of French and German, or a university degree.
Any young woman who is a college graduate and has a certificate from one
of these library schools is likely to find good employment in a library.

The technical training which a library assistant must acquire, either in a
library or at a library school, includes the classification of books
according to subject, the cataloguing of books, some knowledge of binding
and repairing, the arrangement of books on shelves, the use of open
shelves, how to serve the public, filing and use of periodicals, how to use
reference books of all kinds, preparation of reading courses for clubs,
how to make the library useful to boys and girls at school, and practice
in the children's library.

In a small library, while the work is not greatly divided, one librarian,
possibly with an assistant, must carry on all the work of the library.

In large libraries, the work is divided into a number of departments,
each of which is in charge of a responsible head, who may have several
assistants. Over all the work of the library is the head librarian.

The administrative side of library work calls for executive and business
ability. The best experience for a young worker whose gifts are in this
direction is to be obtained in a small library. She may, if she has
training, become director of such a library and she will gradually win
promotion to a larger library, unless she finds that the work where she
is suits her capacity better.

The cataloguer labels the books as they come in and prepares cards which
will represent the books in the catalogue. A book may be asked for under
several different classifications, and the skill of the cataloguer is
required to decide how many cards are needed and under what headings the
books should be listed.

The reference librarian has work of an altogether different character. She
is constantly in touch with the public. All kinds of questions are brought
to her. The reference department sometimes maintains a telephone service;
that is, clients may telephone inquiries to the library and the information
needed will be looked up and telephoned to them within a reasonable time.
The reference librarian requires a complete knowledge of books of
reference, encyclopaedias, bibliographies, and dictionaries of all kinds,
and she must be skilful in their use.

The circulation librarian has charge of the collection of books to be
loaned to the public. She must be familiar with the collection and should
understand the tastes of those who use the library. Book exhibitions and
announcements are under her care, and she generally has charge of a number
of assistants.

One of the most pleasant and yet one of the most exacting positions in a
library is that of librarian in the children's room. The children's
librarian must be fond of children and should be able to control and
influence them for good. She should have the wish to instruct and she
needs a rich endowment of imagination, since this is necessary in order
to understand children and to sympathize with them.

Other openings for librarians are in scientific schools, medical schools,
and in some law firms and business houses where the keeping and filing
of documents are of special importance. Librarians in such positions are
on their own responsibility and sometimes do important reference and
bibliographical work. Civic and engineering libraries, municipal libraries,
libraries on music, architecture and art, the cataloguing of prints and
pictures, special work in bibliography and indexing, offer in a few cities
opportunities to trained and gifted librarians.

Salaries of from six to eight hundred are not uncommon for library
assistants who have training or experience. In a number of positions the
library may be open during limited hours, or on certain days only. But when
all a librarian's time is required an effort is made to pay a salary which
will ensure for the librarian a reasonable standard of comfort. The better
paid positions have salaries of eight or nine hundred up to twelve,
thirteen or fourteen hundred for women librarians in charge of branch
libraries, heads of important departments, and chief librarians.

A woman's work in a library offers opportunities for service and
self-improvement. The profession is fairly well paid. It requires
careful training and constant study. Enthusiasm, ability and initiative
may make the librarian one of the most useful and influential citizens
in the community.




CHAPTER XVII

WORK FOR THE GIRL AT HOME


We have been referring so far to girls who are earning a living in paid
employment, working usefully and happily in almost all the occupations
which make up the gigantic output of national activity. Many thousands
of girls at home are doing household work which is just as necessary
to national well-being.

Chapter Eighteen on The Home Employments, which follows this chapter on
Work for the Girl at Home, is intended to state more fully the importance
of the occupation of home making. The present chapter is planned to suggest
lines of remunerative work for girls who are helping in home making, but
who require spending money and a healthy, active interest in life and
people outside the home.

Every girl who is helping to make a home may be certain that she is one of
the world's necessary workers. The home people are dependent on her more
directly and to a far greater extent than the work of the office or factory
is dependent on the girl who is a paid employee. The girl at home may not
seem to have anything definite to show for all her daily tasks. As one home
maker said of her own work: "Just a lot of dishes washed and a lot of meals
cooked and eaten." But the working efficiency of all the members of the
household is dependent on this work, and not only their working efficiency,
but their happiness as well. The output of a factory can be expressed in so
many thousands of dollars and cents. But the work of a home is expressed in
a spiritual and mental, as well as in a physical, total.

The girl who is doing necessary work for the home should be paid an
allowance, unless the family income is so limited that it is impossible to
arrange for one. It should be understood in every case that the work of the
girl has a money value, as well as a value which cannot be recompensed
except by affection. When the family income does not permit of an adequate
allowance, happily the girl is often able not only to support herself with
work which allows her to continue her home occupation, but to make a
contribution to the upkeep of the home. The girl at home who is making an
income from other work should save part of what she makes for investment,
for some special training, or for recreation and travelling.

The home girl should remember that her expenses are small. She does not
pay for board and lodging as is generally the case with the girl in paid
employment. There are a hundred small incidental expenses met by the girl
who goes out to work which are not necessary for the girl at home. She has
no set hours to keep and she has time to sew, to make clothes and trim hats
without over-tiring herself as the wage-earning girl often does if she is
her own dressmaker and milliner. The working clothes of the girl at home
may be very simple. She does not need to go out every morning to her work,
and for this reason can dress more economically than her wage-earning
sister, and still be neat and fresh.

Let us suppose that the girl at home needs to earn an income, either small
or fairly large. The first step she should take is to think carefully over
her own possibilities, and the possibilities of the neighbourhood in which
she lives. What can she do that is worth payment, and where can she find
someone who is willing to buy what she has to sell?

She may have a gift for sewing and dressmaking. If she is really capable
and can do satisfactory work, she may easily build up a small business
among her friends and their friends in the making of smart blouses.
The girl should always remember that poor work is never worth while.
Her blouses should be better than anything her clients can buy at a store.
They should have distinction and style of their own, and a fineness and
individuality which the stores cannot rival. If her gift is undeniable but
her workmanship is poor, she should take lessons at a school of dressmaking
and make herself a first-class worker. She may possibly undertake dresses,
although blouses generally are more useful and more possible for the girl
at home. In the same way, the girl with a gift may specialize on hats, but
her hats must be professional in workmanship and individual in style.

Perhaps the girl at home is a born cook. Home-made bread is always in
demand. But it must be the best that can be produced. A specialty in
home-made cakes of certain kinds may be made profitable. Candy-making is
often carried on successfully as a home industry. But the home girl who
does work of any kind for profit must have business sense. She must
itemize her expenses accurately. Cakes or bread which have not turned out
well should never be offered for sale. To do so is not fair to the worker,
for one of her most valuable assets should be the fact that her work is
always satisfactory.

The work of the home has changed greatly in the last fifty years. Once
rugs, carpets, blankets, yarn, soap and candles were made at home. If the
girl can find a market for home-made rugs she might make rug weaving a
profitable employment. The same is true of soap. In these days of thrift
and economy, days when work must be better done than ever, a girl might
induce the women of a neighbourhood to let her become a local soapmaker.
But she would have to be certain of herself and of the work. A co-operative
canning kitchen would be a great benefit to the women of any community, and
two or three home girls who could count on a certain amount of time for
this work could manage the kitchen. This work would be specially suitable
for girls in a small town or country district. They could arrange for a
market in a neighbouring town or city. The arrangement could be made
through a local Women's Institute or Home Makers' Club. "Canning circles"
have been managed successfully in some parts of the country. If the girl
wants a small business of her own in preserving fruits and canning
vegetables, she may develop a market in her own neighbourhood. If her home
is in the country she may arrange to supply a store or a number of
housekeepers in a neighbouring town, or she may help to form a circle and
work with other girls.

Selling flowers, choice fruit and poultry may be made money-making
occupations by either country or city girls. First, the girl should know
her specialty. She should not merely know something about it, but she
should make herself an absolute mistress of it. Her flowers should be fine
in quality and colour. They should be properly handled and properly packed.
To begin with, of course, they should be properly grown. Nothing is left to
accident in a successful business, and the home girl should see that she is
not in any way behind professional dealers in her line. If she is selling
hand-picked fruit, the people who buy from her should know that they will
receive only the best. Those who buy are willing to pay a higher price for
any specialty which is the best of its kind.

Girls whose interests are of a different character may find other paying
employments. To find the employment depends largely on the study of one's
capacity and one's neighbourhood. Is there any opening for a lending
library? Then the girl who is fond of books and reading and who understands
the average taste in reading, provided she can find a little capital, may
start a lending library. It is possible that there may be a library in the
neighbourhood which would be glad to engage her services a few hours in the
day. There are villages and country districts where a girl living at home
could make a success of a small library.

The girl with a turn for keeping accounts might become a visiting
bookkeeper. Doctors and dentists often have their accounts kept by someone
who is not altogether in their employ. A good business connection of this
kind might be worked up in a neighbourhood. Or a girl might answer the
dentist's or doctor's doorbell and telephone during certain hours in the
day. She could give attendance in his office at the same time. A girl is
often able to find employment for some hours a day in a store in the
neighbourhood of her home. A village store which is also the post office
may engage her as an assistant for part of the day.

Mothers in a suburban neighbourhood are often glad to have some girl at
home look after their children one or two afternoons in the week. To
undertake work of this character successfully the girl should be fond of
children and able to manage them. If she can tell stories well, she might
form a circle of children to attend a children's hour. A visiting mother's
help would be a boon in many neighbourhoods.

The possibilities of paying employment for girls at home who have
initiative and some spare time are almost limitless. The girl's ingenuity
is the only measure of what she may do in the way of paying work. The field
of success of two such girls of the writer's acquaintance is the lovely,
old-fashioned home garden. One girl has made a specialty of poultry. Her
stock is of the best. She sells eggs, both for household use and as
"settings." The other girl grows roses in the garden and from her own
success as a rose grower she has become a seller of rose bushes. They are
both happy in their employments, and they continue to be home makers as
well as business women. The income is not the only benefit which the girl
at home receives from such work as this. Her work brings her into contact
with other people, broadens her interests, increases her usefulness, and,
moreover, is often a recreation. The home-maker needs outside interests.
The girl at home is never dull, or unhappy because she is dull, when she
has an avocation in addition to her work and life in the home.

To unite her home-making and her other employment successfully, the girl
should learn how to organize her time. A girl, for instance, might look
after poultry while she waits for the kettle to boil. The same time might
be taken for work in the garden. Heat that is used to cook dinner will
help to can or preserve. The day's work should be planned carefully if
time is to be put to the best use.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE HOME EMPLOYMENTS


The more thoroughly women and girls understand paid work outside of the
home, the more clearly they recognize that work in the home is of high
standing, intellectually, artistically and spiritually. The most able women
in outside work are constantly looking back to the home, hoping that they
may be able to introduce into home life and management much that they have
learned in other pursuits.

One of these women whose name is associated with a famous business success,
in writing of her own work recently said: "I believe that work which is
most commonly thought drudgery can be made attractive and beautiful if it
is approached in the right spirit, and I feel more than that--that until
all women are awake to this, and really enjoy their work--whether it is
running a home and bringing up their children, or being out in the world
in business--they will never be as efficient as men are in their field."

We should be careful then to know how a girl should equip herself for the
home employments. If she will look back to chapter five, "What Every Girl
Needs to Know," she will find that in order to develop into a young woman
able to meet the problems, work, responsibilities and joys of life, she
should know how to keep herself and other people well. To keep herself
well, she should understand the values of food and how to prepare food;
she should know how to dress, which includes knowing how to make and mend
clothes; and she should know how to rest. In order to keep other people
well, she must know what food should be given to babies, to people at work,
both men and women, and to old people. She should also be able to judge
whether they are properly clothed and cared for. If possible, every girl
should have some knowledge of nursing. She may not be a trained nurse,
but she should have some of the knowledge and skill of the trained nurse.

One of the finest of the home employments is this great work of caring for
people and keeping them well. One of the functions of a home is to preserve
the health of its inmates.

Fortunately, any girl who wants to learn the art and science of home making
may learn at home or in school, or she may go to special classes where all
these domestic subjects are taught. There is hardly any study which is more
delightful, because one has the pleasure of working with one's hands as
well as studying. A girl who is a good cook, and knows how to cut out
clothes and sew them, has a good part of the knowledge of the home-maker.

What else does the girl need to know before she can feel that she is
properly trained to have charge of a home? The girl should be prepared
to find that home-making requires a varied and very interesting training.
The best home-maker needs a thorough knowledge of household accounting.
The business girl understands that the factory, the store and the office
can not be managed successfully unless the manager understands all about
the bookkeeping of his business, for the books of the business should
show the exact condition of the enterprise. The home is not a business
and yet it requires some knowledge of business.

Much of her own happiness and usefulness and the happiness and usefulness
of others will depend on her knowledge and ability to handle an income.
She should read the best books and magazines on household management.
If the girl has no books of her own she should ask for advice and help
at the public library.

The home maker has many interests and an endless variety of duties.
She needs to study--and if need be to take some action to try to
control--the sources of food supply for her household. She must decide
what manufacturing work should be done in the house. Are bread and cake
to be baked at home? What preserving and canning are to be undertaken?
How much clothing is to be made in the house, either with or without help?
In every case the decision has to be made according to individual
requirements. It may pay one home maker to bake her own bread; in the case
of another, her time and strength may be needed in other ways. The problems
of mending, and of taking proper care of household furnishings, are part of
the duty of the home maker. She should also be an expert buyer, and should
be able to judge of the quality and price of fabrics and of their
suitability. If she employs a houseworker, she must be able to plan the
work of her helper. It is important that the home maker should be fair to
everyone whom she employs. Wages, hours, food and shelter, treatment and
standing, should all be of the best character that she can give. The very
nature of a home is based on right human relations. Nothing that is
unjust or unkind should be tolerated in the management of the home or
its relationships. The home is not managed for profit, but for human
well-being. This fact alone places the work of the home maker among the
first and best employments.

By far the most important function of the home is the care and training of
children. No girl or woman can have too great a talent, or too careful a
training, or too fine a personality, to devote all she has to the care of
little children. It is a very wrong thing for anyone to undertake
ignorantly, or to fail to be interested in, the best care of the health
and feeding of infants and their early training. All girls who have had
anything to do with the care of babies know how very delightful babies are,
and how worth while it is to take care of them and to win their affection.

The twentieth century girl has to deal with two aspects of home-making,
one of which is an old aspect revived, while the other is a principle new
in its application to the work of the home. We have been taught by the
stern necessity of the Great War the importance of the food supply of the
world and the household. Every woman who is a home maker should have, if
possible, a small garden in which to grow vegetables. Even if she lives in
an apartment, she may arrange to have a garden allotment in co-operation
with others. Gardening is one of the oldest of the home maker's
employments.

The principle which is new in its application to the work of the home
is co-operation. So far home makers have carried on their affairs
independently, each woman very largely by herself. Suppose a group of ten
women, practical, experienced home makers, with sufficient business sense
to recognize fair business dealing, were to decide to arrange for some of
their home making work in partnership. A great deal of the household
buying of coal, bread, flour, canned goods (when buying canned goods is
advisable), sugar, and other groceries, meat, poultry, butter, eggs, etc.,
might be carried on to great advantage in partnership. Canning, preserving
and baking might be undertaken by one or two of the members of the group,
or a professional worker might be engaged to do this work for the ten
members. The actual expenses should be shared fairly and a considerable
saving would be effected when the output was distributed amongst the
members. In the same way, the co-operative group might arrange for
household help. One skilled houseworker might assist with the work of
three or four households. Washing, ironing, cleaning, dusting, mending,
dressmaking, sewing, shopping, and the care of the telephone, could be
carried on either partly or wholly by members of the group in return for
other service, or by paid helpers who in every case should be reliable
experts.

The principle on which successful co-operative work is based is the forming
of a small group of well-known and trusted individuals to carry on work
either in production, or buying and selling, or in both, with the sharing
of expenses and the elimination of commission and secondary profits.
Co-operation is admirably adapted to the work of home-making. The girls of
the twentieth century, with courage, cleverness and enterprise, may bring
a new blessing to the work of the home through the use of co-operation.

While the home-maker recognizes that her first interest is the work
and the life of the home, she must also be interested in the affairs
of the day. The home is the heart and kernel of the affairs of the world.
It is a mistake to try to get rid of the work of the home; the right way is
to enjoy it; just as a doctor, an actor, a writer, a manufacturer or a
merchant enjoys his or her work. The affairs both of the home and the world
belong to the woman home-maker. We should take pattern by English and
French women, for the English woman is keenly interested in political
affairs and is able to discuss them with understanding, and the French
woman is admired by all because she is her husband's business partner and
can continue the business in his absence. A partner with responsibility is
better and happier than a worker without responsibility, and of infinitely
more value to the community than an idler without an intelligent interest
in life.

No true home can exist without the recognition and love of spiritual
interests. Home life is intended to promote the growth of kindness and
mercy. The woman of the home must also help in providing recreation for her
family and herself. Thus home becomes the best and happiest placein the
world and is worth all we can give in time, energy and love to make it so.




CHAPTER XIX

JOURNALISM. WRITING. ADVERTISING. ART. HANDICRAFTS. DESIGNING.
PHOTOGRAPHY. ARCHITECTURE. LANDSCAPE GARDENING.
HOUSE DECORATING AND FURNISHING. MUSIC. ACTING. DANCING.


Many girls who have definite gifts are specially interested in the
occupations described in this chapter. As a rule, the girl with a decided
talent has no difficulty in choosing the employment which she wishes to
follow. But she sometimes is in doubt as to whether her ability is
sufficiently great to justify her in choosing an art rather than a
handicraft, or an art rather than a profession, or whether her gift should
not be used in a directly practical business pursuit. One of the purposes
of "The Canadian Girl at Work" is to teach the work of whatever kind may
be interesting, and that the standing of the worker depends on the skill
and perfection with which the work is done. Good art is found in many forms,
but never except as the result of work, devotion and a gift. If the girl,
in any artistic employment, helps to make the ordinary surroundings of
everyday life more beautiful and more suitable she is using her gifts to
advantage.

The girl who wants to write may find a suitable and enjoyable field in
journalism. Some instruction in journalism is given in colleges, more
often in connection with college papers than in any other way. But the
usual method by which a girl is taught journalism is by working on the
staff of a newspaper. Such positions are not easily found. Application
may be made at newspaper offices for a regular position when one becomes
vacant. While she is waiting to obtain regular work, the girl may write
special articles and submit them for publication. We may take for granted
that she enjoys writing, but she should be able to choose subjects on
which to write. One of the first questions that an applicant for newspaper
work is likely to ask is: "What shall I write about?" This question the
writer must learn to answer for herself. She should know what is
interesting and worth writing about. The journalist, besides enjoying
writing and having some gift of expression, should be keenly interested in
people, and should have enthusiasm for her work. The hours are long and
the rate of payment not particularly high, but the true journalist is
always in love with her work. Positions for women on newspapers are varied
in character. Some women are general reporters and take assignments from
the city editor. Others are in charge of a woman's page and may have one
assistant or more than one, working under their direction. Some are special
writers, covering a certain amount of general work and having a specialty
in addition, such as music and drama, book reviewing, a page for children,
fashions, market reports for women, and so on. An assistant on a woman's
page may begin at ten dollars a week, and as her work increases in value
she may receive twelve, fifteen or eighteen dollars a week. The woman
journalist in charge of a woman's page is paid as a rule from twenty to
thirty-five or forty dollars a week. Few women journalists are paid larger
sums.

A number of other positions are held by women in connection with weekly
newspapers, magazines and publishing offices. Salaries vary all the way
from ten or twelve to thirty or forty dollars a week. The average salary
for the woman journalist who has proved her ability is in the neighbourhood
of twenty-five dollars a week. Many newspapers and some printing offices
employ girls as copy holders. These girls begin at a weekly wage of seven,
eight or nine dollars, and when they become expert, receive higher wages.
The best paid positions for women proof readers are held by those who have
proved their ability to compete with men expert in the trade. Women proof
readers belong to the men's union and their wages are the same as those
received by men.

An employment which is becoming more important for women journalists and
writers is the writing of advertisements. Much advertising is addressed
almost exclusively to women and women have proved that they can do work
of this description to great advantage. Salaries are high as compared with
salaries in other women's employments. The work is difficult and requires
a distinct gift, besides a knowledge of how to write and of what is being
written about. The woman who is doing advertising writing needs accurate
knowledge of a number of special fields, such as fashions, the history of
costume, period furniture, and so on.

Work for the girl who is gifted with an unusually fine sense of colour
and form is developing rapidly. To be a painter, a woman should have an
outstanding gift, and it is generally necessary for her to have an
independent, or at least a supplementary, income. Many young women
painters add to their income by teaching, and girls who live at home are
able to continue the study of painting for their own pleasure and in part
for an additional income. The training of a painter is long and costly,
and while the gifted girl has happiness in her work, the occupation of an
artist is exacting, although it may not seem so to the public. Girls with
artistic gifts may find employment in illustrating, designing, bookbinding,
handwrought jewelry, woodcarving, embroidery, and in weaving from original
designs. The girl who is attracted to photography may obtain instruction
in a photographer's studio, but the artistic photographer will have to
depend largely on herself in developing the possibilities of her work.
A number of women have achieved success in artistic photography.

To work successfully in any of these occupations, the artist must be
trained and should have special gifts. Training is obtained partly in
schools, partly in studios at home and abroad, and from working with
other artists. Some of these artistic occupations pay well; in others
payment is variable and more or less uncertain.

The woman architect needs a special gift and should be trained as
thoroughly as possible in draughtsmanship. Her next step should be to
obtain a place as draughtswoman or general assistant in an architect's
office. Promotion afterwards will depend largely on individual ability.

Architecture and houseplanning are fields of work not yet occupied to any
large extent by women. Girls with gifts for work of this character should
be encouraged to enter these occupations, provided they have perseverance.
It is always difficult to enter a new field, but a few women are already
successful architects, and the advantages which should be possessed by
women in designing houses are obvious. When a woman plans a house she
considers it from the standpoint of a home and takes into consideration
the nature of the people who are to live in the house and also the kind
of work they will do both in the home and in the outside world.

Landscape gardening has, as yet, been developed little in Canada. There
are, however, a few establishments carrying on such work and in one or
more a woman is a partner.

House decorating and house furnishing have also been entered on as
professional occupations by women. House furnishing in particular offers
a promising field for girls with the necessary training and endowment.
Many girls have ability for this work, and as the employment is being
developed commercially, the opportunities for girls in house furnishing
should increase with some rapidity.

Payment in all these fields of artistic work depends not only on the
ability and skill of the worker, but in particular on the degree in which
the products of her art are planned to meet the needs and desires of a
large public. The individual worker who expects her work to find its own
public is far less likely to have a steady income than the worker who is
employed by some large firm. If the artist or the worker in handicrafts
feels that she must work alone, or if she works better by herself, then
she should have either an independent income or an alternative occupation;
otherwise she will need a well-developed business sense in order to handle
the products of her skill to the best advantage financially.

In music, the gifted girl may be a teacher, or may appear in public as a
player or singer, or she may combine teaching with public appearances.
Teaching music has been systematized to a marked extent. Many young
musicians who teach are engaged on the staff of the conservatory or
academy where they obtained their instruction. Musicians who appear in
public generally possess, along with musical ability, a more or less
impressive personality. A number of teachers who have made a decided
success are in receipt of good incomes. A performer or singer needs to
have unusual ability to earn a large income. Women musicians not
infrequently make fine accompanists and may devote themselves to this
branch of their art. In general, what has been said of the remuneration
in other arts applies to music. But the systematizing of the teaching of
music by institutions has a tendency to steady the income of the music
teacher. Training of the best kind is long and costly, but any other kind
is unsatisfactory.

In order to attain standing as a professional actress a young girl should
have special physical training, voice culture and a broad literary
education. She should know something of singing and dancing, and she should
learn how to walk well and how to speak correctly and impressively. Part of
this training may be obtained at schools of dramatic expression which are
often connected with conservatories of music. The people of the stage work
harder than the average trained or untrained worker. Their hours are longer
and they endure more discomforts. There are few spectacular successes, and
still fewer genuine reputations for genius in dramatic interpretation.
Seasonal unemployment is prevalent in this occupation. Salaries seem to be
large, but very few are large in reality. If we reckon the number of weeks
throughout the year during which payment is received, it appears that few
actresses earn a good income. A young woman of decided gifts may become an
individual entertainer.

Dancing has recently come more into favour as an occupation, regarded
both as giving physical training for health and as an art. The teaching
of art dancing is undertaken by some conservatories of music and also by
individual teachers.

All work of an artistic character requires an endowment of imagination,
sympathy, insight, and artistic ability. The artistic worker gives a great
deal, and does not enjoy or suffer temperately. It is impossible to do
good work unless the whole being is thrown into the effort. Unless the
artist possesses financial, as well as artistic, ability, the pecuniary
reward is likely to be uncertain. But the individual with decided gifts
rightly is dissatisfied in any other occupation.




CHAPTER XX

BANKING. LAW. MEDICINE. DENTISTRY. PHARMACY.
CHEMICAL INDUSTRY. CIVIL SERVICE. SOCIAL WORK


Among girls at work and at school are those whose mental capacity is
developed strongly. They enjoy thinking out problems. They analyze
situations, because they want to understand why some particular fact
happens to be true. These girls may be executive and practical, but they
are always thinkers. If possible, they should remain at school in order to
continue their studies. But although a girl who is intellectual may have
to go into paid employment early, there is no reason why she should not
eventually find her way into work for which she is better fitted.

Employment for the intellectual girl is varied, just as the intellectual
girl herself, according to her individual capacity, is fitted for a number
of different occupations. Banks have long employed girls as stenographers
and a number of young women have held junior clerkships. But now the work
of a ledger-keeper or teller is sometimes given to a woman, and there is
a prospect for the intelligent girl with capacity for financial affairs to
find a position in a bank, suited to her gifts. There are a few women in
accountants' offices. The number of women who act as insurance agents is
increasing, and it is considered that they have special advantages in
insuring other women. A small movement, therefore, has already begun to
introduce women into the higher branches of business and finance. In order
to be successful in financial work, a girl will need to prepare herself as
carefully as possible. She should understand something of business law and
should be familiar with the machinery of banking and credit. The study of
economics and popular government are part of her preparation. Women who
have taken a university degree in economics are already influencing the
fields of work which may be entered by the girl with a good intellectual
endowment.

Women lawyers are doing good work in many of the larger cities, especially
in the United States. The training required is long and somewhat expensive.
There is no reason why a woman lawyer who has training and the legal
instinct should not be a useful and successful worker. After graduating,
she may find herself confined to office work altogether. If she has greater
capacities, she may have difficulty in making opportunities for using them.
Occasionally she may find employment in government service in connection
with laws regarding children and factory work. Work in social service has
attracted the attention of some young women to the study of law. In dealing
with family difficulties through a "settlement," the social worker becomes
impressed with the importance of understanding what legal redress may be
obtained for some just grievance, and applies herself to legal study. Work
among immigrants and foreigners unable to speak English is also encouraging
the study of law by young women who are social helpers. This field of
employment for women is not likely to be large, but it is growing.

The woman physician is an important social force in modern life. Some
medical colleges require for admission a university degree, so that the
course of training may cover seven or eight years. As a rule only girls
who are strongly attracted to medical work and who are specially gifted
for it, undertake the study of medicine. In addition to university work
and medical school training, the young woman doctor if possible should
spend some time on the staff of a hospital and should take postgraduate
study either before beginning private practice or shortly after. For the
first few years she may hardly be able to meet her living expenses. She
may, however, obtain a position as a school physician or with an insurance
company. The woman physician needs strength, health, a fine nervous system,
idealism, self-control, unselfishness, and knowledge of human nature.
Every fine quality which she possesses will be of service in her work.
Her ideals cannot be too high, but they must be balanced with common sense.
She needs also to be gifted with intellectual force. Her patients should
have confidence in her skill and also in her character.

Dentistry offers to women a good although restricted field of employment,
and so also does pharmacy. The woman dentist needs scientific accuracy,
mechanical skill and good nerves. Her training is shorter than that
required by a physician and will cost less. Her first employment may be in
schools. Work with children offers the woman dentist special inducements;
she may find employment doing children's work for another dentist.
When she opens an office of her own, she will need a thousand, fifteen
hundred or two thousand dollars in order to make a successful beginning.
The woman pharmacist requires to attend a college for two years and to have
had experience in a drug store before she can obtain a certificate.
Accuracy, skill and carefulness should make her a successful druggist.
If she has business ability, she should be able in time to manage
a business of her own.

Young women who have graduated in science from universities are finding
openings for chemical work in a number of industries. One girl who has
specialized in botany recently discovered "a growth" which was injuring
the quality of paper turned out by the mills of a paper company; she
was able to tell the manufacturer how he could solve his difficulty.
The chemical expert is constantly increasing in industrial importance.
Teaching and laboratory work, therefore, are not the only employments
open to the girl with an aptitude for scientific work.

A number of able women find employment in the Civil Service. They are
required to pass a Civil Service examination. College graduates hold
positions in the higher grades, while many women clerks are employed as
stenographers and in minor positions. The statistical office, forestry,
trade and commerce and the labour department, all need expert assistants.
While few of the higher offices are held by women, still women with
special knowledge and ability are being employed in increasing numbers by
the government.

The income earned by professional women is likely to be comparatively small
at first. These occupations are all full time employments and require the
undivided attention of the worker. After some years of steady application,
the professional woman is fairly certain to receive a reasonable, even a
good, income. Two, three, and four thousand dollars may be regarded as
incomes which may be obtained with reasonable certainty by women who are
successful in their professions.

The intellectual girl should choose her work wisely. She is a good student
and while she is in training it may seem to her that she will have no
special difficulties of any kind to face.

When she comes to follow her occupation in everyday life, she will find
that personal initiative, judgment, and executive energy in affairs are as
valuable as the ability to master a problem in her study or in the
laboratory. If her studies have left her isolated from human nature, she
will find this want of understanding and sympathy a heavy handicap in
whatever occupation she may enter. Scholarship cannot be made fruitful
in everyday life unless it is used in the service of humanity.

One of the modern employments for young women of education which is
increasing rapidly in its scope is to be found in social work. A broad
general training and a special interest in humanitarian work are required
by those who enter this occupation. The missionary and the deaconess may
be regarded as forerunners in some sense to the modern social worker.
Many Canadian women of the finest aspiration have become missionaries in
distant lands; women physicians have accomplished work of great value as
medical missionaries. The deaconess of to-day may be a graduate of such
training schools for social workers as the Departments of Social Service
and Social Science in the University of Toronto and McGill University.
The special training of the social worker includes lectures in economics
and sociology and the history of philanthropy, discussion of social
problems in classes, and "field work" under the guidance of experienced
workers. Positions for those who take training in social service are found
in "settlements," and in connection with "Big Sister" associations, and
Charity Organization Societies. Welfare departments in stores and
factories indicate the growing importance in modern industry of work which
has to do with social factors in employment. The trained social worker may
find a position as secretary, statistician, visitor, investigator,
lecturer, dietitian, nurse, or as a clerk or executive officer, in child
welfare, civic improvement, or family relief work. Young women who mean to
undertake such work should have, not only training, but common sense and
idealism. Salaries are sometimes low, and much valuable work is contributed
to social betterment enterprises by young women who live at home and are
able to give their time and work free or for small remuneration. There are,
however, a number of well-paid positions in connection with social service
work.




CHAPTER XXI

GOING INTO BUSINESS FOR ONE'S SELF


Responsibility is something in which we all should share. If girls will
observe people, they will see that human beings grow and become better able
to work and help others through the exercise of responsibility. The girl or
woman at work who feels her responsibility and is able to act on her own
initiative is more valuable than the worker who always has to be told what
to do. By gradually learning how to take responsibility, the girl becomes
fitted to go into business for herself.

In the first place, few girls actually enter paid employment or business
life with the intention of becoming independent proprietors. It is only
after some years' experience of work that the idea occurs to them.
A trained nurse may have been in private practice three or four years
before she begins to think that she would like to own and manage a private
hospital. For the properly qualified and equipped woman, this is a good
business enterprise. A number of nurses are conducting excellent private
hospitals. The work is exacting, the hours are long and the responsibility
is heavy. But any girl who thinks of going into business for herself should
know at once that all these conditions are true of every independent
business that is worth while.

The business woman requires a precise technical and financial knowledge of
the business which she means to enter, and she needs as well originality,
a fund of ideas, courage, initiative, imagination, that feeling of capacity
for responsibility and enterprise which is like love of adventure,
judgment, nerve and character. She should not be too excitable and yet she
ought to be keen. She should not be easily disturbed and she ought to be a
steady worker. Above all, she requires to be able to deal with people, both
customers and employees.

Instances of women who have been successful in business enterprises may be
quoted which do not seem to conform to the requirements specified. But if
they are examined, these instances will show that the women in question
have fulfilled the conditions of success almost exactly as described.
A woman has succeeded, for instance, in managing her own country inn.
She was in a totally different employment before she started this
successful enterprise. But she had already bought, built on, and sold with
a margin of profit, three or four other properties. She had learned how to
buy land to advantage in the neighbourhood of a city. She bought her
present property, choosing a few acres which were already in fruit or in
use for growing vegetables. There was an attractive, large, old-fashioned
farm house on the premises, the property was near a railway station and
situated on a road constantly used by motorists. Other enterprises of the
same kind were studied by her. The food provided was made a specialty.
Every expense which could be lessened in connection with the property was
considered. A flock of poultry was kept. The fruit was either sold or put
down for winter use in the inn.

In almost every instance the successful woman of business enters on her
new enterprise in a small way. A girl begins by making and delivering
lunches to the staff of a large office building. Later she adds other
buildings to her list. She sells cakes, sandwiches and preserves from her
own home. Having saved some capital, she embarks on a down-town tea room.
Every detail of her business is planned as it expands and the management
is entirely in her own hands. The successful management of a large
business would have been impossible for an inexperienced girl, but it
comes easily to the young business woman.

In the same way a nurse began a business preparing supplies for doctors.
Soon she added invalid cookery to her other work. Her venture developed
into a business partly catering, partly a dining club, and in part a depot
for surgical dressings and home made cooking for invalids. Another woman
has inherited a large catering business from her father. It was a
considerable business when she became manager, but she had gone to work
with her father as soon as she left school. Still another woman has
established a system of hairdressing businesses. She began with one room
in one city. Her business has been extended to over forty cities. No chance
good fortune can account for successes such as these described. Managing
ability, foresight and character are responsible for a great part of the
achievement. The woman in each case made the discovery that the best
commodity of its kind offered to the public in the right way must bring
success, if the business enterprise itself is well managed.

Examples of the wise judgment of women in business are found in every large
community. A girl who makes good marmalade for home consumption began to
make and sell this product in a small way. She is now part owner of a large
business. A woman who went into a factory as an office helper proved to
have a gift for designing dresses. After spending a number of years in the
employ of the firm with which she began work, she has gone into partnership
with a woman dressmaker in a small specialized factory. A large wholesale
fish business is owned and managed by a woman, whose knowledge of the
business, including sources of supply and distribution, is entirely
adequate.

Women who own and manage business enterprises when they succeed often do so
because of their womanly qualities. There is no conflict between capable
thorough work and womanliness. The normal woman has always a capable and
helpful side to her character. She generally retains in affairs her
gentleness, considerateness, and patience in dealing with all sorts of
people. No quality is more important in business than a natural ability to
understand and sympathize. A woman's ideas may be original and her
knowledge of business details exact, but it is her power to work with
others and to make the best of them which is the highest part of her
business ability. Many of the businesses owned and managed successfully
by women are connected with food, clothing, health, physical, mental and
moral training, and personal well-being. The woman's advantage in business
has to do most frequently with perfection in detail, personal supervision,
knowledge of the highest home standards, and with making her commodity a
little the best on the market. The best women in business excel in making
conditions for their employees ideal. They plan to give their workers
opportunities for education and training, and sometimes help them to start
in business for themselves.




CHAPTER XXII

NEW WORK FOR WOMEN


One of the best known doctors in the country has chosen a special trained
nurse to act as his anesthetist, that is, she accompanies him and assists
in giving his patient the anesthetic when he is about to perform an
operation. This girl when she entered the training school of a hospital
had no idea that she would specialize in this way as an assistant to a
famous surgeon. Her work is but one of the many examples of the usefulness
of the trained woman worker. Varied opportunities in employment may be
discovered by girls who are in earnest in finding the best work they can do.

A number of the new employments for women are connected with food, clothing
and home making. The woman who fits herself to be a food expert may make a
good income as a writer or lecturer, provided she has the necessary gifts
as well as knowledge and skill. A food expert is sometimes employed in
large departmental stores. Such a specialist is often found in charge of
the dining-room of college residences. Dietitians are a necessary part of
the staff of a hospital. The woman who qualifies as an expert on food is
entering an occupation which is being recognized as of the first importance.

A visiting household expert who is competent to advise in the arrangement
of household work and who is skilled in household accounting is a new
worker in the oldest occupation for women. A food demonstrator is sometimes
sent out by the government to teach canning, preserving and drying, and to
explain new household processes. Women experts in poultry keeping and
vegetable growing are also in government service. Women specialists have
made a study of public marketing. Many women have made a success of the
business of catering, of tea and lunch rooms, and of food specialties such
as mushroom growing, raising squabs, preserving, pickling, and spicing
fruits. In hotels, there are women managers, chaperones, hostesses and
matrons. The old-fashioned boarding house is still a useful institution,
and the girl who will undertake to keep house for a group of professional
women on a co-operative plan is a modern worker likely to find remunerative
employment. Any woman who has the capital to establish a well-arranged,
well-organized home where expensive, high-class board may be obtained, in
a city, or in the neighbourhood of a university, is certain to attract as
many clients as she can accommodate.

Clothing and house furnishing offer fields of new work for women.
The expert shopper in these departments is already in demand. An adviser
in dress for women has made her appearance as a paid worker. Many women
could save time, trouble and money if they could go to an expert for
consultation about their clothes. A girl who is a specially good shopper
should be able to build up a business among her friends.

Some women have made a success of high class laundry work. Girls who will
undertake fine washing and mending of delicate fabrics are in demand.
There is a greater need for the expert who will take classes in health
exercises for women. Teachers trained in the Swedish gymnasium system are
likely to find employment. Others are required for children who need
special care. Courses of training are already planned for teachers of
this description, and the occupation is likely to develop considerably.
Social work is constantly requiring helpers in new departments.
Investigators, secretaries, statisticians, lecturers, health workers of
various kinds, are employed by social organizations. Welfare workers have
made their appearance in factories. Employment departments of factories
and shops are offering work to the woman who is an expert in employment.
Others are in the service of civic and government employment bureaus.
The vocational adviser is to be found in colleges and is employed by
organizations of a benevolent character.

Rent collecting as an occupation for women was begun in Great Britain by
Miss Octavia Hill. A woman in this country with capital invested in an
office building, who has had business experience, manages her own building
and collects the rents. Other women are employed as managers and agents
for apartment houses. The real estate business has been entered by women
who sell real estate, and accompany prospective tenants to houses and
apartments. Other somewhat unusual employments for women are publicity
writing in various commercial and public campaigns, and lecturing on
various phases of modern life. Women are also commercial travellers,
conductors of entertainments, pageant managers, window decorators, brokers
and financial advisers, theatrical managers and producers of plays.
They find employment as civil engineers and in research work of various
kinds. Women have succeeded as conductors of foreign tours, and as
lecturers on current events for women's clubs.

Some of these occupations may appear out of the way, and even romantic,
to the girl who is choosing her work, or who is already at work in some
paid employment. But in every case, the pioneer worker needs special
training and experience. New work requires more originality, perseverance,
and if possible better preparation than may be necessary in standard
employments.

In conclusion, a word may be said to the girl or woman who has been at work
for some years. She should take stock at intervals of the work she is doing,
and of her prospects and possibilities. Let her devote some clear thinking
as to whether her work could not be re-arranged to the advantage of her
employer and herself. Purely routine work is scarcely ever as well done as
it might be. She should ask herself, "Can I improve my work? Is there any
new line in which I can develop? What special knowledge and skill have I?
Am I using all the capacity I have? Does my work need to be changed or
re-organized?" The girl or woman at work should not be satisfied with a
superficial answer to these questions. It is generally possible to improve
one's own work, by thinking about it carefully and by trying.




CHAPTER XXIII

MONEY AND WAGES


The weekly wage on which some girls live comfortably will give others only
the bare necessaries of life, and sometimes not even that.

The girl's real wages are what she is able to get for the sum of money
she is paid in exchange for her work. Before she can judge whether her
wage is good or poor, she must know how much her board and lodging will
cost, the cost of clothes, and the total amount of her other expenses.
She should know what additional advantages there are in the place where
she is working. If there are disadvantages, she should consider them also
before she can tell whether the wage offered is a good or a poor wage.
Local prices, and the difference in the cost of living between one place
and another, must be learned by the girl at work before she can estimate
the value of her wages.

During the time when she is becoming skilled in her occupation it is
difficult for the girl at work to support herself entirely. If she is
living at home, her family will help her. But she should always remember
the girl who is not living at home, and should feel that it is her duty
not to lower this girl's wages below a living standard. Every girl at work
should make an effort to know what a living wage is in the place--town,
city or country--where she is employed. Wages for skilled workers should
be of a good standard, that is, the wage paid should be sufficient to make
the worker efficient and comfortable. Even the beginner should have a
living wage.

Prices of food, clothing and board, and the other expenses which one
has to meet, are different in town, city and country. When the girl
wage-earner changes from the place in which she lives, she should find
out beforehand as accurately as possible how much she will need to live
on in the place to which she may be thinking of going.

If we do not think accurately and carefully about what we earn and what
we spend, we shall likely always remain undeveloped in judgment and
character, and shall not be able to take the responsibility which should
come to every mature person.

A girl worker in one employment may necessarily have a different scale of
expenses from a girl at work in another occupation. For instance, it costs
the average stenographer more to keep up her standard of efficiency than it
does the average girl in a factory. The stenographer also has to spend more
time and money in preparing for her occupation. A girl in a factory who is
earning twelve dollars a week is better off financially, therefore, than
the stenographer earning twelve a week. A woman physician may have a yearly
income of two or three thousand dollars. A teacher who has an income of
fifteen hundred dollars a year may be better off financially. The physician
has to pay the rent and upkeep of her office; she must have someone to
answer her telephone and to take messages; she may need a conveyance so
that she can get about to her patients. Her training and the equipment she
uses in her work are more varied and expensive as a rule than those which
are required by a teacher.

We should remember that while what we earn is important, there are other
considerations as important. The joy of the worker in her work is the first
consideration. The born teacher, like the born doctor, is happier in her
own employment. An income is a necessary possession, but it does not give
that happiness which work alone can give. Very few of us work for money
altogether, while many of us work to earn a living, which is a different
thing. To be self-supporting through work which we enjoy is one of the
greatest blessings of our existence.

It is impossible to state an amount which will represent accurately a
living wage for girls who are beginning work in all the towns, cities or
country districts of Canada. At present a living wage in a city may be
nine, ten, eleven or twelve dollars a week; in places outside cities it
may vary as greatly. Girls at work should look for an employer who
recognizes reasonable standards and pays such wages as far as possible.
The more loyal girls are to such employers the better working conditions
will be for everyone.

Skilled and highly trained workers require, and receive, wages far above
the sums mentioned in the preceding paragraph.

The girl should estimate the value of her yearly income. This is important.
She may be a milliner and have steady employment for only thirty or
thirty-five weeks in the year. If she is paid a weekly wage of twelve
dollars, her yearly income will amount to three hundred and sixty or four
hundred and twenty dollars. She must find some other occupation for the
rest of her time or her total income will amount to three hundred and
sixty dollars, or four hundred and twenty dollars and no more.

The trained nurse who is paid twenty-five or thirty dollars a week when she
is on a case, will make a mistake if she forgets that she will not be able
to work without intermission throughout the year. She may be engaged in her
employment only forty weeks in the year. Nurses may earn no more than eight
or nine hundred dollars in twelve months. Even the most capable factory
worker does not earn her highest wage every week in the year. She should
be careful to reckon her income by the year, not by the week.

The girl at work exchanges her yearly income for food, shelter, clothing
and a number of other requirements, such as doctor's and dentist's fees,
carfare, and washing, holidays, recreation, savings, etc. If she earns
twelve dollars every week in the year her income will be six hundred and
twenty-four dollars. Out of this she may pay five dollars each week for
board, or two hundred and sixty dollars a year. If she spends between one
hundred and twenty-five dollars and one hundred and fifty dollars for her
clothes in the year, she will have about two hundred dollars for other
needs.

What she uses her money for gives to the girl the real meaning of her wages.
Her income means food, clothing, and a house to live in. Besides that her
income means many small expenses, a little holiday and recreation, a little
kindness to someone, church collection, a gift to someone who is in need,
some small pleasure for the girl herself. It should also mean a savings
account. Something will be said about saving in the next chapter. But here
it may be said that if we spend everything we have from day to day, we are
left with little choice in spending. Choice in spending is a test of the
girl's character. We may choose to spend our spare money for candy. But if
we do we shall probably not be able to buy a volume of poetry which we
should love to keep and treasure. We may need a warm coat, but the money
we might have had for it we spent for a second expensive blouse when we
had one pretty blouse already. It was money we had saved which helped us
to go to a course of lessons in gymnastics, and that course may have cured
a tendency to headache.

The average girl hopes that her wages will increase, and this is right.
An employer once said of the amount that he was willing to pay his most
useful employees: "I feel that if a girl is not able to make a good
bargain with me for her work, she will not be able to make a good bargain
for me with others." The best and surest way for the girl to increase her
wages is to think out some plan for increasing the value of her work, and
then if necessary to say to her employer that she has been able to make
her work more valuable.

A word of warning about wages may not come amiss here. If our wages are
too low, the best way to go about raising them is to act ourselves, not
to expect others to act for us. The best results are likely to be obtained
by giving your employer some increased advantage, and by seeing at the
same time that he gives you an equal advantage in your income. But never
feel ill-used, because that lessens your happiness and your power to help
yourself. Remember it is your own difficulty and you are the person to
find the way out.




CHAPTER XXIV

SPENDING. SAVING. INVESTING


There is only one way by means of which we may know accurately how we are
spending our wages. To know this we must keep accounts. Perhaps the girl
has an impression that accounting is dull and troublesome. But this
impression, if she has it, is a mistaken one.

This chapter on Spending, Saving and Investing is not written to keep the
girl from having what she wants. It is written to help her to make the
most of her wages, so that she will get the most use and pleasure from her
spending. A pretty blouse does not make up for the prettier colour that
ought to be in the girl's cheeks; it rather makes one notice more readily
that the girl herself is not looking her best. To be well dressed and well
cared for, to make the best of herself, a girl should learn to keep
accounts and to plan her expenditures carefully. She has often seen a man
poring over his business books, because he knows that by doing so with
good judgment he can improve his methods. Similarly, the time a girl
gives to the study of her accounts will also be to her advantage.

One business woman who has made a study of her expenditure has the
following list of headings for her private account book: Board and
lodging; clothes; laundry; dentist and doctor; car tickets and stamps;
contribution to family life; books, magazines and papers; church and
benevolence; gifts and entertainment of friends; holidays and travel;
recreation, candy, music, and the theatre; study; clubs and societies;
miscellaneous; taxes; saving and investment. The girl at work can usefully
make a study of these headings since they, or others of the same character,
are used by women in business who desire to lead normal, generous and
helpful lives. The business woman just mentioned says that the money she
has for her income would give her no satisfaction if she had not people of
her own to love and if she were not helping to take care of them. From
this statement any girl will understand the meaning of the heading
"contribution to family life" in this business woman's accounts.

The girl at work, however, can begin her accounts in a much simpler form
than the foregoing. The list of headings given above have been evolved
to fit the life of a woman who has been at work for a number of years.
A girl's first accounts may be as follows: Board and lodging; clothing;
recreation and holidays; dentist and doctor; church and charity; savings;
miscellaneous.

Mrs. Ellen Richards, whose work in teaching people how to live wisely
is making her name more famous every year, gives in one of her books a
division of a family income which every girl should study and try to
understand: Food; clothes; rent or housing; light, heat and wages
(operating expenses for the house); miscellaneous, including books,
education, church, charity, savings, life insurance, doctor, dentist,
travel and pleasure. Various divisions by percentages have been made of
the family income. The one chosen by Mrs. Richards is based on an income
of $1,000 a year. The percentages are 30 per cent. for food; 20 per cent.
for rent; 15 per cent. for clothing; 10 per cent. for operating expenses;
and 25 per cent. for miscellaneous.

It will be seen that there is a great deal for a girl to learn about the
spending of money. She will readily understand that it is impossible for
her to use her wages or income to the best advantage unless she knows what
she is spending it for, and in what proportions. Every girl should make
a division of income fitted to her own needs.

It is not always possible to follow the percentages which Mrs. Richards
recommends, but it is possible and wise for every girl to know what are
regarded as proper divisions for a family income, and to plan her own
expenditures with such percentages as a guide.

Sometimes girls are called "fortunate" or "lucky" because their affairs
seem to turn out well. In reality, these girls have planned carefully and
have carried out their plans faithfully. A well managed life is not an
accident, or a piece of luck; it is the result of careful planning, and
persistent application.

The girl who saves has a freedom of action unknown to the girl who has
never had a bank account. We all find a compelling necessity to spend
money for food, shelter, clothing, carfare and other incidentals. But when
these wants are satisfied, the wise girl puts by a certain part of her
income. Then she can begin to exercise a power of choice. She may take
some training which will help her to get a better position, she may learn
a new occupation, or she may study music or designing. Possibly she needs
a rest and change; if she has money saved, she may rest for a few weeks.
If she has spent all her money, she must continue at work. Then, too, she
should guard herself by the possession of a bank account against sickness,
and being out of work. Even a small sum saved every week enables a girl to
feel strong and self-reliant. The habit of saving calls for self-control,
far-sightedness and imagination.

Girls invest their savings in various ways. A girl may help her people to
buy a house, sometimes with a garden attached. This is a good investment in
most circumstances. The girl should take an interest in the garden and help
to grow vegetables and flowers. Possibly the garden lot may be large enough
for poultry as well as vegetables. Or the girl's family may live outside
the city, in which case a good part of the food for the household may be
produced in the garden. It was one of the glories of Belgium before the war
that many of her wage-earners lived in the country and grew a good part of
their own food. They kept hens and pigs; and there was almost no
unemployment or destitution in Belgium.

The girl who saves generally begins with a bank account and should learn to
understand banking. The Canadian Government has an advantageous system of
annuities which offers young investors an excellent return for them money.
Girls and boys alike should study these annuities. Life insurance is a
helpful form of investment for those who have dependents. The girl at work
should not put her savings into speculative investments. Business men of
the best standing say it is pathetic to see the waste of girls' savings in
unwise investments. One of the best investments a girl can make is to
continue her education.




CHAPTER XXV

HEALTH


Health has more to do with our successful employment than most of us have
yet realized. To prove that this is true a woman who is an employment
expert told the following story:

"The other night I was sitting in my office waiting for a girl who could
not come to see me in the daytime. The manager of a business house who
was interested in the girl had asked me if I would advise her how to change
her work from one employment which she liked fairly well to another in
which she was greatly interested. I had formed no particular idea of what
the girl would be like. My day had been full and I had had no time to
consider her case, knowing only that she wanted to change her work, and
that she was a girl who was already earning her living.

"She came in, looked at me with a straight, steady glance and offered me
her hand with a simplicity which took no note of the fact that an older
person is supposed usually to make the first advance. The fact that we
shook hands gave me an opportunity to notice that her hand was neither
nervous nor tremulous. The quality of her handclasp can be summed up in
saying that it was reassuring and agreeable. I wonder if most people know
how all these points are noticed by employment experts and employers.
The way in which the girl looked at me and the way in which she shook
hands told me that she was physically and mentally in good condition.

"She was about five feet ten, and unusually well built and well developed.
She was dressed in noticeably good taste. She was a rather large woman, or
rather girl, for she was only a child in years. She was not what anyone
would call 'a beauty,' but she was so splendidly well and carried herself
so finely that she made an excellent impression. I do not know when I have
been so much attracted by anyone. Almost any employer would have given her
a position if he had had one vacant which she could fill. I wish all girls
could realize what an advantage it is to be well physically and mentally
and to look as well as this girl did.

"When I came to question her I found that her story was unusual from the
point of view of employment. I thought from her appearance that she might
be eighteen or nineteen. But to my astonishment she told me that she was
fifteen and that she had been earning her living for nearly a year.
She was a stenographer and had had three years' training in a high school
of commerce. Her father had died and she was helping to support her mother.
Several factors were against her satisfactory employment. She was under
age and she had not completed her school course when she went to work.
From these two facts it would have been natural to suppose that she would
obtain a poor position, both in the character of the work required and in
payment. She was earning fifteen dollars a week, a rate of payment three
or four dollars a week higher than the average wage paid beginners in the
city where she was employed. It was her splendid health, her look of
substantial character and her good manner which had won this girl
employment when another girl of fifteen, less healthy and less developed,
might have failed to find any satisfactory position at all."

A time is likely to come in the world's history when the laws of right
living are so well understood that poor health will be regarded as
blameworthy. In a number of cases we must regard it as blameworthy now.
To be in the company of a radiantly healthy person is a cheerful blessing.
Let us make up our minds to be this kind of blessing to our friends.

Happily we can do a great deal to make ourselves healthy. We need to eat
wisely, to dress properly and to rest well. Every girl should learn to
regulate these things wisely for herself. Other people can only help to
make us healthy, but the real work of being healthy we must do for
ourselves, and this means daily attention and daily care. A famous doctor
said once that the average baby is meant to live; all the baby asks is to
be given a good chance. In the same way the average human being is meant
to be healthy. Health depends--the statement is so important that it will
bear repeating--on care in eating and resting and on proper clothing.
Health depends also on cleanliness, inside the body and out; this means
cleanliness in every respect. A daily bath and proper attention to one's
body are essential to health.

The girl should learn as soon as possible that her health as well as her
appearance will depend on her taking daily exercise. She may suppose that
exercise is a dull tiresome thing which she is told by other people to
take, but which in itself has no interest for her. Here, as in other
things, the girl must learn to be her own captain, her own commanding
officer. She should give herself orders to take daily exercise. If any of
us needs a lesson in keeping well and beautiful, we can get that lesson
from our little friends the birds. Every creature, wild and tame, winged
and four-footed, takes the most scrupulous care of its physical condition.
They clean, stretch, brush, polish, until every feather or hair, until
every muscle and sinew is in fit condition.

We should think of our bodies as fine instruments which are given into our
keeping. The human body is the finest and most wonderful instrument in
the world, and it is sad and amazing how often we fail to take the most
ordinary care of it. There are different systems of exercise, and the girl
should find one that will bring all her muscles properly into play.
Five or ten minutes' exercise a day is all that is required. There are
many muscles which are not used in walking or ordinary play, and if these
muscles are not exercised regularly then that fine instrument your body
will get out of good condition and will not show correct and beautiful
lines. A girl should train herself to stand properly. A simple test by
which she can tell if she is holding herself rightly is to walk a few
steps on tiptoe. In order to do this she must hold herself correctly.
To have a good body, well shaped and in right proportion, it is necessary
to hold one's self correctly all the time. Habits such as these are not
acquired all at once. It is only by persistence day by day that the girl
will learn to walk and to stand properly and will find that her body is
becoming lithe, strong and healthy, an instrument which it is a joy to
use and which will make her appearance as attractive as it ought to be.

When anything goes wrong which we do not understand, it is generally
necessary to consult a physician. Special care should be taken to see
a good doctor or dentist, if anything is wrong with eyes or teeth.

Other aids to health and happiness are sunshine and fresh air, drinking
plenty of good water, useful work, good temper, and good times. To be
healthy and happy we must also give affection and kind help to other people.

Like everyone else, the girl at work needs holidays. Two weeks in the year
is a usual allowance; but three weeks are better than two. After the girl
has become a responsible and important worker, she will find two holidays
in the year a good investment for health, a short holiday and a longer one
of three or four weeks.

To be angry, bad tempered and to think unkindly are all harmful to one's
health and destroy a great part of one's happiness. No one can be a
successful worker of a high type who is habitually jealous or bad-tempered.
Good thoughts are an aid to both health and happiness. In the same way one
needs what are called "good times." Many girls love walks in the country
with a number of companions. Learning to know birds and flowers by sight,
and keeping a record of those found, and when and where they were found,
is an enjoyable pursuit of endless interest. Learn to keep and cherish all
the festivals of the year--Christmas, New Year's, Thanksgiving, and other
holidays. Charades and plays, games and dancing, picnics and excursions,
may be made enjoyable and delightful and should help to keep girls healthy
as well as happy if they are planned with good sense and restricted to
suitable times and places.




CHAPTER XXVI

A GIRL'S READING


Anyone who has developed a love for reading possesses resources for
self-improvement and enjoyment which are almost limitless. This love for
reading a girl may acquire when she is young, or she may develop it at
any time. It is worth while taking some trouble to learn to read well.

Reading for the girl at work should include newspapers and magazines as
well as books. She should learn how to read newspapers, because as a great
journalist said once, "A newspaper is a sign post telling the traveller
which road he ought to take." In this sense we are all travellers and
every worker needs to read his sign post which is a newspaper. To each
girl some parts of a newspaper are more important than others; much
depends on her occupation and on her relations to life. The business man
reads the newspaper to find out what is happening that will affect his
business. The girl at work should read what we call foreign news, that is,
news about countries other than our own, and she should read also about
important happenings in our own country. We ought to read the newspaper
carefully so that we may be in touch with the rest of the world. We should
read important local news, that is, news of our own neighbourhood.
We cannot understand our neighbourhood unless we know what is going on in
it. A new library may have been opened, a new church or picture gallery.
Some worth while person may be speaking whom we may go to hear. There may
be trouble in the community which we can help to put right. The person who
is really living in touch with progress must give some time to daily
newspapers.

But there is a good deal in a newspaper which one does not need to read.
A newspaper is a report of daily happenings, sometimes even of rumours.
These should be published, so that the truth may be arrived at, but the
girl at work should find the parts of the newspaper which are her special
concern and should not give much time to the rest of the paper. She should
learn to distinguish facts from rumours and opinions. The girl who is
learning discrimination in buying will find some of the advertisements
useful reading.

Magazines are more like books than newspapers. Sometimes they are not
so useful as newspapers. But they are often entertaining, and good
entertainment is a fine thing. There are magazines which make a special
feature of publishing articles on what is new in art, science, music,
politics, etc. A number of good magazines are devoted especially to the
interests ofwomen. The girl should not attempt to buy many magazines.
A great many of them are alike. She should find one that meets her needs,
and sometimes she should vary her choice.

It is important that she should see some of the best publications which
have to do with her own line of work. If the girl is working at home she
should read about home questions. Admirable new publications are being
issued on all kinds of household matters. If a girl is a saleswoman or
stenographer, she should see what is being written on these subjects.
It is a mistake for any worker not to make herself familiar with what
other workers in her own occupation are doing.

Besides reading for our work, we have minds and souls to keep and
cultivate. Reading of the right kind is a great help in encouraging
the growth of mind and soul. Books, when they are good of their kind,
and when read in the right way, teach us; give us rest, change and
variety; entertain and amuse us; and are a refuge and consolation.

We can learn a great deal from a good book of fiction. One writer has said
that she obtained the greater part of her education from reading novels.
Stories explain to us the endless varieties of human nature. We learn to
know people from reading good novels, and after a while we are able to
criticize the characters in the stories from the people we know ourselves.
Then we can tell whether the novel is true to nature, or whether it is
only a poor mistaken interpretation of life. Many novels have to do with
famous places as well as famous people. It would be a great loss if we had
to give up all the good novels in the world. The best novels help us to
understand how wonderfully important life is.

Other realms of knowledge and delight are found in biography and history.
Scarcely too much can be said in praise of good biography. The girl should
ask at home or in a library for an interesting life of some famous person.
Perhaps she is specially attracted to a hero or heroine of history, to
some famous writer, artist or musician. In any case, she may ask the
librarian to advise her which biography to read first. While reading
famous histories, such as Greene's Short History of England, she should
not fail to read the history connected with her own neighbourhood. World
history and the history of countries other than our own are also important.

Besides fiction, biography and history, the girl is likely to find herself
longing to read some of the great poetry of the world. Here again she may
ask the advice of the librarian. We can hardly know the full beauty of
God's world until we have read some of the writings of the great poets.
The girl who is really fond of reading will enjoy essays and the letters
of famous people. Girls who love art and music will find good books on such
subjects. Almost anything one can imagine has been written about in a book.

While she should read well and wisely, the girl should not turn into a
bookworm. Unless our reading fits us for better thought and better action,
we should examine into what we are reading and change it for something
better. Reading should never be a hindrance to work, but a help. Nor should
we put reading in the place of people. It is a poor plan for any girl to
prefer books habitually to intercourse with her friends.

A number of fine books deal with social and economic questions. These
subjects appear also in many novels. The girl who wants to see conditions
improved for the sick, the poor, and the unfortunate may again ask advice
from the librarian. The biography of a woman like Miss Nightingale, or such
a book as Ruskin's "Sesame and Lilies," will interest girls of this class.

A few rules will help us in our reading. Whatever book we read should be a
good book of its class. Suppose we want to read a light and entertaining
book for amusement and relaxation, then it should be good entertainment,
well written, well planned, delightfully easy and gay in style. Do not read
books which make you wish that you had not read them. Shun books which make
one feel that life is not worth living. We can always judge the character
of a book by the importance it gives to life. A book that has a great
vision of life is a great book. In the same way we should not read books
that make us think poorly of people. The finer the book the more clearly
it shows how worth while every individual is. Any book that separates us,
or turns us away, from the highest, happiest things is not worth the time
which we might spend in reading it. There is something wrong with a book
which leaves us indolent and listless. Books that we should choose,
therefore, are those which make us feel that life is worth living, that
people are worth while, and which keep us in love with the highest things
in life.




CHAPTER XXVII

NECESSARY WORK


There is a question which everyone should ask herself about her work:
"Is the work that I am doing adding anything to the wealth and well-being
of the world? Is it necessary work--that is, is any one single person
dependent to any extent for his or her existence on what I do?"

Necessary work has to do with providing the necessaries of life. These are
food, clothing, shelter, light, heat and every other service or commodity
which helps to keep us alive and adds to our efficiency as human beings.

Anyone, therefore, who is producing food or preparing it is a necessary
worker. So are the great armies of workers who are engaged in producing
materials out of which all kinds of necessary clothing are made, and
other workers who make necessary clothing from wool, cotton, linen, etc.

Such workers occupy an honourable place because our lives actually depend
on them. Their daily work adds to the wealth of the world and makes it
possible to improve the standard of living for everyone. We could spend
much time naming the occupations of necessary workers, such as fishermen,
sailors, railway men, farmers, miners, and many others. Sailors and
railway men are not directly engaged in creating new wealth as the farmer
is, but food would not do us much good if there were no one to bring it
to market, so all transportation workers are necessary workers.

Mothers of children add infinitely to the wealth and well-being of the
world. Every girl or woman whose work it is to prepare food and make a
home is a necessary worker of honourable rank. The paid house worker is a
necessary worker and has this honourable rank.

Whether or not we are engaged in necessary work makes a great difference
to the steadiness of our employment. If we are doing necessary work, we
are much more certain of steady employment than we can be if our work is
connected with providing luxuries or other commodities which are not
essential to the maintenance of life.

About twice in every ten years, the world, or part of the world,
experiences what is known as a financial depression. Perhaps crops have
failed in many countries, or unwise people have been speculating madly,
or a great amount of money has been invested in utilities which will not
become productive for a number of years. Whatever the reason is, the world
passes through a time of business depression. Every worker, young and old,
should remember that these times of depression will recur. In good times
when we are earning good wages we must prepare for these bad times when
wages may be lower, or we may be out of work altogether and have no wages
for some months. If we are not primary producers, such as the people in
the classes named above, then it is wise for us to learn how to do some
necessary work so that when a business depression comes, if we lose our
usual employment, we may turn to this other vocation which we have learned.

Some girls earn wages by curling feathers. Now feathers are a luxury.
No one needs to wear a feather in her hat in order to keep alive. But we
know that we must eat, be clothed and have shelter in order to live.
In times of great business depression people stop spending money, as far
as possible. They cease buying feathers and other luxuries. In this way,
girls who earn their living by doing work connected with luxuries are
likely to lose their employment during times of financial depression. But
if the girl who has earned her living curling feathers is a good cook,
she is reasonably sure of employment even in bad times. Workers such as
artists of all kinds, musicians, writers, actors, painters, sculptors,
handicraft workers, architects and so on are likely to experience
difficulties during times of financial depression. Many workers in these
classes agree that it is advisable for them to have other work of a
different character which they may use as occasion requires.

The girl who is a musician may add to her profession a knowledge of
poultry farming or rose growing. Roses may be called a luxury, it is true,
but the world will never consent to live without roses. Or the girl who
is an artist may make and sell blouses. The girl who is a writer may find
productive work of the same character as the musician, or she may turn to
fruit farming or become a paid housekeeper. Every worker should make an
effort to understand the connection between the character of her work and
the likelihood of her obtaining steady employment.




CHAPTER XXVIII

WHAT ONE GIRL CAN DO FOR ANOTHER


"No work will have as much happiness as it ought to have, or will be as
well done as it should be, until fellow-workers exchange experiences and
advice with one another."

Every girl can learn something about her work from others in the same
occupation. To learn from a friendly fellow-worker is pleasant and easy
compared with the difficulty that we find in learning from people who are
not specially interested in showing us how to work. Some of the happiest
groups of workers are those who have organized to promote friendship and
good feeling amongst girls and women who are in the same occupation.

This is what the girls of one such group say of the benefit of belonging
to a friendly social organization of which the members are fellow-workers:
"It improves our work, because we know how the others do theirs and we
want to do as well as they do. We talk over problems in our work, and
hearing the various ideas and solutions that others have thought out helps
us in solving our problems. We do not meet to discuss our work primarily;
as a rule our gatherings are for enjoyment and recreation. But work every
now and then comes into general conversation and in this way we learn.
It is a help to have for a friend one of the best workers in your
occupation. You try your best to keep up with her. If any of the girls
needs a new position, or is in difficulty about her work, she may talk it
over with one of the older workers. In the same way we advise one another
about wages. We can find out what is the average wage and the best wage
paid in the occupation and what are the average hours of employment.
Many girls in the club have found new positions and have been able to ask
for and get higher wages through the advice and help of other club members."

Every girl knows what a help it is to work with others when sewing,
mending, dressmaking and trimming hats. The girl in paid employment finds
this work more trying than the girl who remains at home, because the girl
at home generally has spare hours during the day when she may do work of
this character. A mending circle meeting once a week could plan some
entertainment to accompany work. One of the circle might read aloud, or
all the members might take turns in telling a story and adding in some
way to the evening's entertainment. Girls in such a circle could all help
in blouse making or in millinery. One or more of the members might have
a special gift in cutting and fitting. Others might be more skilful in
sewing. One or more of the girls might have a special gift in buying.
The possibilities of co-operative work of this kind for girls in the
twentieth century are very great indeed.

There was a time in the history of the world when work of this kind was all
done in private homes. Women and girls worked together at home, spinning,
weaving, sewing and dressmaking. A great part of such work is now done in
factories. But girls know that they still have mending, sewing, dressmaking
and millinery to do. People are seldom well advised if they do work of this
kind in isolation. The work is often not so well done and the worker is
lonely and apt to be discouraged. It is part of the duty of the twentieth
century girl to restore happiness and companionship in all this women's
work, a great part of which is still done by hand. The happy circle of girl
workers is often the best solution to the problem of how this work of
making, trimming and mending should be done.

One such group of girls, in this case, a group of stenographers, who, as it
happens, have all come from farm homes, have made a success of co-operative
housekeeping. There are eight girls in the group. The city in which they
work is by a lake and during the summer months these girls rent a cottage
on the lake shore outside the city. They have the cottage for four months.
Two girls undertake the housekeeping for a month at a time, which means
that each girl has one month of housekeeping responsibility and three
months when she helps only with tidying and cleaning. Their individual
expenses for rent and housekeeping amount to $4.50 per week. This is an
excellent example of the good to be obtained from co-operative effort.

Other girls find companionship, recreation and improvement in reading
circles, study clubs, and clubs for walking, snowshoeing, skating and
other outdoor enjoyment. Clubs formed to promote play and exercise are
among the best of these organizations. Some circles are for dancing;
others are dramatic clubs. Practically every group of this kind undertakes
some benevolent work, and should do so in order to share happiness and
good times with others. Such clubs entertain the inmates of hospitals,
children's and old people's homes, give Christmas trees to children, send
gifts to the needy, or work for benevolent organizations.

The club for outdoor play is one of the most important of group
organizations. It has a wonderful effect on the health of its members.
Tennis, basket ball, cricket, hockey and croquet are played by groups of
girls who often challenge boys' clubs and are able to enter such contests
with skill and ability. The gardening club is one of the many ways in which
a club of girls can raise money to help in benevolent and other objects.

To form a group of this kind successfully the girl members require to have
kindly impulses and enthusiasm, a willingness to work and play together,
and the wish to be useful and to do something worth doing. Other requisites
are a few simple rules, loyally lived up to, and one or two girls who have
organizing ability. Leaders should train others to lead also, and each girl
should take her turn in leading and in following.

The ideal group is not made up of girls exclusively, but should take its
pattern as much as possible from family life. The girls of the group play
together and work together. But the fathers and mothers of some of the
girls will be glad to be honorary members and should share at times both
in work and in play. A boys' club may be a friendly rival in games and may
co-operate in benevolent work and entertainment.




CHAPTER XXIX

CIVIC DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES


Learning to be a good neighbour is an active enjoyment which lasts us all
our lives. Our civic duties and responsibilities may be summed up by saying
that they are the duties and opportunities of a good neighbour. We should
study our civic duties and responsibilities carefully so that we may know
how to vote rightly and wisely when we are given an opportunity to vote on
public questions.

The privilege of voting as a citizen is of the highest importance. But
it is not by any means the only duty or opportunity of a good neighbour.
Women have exercised the right to vote only of recent years, and still in
a number of countries women do not yet vote. They can and do give service
in many other ways. Every man and woman who has the franchise should
record an honest and intelligent vote. But those who vote should give
other service as well. Those who are too young to vote have other
opportunities to work for the community and for the nation.

The right to vote in Canadian elections for the Dominion House of Commons
was given to a limited number of women for the first time in 1917. By an
Act of Parliament which became law in 1918 all women in Canada have the
right to vote in Dominion elections under the same conditions as men.
Women of twenty-one and over have the right to vote in the Provincial
elections of Ontario, British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba,
and Nova Scotia.

What is the meaning of learning to be a good neighbour?

Let us take the cases of three Canadian girls. One lives in a country
neighbourhood, one belongs to a village, and the third is a city girl.
Each of them lives in a house on a road or street. Other houses in which
neighbours live are not far away. The city girl's next door neighbour is
close by; there is more space in the village; and where the country girl
lives everyone owns a farm so that there is abundance of room between one
neighbour and another.

The community in which she lives gives each of these girls certain good
things. It gives her the school where she is educated. The roads that lead
to different places where she needs to go are provided by the community.

When a great many people live close together, the community has to provide
other necessary things. The girl in the country neighbourhood, unlike the
city girl, needs no special playground because she has many beautiful,
safe places where she can play; also her father can provide his house with
pure water with comparative ease, whereas in a city or town, the council,
which is the government of the local community, provides water and
playgrounds. The city girl is used to having these things provided for her
by the community, and the girl in the country often does not stop to think
of the space, light, air and water which are hers so freely and abundantly.

What we call the community is all the people who live in one district,
which has boundaries to mark it off from other communities. Certain
utilities, such as roads, schools, courts, water, lighting, parks,
playgrounds, and many other things, are kept up by taxes, which are paid
by the people of the community.

Sometimes taxes are objected to as burdens. But it is honourable to pay
taxes for the upkeep of a good community. Money raised by taxes should be
spent wisely, honestly, and not extravagantly. It is the people's money,
and proper value should be received for what the community spends. We
should all see as far as possible that the money from taxes is spent
properly.

Every girl, boy, man and woman, is a citizen of some community and nation,
and has a duty to see that the community and nation are well managed and
well governed.

There is a beautiful word, common, which is sometimes misused in one of
its meanings. One of the meanings of the word "common" is "belonging to
all." Common property means property belonging to a certain number of
people. A "common" is a piece of public property. A common duty is a duty
which belongs to all. There is no common or public property in your
neighbourhood, and there is no common duty in your neighbourhood, which
is not yours.

To be a good neighbour has both a public and a private meaning. You are a
good neighbour to the people who live near you if you help to take care of
them when they are sick, do everything you can to keep them healthy when
they are well, and are kind when they are in trouble. A good neighbour
is a quiet, peaceful, law-abiding citizen, pleasant and useful in the
neighbourhood. What you do as a good neighbour for the people who live
next door, you do as far as you are able for the community in which you
live. The best rule ever given to the world for being a good neighbour
is contained in the story of the Good Samaritan. The more we study that
story, the better we will understand our duties to our neighbours and
the community.

Women and girls should be specially interested in such questions as
education and the training of children, in public health and safety and
public justice, in markets and everything having to do with the food
supply, and in the proper treatment of immigrants. The nation cannot do
its best unless girls and women help by being good neighbours and citizens
in all these and other matters.

Perhaps the most valuable possession that any girl has is her character.
The honest, kind, likeable girl, who keeps her word and is a good friend,
is valued by everyone who knows her. The character of a nation is not
unlike the character of the individual. We love our country. We would give
her the best service. The best we can do for her is to make her national
character honest, kind, strong, helpful and lovable. Every individual in a
nation has a civic duty and responsibility to make that nation a good
neighbour.

A Canadian woman of seventy years said once to a younger woman who was a
professional worker, "My dear, tell me about the hospital where you are
working. I have heard that conditions are not all they should be. I want
to know, because if I know I may be able to help in making what is wrong
right." She was a quiet, gentle woman, charming in manner, and somewhat
shy and reserved. She never talked about disagreeable things. On this
occasion she believed it was her duty to make sure whether there was a
wrong, and if there was to try to put it right. No one ever heard anything
said about this matter in public, but after some time the management of
one public institution was greatly improved. Age, experience and wisdom
can help in these wonderful ways. Girls may learn from such women.

We learn best to be good citizens in our own homes. Study public affairs
and community questions with your father and mother, brothers and sisters.

Those who read Queen Victoria's Letters, which have been published, notice
that in her girlhood she was a simple, gentle, innocent girl, not specially
clever, but eager to learn, resolved that everything in the government of
her country should be explained to her so that she might understand it.
It was her duty to know the details of that great government, and she was
determined, no matter what it cost her in work and study, to know and
understand her duty. In her later letters she appears as an old, very wise
woman, one of the first statesmen of her age. Queen Victoria had great
responsibilities. Ours are smaller. But no girl, whether she works at home
or in paid employment, can reach her highest development in the twentieth
century without living up to her civic and national responsibilities.




CHAPTER XXX

THE BEST KIND OF WORK


Summing up what we have been able to learn, and what the world has learned,
about employment, it is generally agreed that hard work is best. By hard
work is meant work which requires from us the putting forth of all our
energies and which calls for all our gifts. Work is very beneficial. As a
man has said, "It takes the nonsense out of people," not the fun out of
life, but the nonsense out of people, foolish, wrong, mistaken ideas which
make people disagreeable to work with or play with or live with. It is not
until our work, and methods of doing work, make use of all our ability and
capacity that we know how fine work can be. You remember the story in the
Bible which tells how Jacob wrestled with an unseen adversary until the
breaking of the day. Then when Jacob was asked what he would have, he
answered, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me." So work when we
do our best with it blesses us.

Musicians speak of "technic" in playing and artists of "technic" in
painting. Technic is skill, but it is more than skill. It is skill and
individuality joined together. There is technic of a certain kind which we
all may acquire in our work. Perhaps a story will explain best what this
technic is. A beautiful girl who had all the gifts of a great actress but
was untrained once made an extraordinary success in one of Shakespeare's
plays. Later she failed utterly. She had not had that patient unceasing
practice which makes every performance a high level of acting. When she
felt inspired, she could act; but when she was dull or tired or out of
sorts, her inspiration failed her, and she had no technic or skill in
acting to fall back upon.

The good cook practically never fails in what she makes. She may not feel
like cooking her best every day, but she knows how, and all her good work
in the past stands by her skilful hands and makes her cooking a success
every day. In the same way, the practised writer can rely on a certain
technic or skill in writing even when he is dull and jaded and yet there
is work which must be done.

In your work, no matter what it is, do your best every day as far as you
are able, and by and by this skill in work will stand beside you like a
friend and will help your hands and mind.

Have you ever noticed how a mother who has brought up five or six children
of her own, takes a baby up in her hands? Such skill in handling an infant
is one of the most beautiful things in the world. The mother can do it
well, because she has done it often, with all her heart.

We often hear of success and failure in work. Good work is made up of both
failure and success. One failure may spur us on to do better work than we
have ever done before. A failure may teach us a great deal if we will learn
from it. Do not be cast down because of failure. Find out what its lesson
is. Do not be too much uplifted over a success. It may turn out a hindrance
if we grow conceited over it. Both success and failure are temporary phases
of good work.

We should learn not to try too hard, or be over anxious about work.
Once an old gentleman who had taken up golf late in life said that his
caddy had taught him a great lesson. "You are too anxious." the little
boy said. "Just do as well as you can and don't be so anxious. You would
play a better game that way."

We do not always believe when we are learning that work will be enjoyable.
We have to learn _how to work_ before we can get the full enjoyment from
our occupation. You had to learn how to skate and how to dance before you
enjoyed skating and dancing. Trying to skate and trying to dance and being
awkward, and not knowing how, does not give one the full enjoyment of
skating and dancing. But when we do know how and have become skilful, how
delightful these recreations are! When we know how to work, work also is
full of enjoyment.

It is well to remember that work is a permanent part of our lives. Do not
think of it, therefore, as a harsh or unfriendly part of life, but realize
the meaning of employment as one of our greatest possessions. It is a means
by which we can enter into the full enjoyment of our own faculties and
which helps us to understand the importance of life. The comradeship of
work is very real and lasting. The girl who goes forward, therefore, into
her life's work with a determination to do her best, while she will often
meet hard problems, is certain to find usefulness and happiness in her
employment.




LIST OF OCCUPATIONS

Accompanying, see music.

Accounting.

Acting.

Advertising.

Anaesthetist.

Architecture.

Auditing.

Banking.

Basketry.

Bee-keeping.

Blouse making.

Bookbinding.

Bookkeeping.

Business managing and owning.

Butter making.

Buying, see store employment.

Candy making.

Canning.

Care of children.

Catering.

Cheese making.

Chemical industry.

Children's clothes making.

Children's nurse.

China decorating.

Chiropody.

Civil service.

Commercial traveller.

Companion.

Composition, see music.

Comptometer operating.

Concert singing and playing.

Confidential clerk.

Cooking.

Costume designing.

Dancing.

Deaconess.

Dentistry.

Designing fabrics, wall papers, etc.

Dictaphone operating.

Dietetics.

Domestic science:
  Cook, special cooking, dietitian, manager of clubs, hotels, restaurants,
  tea rooms and cafeterias, lecturer, teacher, writer.

Domestic service, see house employment.

Draughting.

Drawing.

Dressmaking:
  Designing, sewing, buying, machine operating, managing and owning.

Embroidery.

Employment expert.

Enameling.

Entertainer.

Etching.

Expert in flour testing.

Factory employment:
  Machine operators, designers, forewomen, stenographers, bookkeepers,
  nurses, dietitians, welfare workers, travellers, managers and owners.

Farm work for women:
  Farm managing, bee-keeping, plant growing, flower growing, poultry and
  eggs, butter, milk and cheese, vegetables, fruit growing.

Farm managing.

Florist.

Flower growing.

Food demonstrating.

Fruit growing.

Governess.

Hairdressing.

Handicrafts:
  Basketry, book binding, china decorating, embroidery, enameling,
  jewelry making, leather work, metal work, pottery, stencilling,
  weaving, wood carving.

Home making.

Hostess, in hotels, clubs, etc.

House decorating.

House furnishing.

House employment:
  Cook, laundress, housemaid, children's nurse, seamstress, ladies' maid,
  companion, mother's help, housekeeper, household manager and organizer.

Illustrating.

Instructor in wireless telegraphy.

Insurance.

Investigating, see social work.

Jewelry making.

Journalism.

Landscape architecture.

Landscape gardening.

Laundry.

Law.

Leather work.

Lecturing.

Library work.

Machine operating.

Manicuring.

Map making.

Massage.

Medicine.

Metal work.

Milk farming.

Millinery:
  Making, designing, selling, managing, owning.

Missionary work.

Mother's help.

Motor driving.

Munitions.

Music:
  Accompanying, composition, concert playing and singing, teaching.

Nursing:
  Institutional, private, military, public health, schools,
  superintendents of hospitals and training schools, managing and
  owning private hospitals.

Office employment:
  Stenographer, typist, bookkeeper, confidential clerk, secretary,
  billing clerk, cheque clerk, fyling clerk, dictaphone operator,
  comptometer operator, librarian, manager.

Painting.

Pharmacy.

Photography.

Police woman.

Postal clerk.

Pottery.

Poultry farming.

Proof reading.

Real estate:
  Agents, rent collectors.

Salesmanship.

Sculpture.

Seamstress.

Secretarial work.

Sewing by the day, see seamstress.

Shampooing.

Shopping expert.

Social work:
  Secretaries, statisticians, visitors, lecturers, dietitians, doctors,
  nurses, field workers, investigators, parole officers, officers of
  institutions, superintendents.

Statistical work.

Stencilling.

Stenography.

Store employment:
  Messenger girls, parcel girls, markers, assistants, stenographers,
  shoppers, house furnishers, assistant managers, managers, assistant
  buyers, buyers, advertisers, nurses, dietitians, welfare workers,
  employment experts, owners.

Teaching:
  Public schools, high schools, colleges, private schools, music,
  dramatic, domestic science, kindergarten, arts and handicrafts,
  lecturing, teaching handicapped children, manual training, sewing,
  millinery, dressmaking, physical training, gardening, commercial
  subjects, governess, tutor, secretary, supervising.

Telegraphy:
  Morse operating, automatic machines.

Telephone employment:
  Operating, supervising, private switchboard operating.

Vegetable growing.

Vocational advising.

Weaving.

Welfare work.

Window decorating.

Wood carving.

Work for the girl at home:
  Blouse making, children's clothes, candy making, sewing, dressmaking,
  millinery, bread making, cake and jam making, pickles, marmalade,
  catering, shopping, embroidery, laundry work, mending, making
  underclothes, canning, raising fruit and flowers, poultry and eggs,
  vegetable growing, managing a lending library, teaching, mother's help,
  house work for neighbours, doctors' and dentists' secretary,
  visiting bookkeeper, visiting housekeeper.

Writing.




BIBLIOGRAPHY.


Art of Right Living, The, by Ellen H. Richards: Whitcomb & Barrows,
 Boston (1904).

Business of Being a Woman, The, by Ida M. Tarbell: Macmillan, New York,
 1916.

Careers: Women's Employment Publishing Company, London, 1916.

Classified List of Vocations for Trained Women, by E. P. Hirth:
 The Intercollegiate Bureau of Occupations, New York, 1917.

Commercial Work and Training for Girls, by Jeannette Eaton and Bertha M.
 Stevens: Macmillan, New York, 1915.

Cost of Cleanness, The, by Ellen H. Richards: Wiley & Sons, New York
 (1908).

Cost of Food, The, by Ellen H. Richards: Wiley & Sons, New York (1901).

Cost of Living, The, by Ellen H. Richards: Wiley & Sons, New York (1899,
 1905).

Cost of Shelter, The, by Ellen H. Richards: Wiley & Sons, New York (1905).

Democracy and Education, by John Dewey: Macmillan, New York (1916).

Domestic Needs of Farm Women. Report No. 104: U.S. Department of
 Agriculture, Washington, 1915.

Domestic Service, by C. V. Butler: G. Bell & Sons, London, 1916.

Economic Needs of Farm Women. Report No. 106: U.S. Department of
 Agriculture, Washington, 1915.

Economic Position of Women. Vol. I, No. 1. Proceedings of Academy of
 Political  Science: Columbia University, New York, 1910.

Educational Needs of Farm Women. Report No. 105: U.S. Department of
 Agriculture, Washington, 1915.

Fatigue and Efficiency, by Josephine Goldmark: Charities Publication
 Committee, New York, 1912.

Food and Household Management, by Helen Kinne and Anna M. Cooley:
 Macmillan, New York, 1915.

Home and the Family, The, by Helen Kinne and Anna M. Cooley: Macmillan,
 New York, 1917.

Household Administration, edited by Alice Ravenhill and Catherine J.
 Schiff: Grant Richards, London, 1910.

Increasing Home Efficiency, by Martha Bensley Bruere and Robert W. Bruere:
 Macmillan, New York, 1913.

Industrial Democracy, by Sidney and Beatrice Webb: Longmans, Green,
 London, 1897.

Intercollegiate Bureau of Occupations, New York. Reports. 1911-1913,
 1914-1915.

Life and Labour of the People of London, Vol. 4. Women's Work,
 by Charles Booth: Macmillan, London, 1902.

Life of Ellen H. Richards, by Caroline L. Hunt: Whitcomb & Barrows,
 Boston, 1916.

Living Wage of Women Workers, The, by L. M. Bosworth: Longmans, Green,
 New York, 1911.

Long Day, The: The Century Company, New York, 1905.

Making Both Ends Meet, by S. A. Clark and Edith Wyatt: Macmillan,
 New York, 1911.

Minimum Cost of Living, The, by Winifrid Stuart Gibbs: Macmillan,
 New York, 1917.

Minority Report of the Poor Law Commission, Part 2. The Unemployed.

New Era in Canada, The, edited by J. O. Miller: J. M. Dent & Son,
 London and Toronto, 1917.

Profitable Vocations for Girls, by E. W. Weaver: A. S. Barnes Company,
 New York, 1913.

Report of The Ontario Commission on Unemployment, 1916.

Road to Trained Service in the Household, The, by Henrietta Roelofs:
 National Board Young Women's Christian Associations, New York, 1915.

Saleswomen in Mercantile Stores, by E. B. Butler: Charities Publication
 Committee, New York, 1909.

Shelter and Clothing, by Helen Kinne and Anna M. Cooley: Macmillan,
 New York, 1915.

Social and Labour Needs of Farm Women, Report No. 103, U.S. Department of
 Agriculture, Washington, 1915.

Survey of Occupations Open to the Girl of Fourteen to Sixteen, by H.H.
 Dodge: Girls' Trade Education League, Boston, 1912.

Trade Union Woman, The, by Alice Henry: D. Appleton, New York, 1915.

Vocational Mathematics for Girls, by Wm. H. Dooley: D.C. Heath, Boston,
 1917.

Vocations for Boston Girls. Bulletins. Telephone operating. Bookbinding.
 Stenography and typewriting. Nursery maid. Dressmaking. Millinery.
 Straw hat making. Manicuring and hairdressing. Nursing. Salesmanship.
 Clothing machine operating. Paper box making. Confectionery manufacture.
 Knit Goods manufacture: Girls' Trade Education League, Boston, 1911, 1912.

Vocations for Girls, by Mary A. Laselle and Katherine E. Wiley: Houghton,
 Mifflin Company, Boston, 1913.

Vocations for the Trained Woman, Vol. 1, Pts. 1 and 2. Women's Educational
 and Industrial Union, Boston: Longmans, Green, New York, 1910, 1914.

Wage-Earning Women, by Annie Marion Maclean: Macmillan, New York, 1910.

Ways of Woman, The, by Ida M. Tarbell: Macmillan, New York, 1915.

Welfare Work, by Dorothea Proud: G. Bell & Sons, London, 1916.

Woman and Labour, by Olive Schreiner: T. Fisher Unwin, London, 1911.

Woman--Bless Her, The, by Marjory MacMurchy: S. B. Gundy, Toronto, 1916.

Women and the Trades, by E. B. Butler: Charities Publication Committee,
 New York, 1909.

Women and Work, by Helen M. Bennett: D. Appleton & Company, New York, 1917.

Women in Modern Industry, by B. L. Hutchins: G. Bell & Sons, London, 1915.

Women's Educational and Industrial Union, Boston. Reports, 1913, 1914.

Work-a-day Girl, The, by Clara E. Laughlin: Fleming H. Revell Company,
 New York, 1913.

Youth, School and Vocation, by Meyer Bloomfield: Houghton, Mifflin Company,
 Boston, 1915.





INDEX


                              PAGE

Accompanying                    92

Accounting                      94

Acting                          93

Advertising                     90

Anaesthetist                   102

Architecture                    91

Art                             90


Babies                          84

Bank account                   114

Banking                         94

Bee-keeping                     67

Best kind of work              138

Biography                      123

Blouse making                   78

Boarding house management      104

Bookbinding                     90

Bookkeeping                 19, 80

Book reviewing                  89

Books                          123

Broker                         105

Business college                15

Buying a house and garden      114


Canadian Government Annuities  115

Candy making                    78

Capital                     65, 69

Care of children                84

Cataloguer                      73

Catering business         101, 104

Changing about                   8

Chemical industry               96

Children's librarian            74

Children's nurse                44

Circulation librarian           74

Citizen                        135

City girl as neighbour         134

City, town and country wages
 and expenses                  108

Civic duties and
 responsibilities              133

Civil service               19, 97

Cleanliness                    118

Commercial traveller           105

Comptometer operating           19

Concert singing and playing     92

Conductor of foreign tours     105

Consulting a dentist           119

Consulting a physician         119

Cook                            30

Co-operation as applied to
 work of home                   85

Co-operative housekeeping
 by girls                      131

Co-operative principles         86

Country girl as a neighbour    134

Country walks                  120

Custom dressmaking              48


Dancing                         93

Deaconess                       98

Dentistry                       96

Departments of Domestic
 Science                        32

Designing                       90

Designing costumes              45

Dictaphone operator             19

Dietitian                       98

Difference between home
 and work                       20

Difference between school
 and home                       20

Division of family income      113

Domestic Science                28

Dress                           17

Dressmaker                      45

Dressmaking, qualifications
 for employment,                46
  training,                     46
  wages                         48

Dressmaking as a business       48

Dressmaking as a factory trade  48


Embroidery                      90

Employment department       9, 105

Employment expert              105

Entertaining              105, 119

Estimate of yearly income      109

Examinations                    35

Exercise                       118


Factory employment,
 qualifications for,             6
  training,                      4
  wages                          6

Fair wage                      109

Farm work for women             65

Farm managers                   65

Festivals                      120

"Field" work                    98

Financial adviser              105

Flower growing                  66

Food                            25

Food demonstrator              102

Franchise                      133

Fresh air                      119

Friendships                     27

Fruit growing                   79


Getting on with fellow workers  21

Girl who really wants work      23

Girl's accounts, The           113

Girl's reading, The            121

Girls' Clubs                   131

Girls with intellectual gifts   94

Going into business for
 one's self                     99

Good Samaritan, The            135

Good thoughts                  120

Good times                 26, 119

Government employment bureau     2


Hairdresser                     61

Hairdressing and manicuring,
 qualifications for employment, 61
  training,                     61
  wages                         62

Hairdressing and manicuring
 as a business                  62

Handicrafts                     90

Hard work                      138

Headings for girl's
 account book                  113

Headings for private account
 book of business woman        112

Health                         116

Health as an aid to
 good employment               116

Health and beauty              117

Health exercise expert         104

Helpers in finding work          2

High character of teaching
 as a profession            36, 38

History                        123

Holidays                       119

Home employments                82

Home gardens                    85

Home girl's advantages          77

Home girl's allowance           77

Home maker                      84

Home maker a necessary worker  127

Hotel manager, hostess,
 chaperone                     104

House decorating                91

House employment,
 qualifications for,            30
  training,                     29
  wages                         29

House furnishing                91

House worker                    28

Household accounting            83

Household expert               102

How to choose place of
 employment                      5

Humanizing work (preface)       iv


Illustrating                    90

Improving one's work           106

Incomes of professional women   97

Increasing one's wages         111

Institutional nursing           44

Insurance                       94

Interests outside work          13

Investigators                  105

Investing                      114

Investing in an education      115


Jewelry, handwrought            90

Journalism                      88

Journalist                      88


Keeping other people well       82

Kindergarten                    37

Knowing how to keep well    24, 82

Knowledge of nursing
 required by average girl   26, 83


Landscape gardening             91

Laundry work                   104

Law                             95

Law and social work             95

Learning after the position
 is found                       20

Learning from others            22

Learning how to be a
 good neighbour                133

Learning how to work           140

Lecturer                        37

Librarian                       71

Library work, qualifications
 for employment,                71
  training,                     72
  salaries                      74

Life insurance                 115

Limited hours for house worker  30

Living expenses                107

Living wage                    107

Luxuries                       127


Magazines                      122

Making one's own clothes        53

Management of clubs, hotels,
 tea-rooms, etc.                32

Managing a tea-room business   100

Managing money              25, 83

Manicuring                      62

Manicurist                      61

Marketing                      104

Maxwell, Sara                   38

Medicine                        95

Mending                         25

Milliner                        50

Millinery, qualifications
 for employment,                50
  training,                     50
  wages                         51

Millinery a seasonal trade      52

Millinery business              51

Money and wages                107

Mothers                        139

Music                           92

Music teaching                  92


National character             136

Nature of a home based on
 right human relations          84

Necessaries of life            126

Necessary work                 126

New employments in food,
 clothing, and home-making     102

New work                       102

Newspapers                     121

Nursing, qualifications for
 employment,                    42
  training,                     39
  salaries                      43

Nurses' registries              43

Nurses' training schools        41


Office building management     105

Office employment,
 qualifications for,            16
  training,                     15
  wages                         17

Organization for comradeship   129

Other occupations for
 milliners                      52

Outdoor clubs                  131


Pageant mistress               105

Painting                        90

Pharmacy                        96

Photography                     90

Piece work                       7

Plan for spending              112

Poetry                         123

Poultry farming                 69

Preserving and canning          79

Private hospital                99

Private nursing                 43

Privilege of voting            133

Probationer                     41

Producer of plays              105

Proof reading                   90

Proper division of family
 income                        113

Provincial and national
 franchise for women in Canada 133

Public health nurses            44

Public marketing expert        104

Public stenographer             18

Publicity writer               105


Qualifications for the
 successful home maker          83

Qualifications that help to
 ensure steady employment       23

Qualities of the successful
 business woman                 99

Questions the girl should
 ask herself                     2


Reading circles                131

Reading on one's work          122

Real estate agents             105

Real wages                     107

Recreation                 26, 131

Red Cross nurses                42

Reference librarian             73

Remunerative work for the
 girl at home                   76

Rent collecting                105

Reporting                       89

Research work                   96

Responsibility                  99

Rest                       26, 118

Richards, Mrs.                 113

Righting a wrong               136

Routine work                    71

Rules for reading              124


Safeguarding  employment       127

St. John Ambulance              42

Saleswoman                       9

Saving                         112

School nurses                   44

School of salesmanship          10

Seamstress                      48

Second employment              128

Self-support               20, 109

Sewing by the day               48

Shopping expert                104

Skilled work                     4

Social and economic questions  124

Social engagements have no
 claim on working hours         23

Social work                    105

Special care of children       104

Special cooking                 32

Spending                       112

Standards of living in
 different employments         108

Statistician                   105

Stenographer                    15

Store employment,
 qualifications for,             9
  training,                     10
  wages                         11

Success and failure in work    139

Sunshine                       119

Superintendents of training
 schools and hospitals          44


Taking stock of one's position 106

Taxes                          134

Teachers of special subjects    37

Teaching, characteristics of
 girl who should become
 a teacher,                     35
  training,                     34
  salaries                      36

Technic                        138

Telegraphy, qualifications
 for employment,                59
  training,                     59
  wages                         60

Telephone employment,
 qualifications for,            56
  training,                     56
  wages                         57

Telephone girl                  56

Telephone school                56

To read well                   121

Town girl as a neighbour       134

Trained nurse                   39

Training for home making        83

Typist                          19


Understanding each other's
 work                          129


V.A.Ds.                         42

Vocational adviser             105

Voting by women                133


Wages                          107

Wages, explanation of
 figures quoted                  3

Wages for skilled workers      107

Waitress, qualifications
 for employment,                64
  training,                     63
  wages                         64

Weaving                         90

Welfare work                    98

What every girl needs to know   24

What is harmful to health
 and happiness                 120

What one girl can do
 for another                   129

What the home maker
 needs to know                  84

What wages should give         107

Woman's page                    89

Wood carving                    90

Work necessary to health
 and happiness                   3


Young Women's Christian
 Associations        2, 11, 42, 70






End of Project Gutenberg's The Canadian Girl at Work, by Marjory MacMurchy

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CANADIAN GIRL AT WORK ***

***** This file should be named 25046.txt or 25046.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/0/4/25046/

Produced by This ebook was produced by: K. Nordquist,
Charles Bidwell, David T. Jones & the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdpcanada.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
