Project Gutenberg's "The Gallant, Good Riou", and Jack Renton, by Louis Becke

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: "The Gallant, Good Riou", and Jack Renton
       1901

Author: Louis Becke

Release Date: April 19, 2008 [EBook #25106]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "THE GALLANT, GOOD RIOU" ***




Produced by David Widger





"THE GALLANT, GOOD RIOU", and JACK RENTON

From "The Tapu Of Banderah and Other Stories"

By Louis Becke

C. Arthur Pearson Ltd.

1901




"THE GALLANT, GOOD RIOU"

This is a true story of one of Nelson's captains, he of whom Nelson
wrote as "the gallant and good Riou"--high meed of praise gloriously won
at Copenhagen--but Riou, eleven years before that day, performed a deed,
now almost forgotten, which, for unselfish heroism, ranks among the
brightest in our brilliant naval annals, and in the sea story of
Australia in particular.

In September, 1789, the _Guardian_, a forty-gun ship, under the command
of Riou, then a lieutenant, left England for the one-year-old penal
settlement in New South Wales. The little colony was in sore need of
food--almost starving, in fact--and Riou's orders were to make all haste
to his destination, calling at the Cape on the way to embark live stock
and other supplies. All the ship's guns had been removed to make room
for the stores, which included a "plant cabin"--a temporary compartment
built on deck for the purpose of conveying to Sydney, in pots of earth,
trees and plants selected by Sir Joseph Banks as likely to be useful to
the young colony--making her deck "a complete garden," says a newspaper
of the time. Friends of the officers stationed in New South Wales sent
on board the Guardian great quantities of private goods, and these were
stored in the gun-room, which it was thought would be a safer place than
the hold, but, as the event proved, it was the most insecure.

The ship arrived at the Cape of Good Hope in November, and there filled
her decks with cattle and provisions, then sailed again, her cargo being
equal in value to about L70,000. On December 23rd--twelve days after
leaving the Cape--what is described as "an island of ice" was seen. Riou
gave orders to stand towards it in order to renew, by collecting lumps
of ice, the supply of water, the stock of fresh water having run very
low in consequence of the quantity consumed by the cattle.

The Public Advertiser of April 30, 1790, describes what now happened. As
the ship approached the island, the boats were hoisted out and manned,
and several lumps collected. During this time the ship lay to, and on
the ice being brought on board she attempted to stand away. Very little
apprehension was at this time entertained of her safety, although the
enormous bulk of the island occasioned an unfavourable current, and in
some measure gave a partial direction to the wind. On a sudden, the
base of the island, which projected under water considerably beyond the
limits of the visible parts, struck the bow of the ship; she instantly
swung round, and her head cleared, but her stern, coming on the shoal,
struck repeatedly, and the sea being very heavy, her rudder broke
away, and all her works abaft were shivered. The ship in this situation
became, in a degree, embayed under the terrific bulk of ice, for its
height was twice that of the mainmast of a ship of the line, and the
prominent head of the berg was every moment expected to break away and
overwhelm the ship. At length, after every practicable exertion, she was
got off the shoal, and the ice floated past her. It was soon perceived
that the _Guardian_ had six feet of water in her hold, and it was
increasing very fast The hands were set to the pumps, others to find
out the leaks, and they occasionally relieved each other. Thus they
continued labouring unceasingly on the 24th, although on the 23rd not
one of them had had the least rest The ship was at one period so much
relieved that she had only two feet of water in the hold; but at this
time, when their distress wore the best aspect, the water "increased in
a moment to ten feet." Then the ship was discovered to be strained in
all her works, and the sea running high, every endeavour to check the
progress of a particular leak proved ineffectual. To lighten the ship,
the cows, horses, sheep, and all the other live stock for the colony
were, with their fodder, committed to the deep to perish.

John Williams, boatswain of the _Guardian_, wrote to his parents in
London, and told them about the disaster, and although we have no doubt
he was handier with the marline-spike than with his pen, some of his
badly spelled letter reads well:--

"This axident happened on the 23rd of December, and on the 25th the
boats left us with moast of the officers and a great part of the seamen.
The master-gunner, purser, one master's mate, one midshipman, and a
parson, with nine seamen, was got into the longboat and cleared the
ship. The doctor and four or five men got into a cutter and was upset
close to the ship, and all of them was drowned. As for the rest of the
boats, I believe they must be lost and all in them perished, for wee was
about six hundred leagues from any land. There was about fifty-six men
missing; a number drowned jumping into the boats; the sea ran so
high that the boats could scarce live. The commander had a strong
resulution, for he said he would sooner go down in the ship than he
wold quid her. All the officers left in the ship was the commander, the
carpenter, one midshipman, and myself. After the boats left us we had
two chances--either to jump or sink. We cold just get into the sailroom
and got up a new forecourse and stuck it full of oakum and rags, and put
itt under the ship's bottom; this is called fothering the ship. We found
some benefit by itt for pumping and bailing we gained on hur; that gave
us a little hope of saving our lives. We was in this terable situation
for nine weeks before we got to the Cape of Good Hope. Sometimes our
upper-deck scuppers was under water outside, and the ship leying like
a log on the water, and the sea breaking over her as if she was a rock.
Sixteen foot of water was the common run for the nine weeks in the hold.
I am not certain what we are to doo with the ship as yet. We have got
moast of our cargo out; it is all dammaged but the beef and pork, which
is in good order. I have lost a great dele of my cloaths, and I am
thinking of drawing of about six pound, wich I think I can make shift
with. If this axident had not hapned I shold not have had aney call for
aney. As for my stores, there is a great part of them thrown overboard;
likewise all the officers stores in the ship is gone the same way, for
evry thing that came to hand was thrown ovarboard to lighten the ship.
I think that we must wait till ordars comes from England to know what we
are to do with the ship."

The chronicles of the time also relate how at daylight on Christmas
morning, when the water was reported as being up to the orlop deck
and gaining two feet an hour, many of the people desponded and gave
themselves up for lost. A part of those who had any strength left,
seeing that their utmost efforts to save the ship were likely to be in
vain, applied to the officers for the boats, which were promised to be
in readiness for them, and the boatswain was directly ordered to put the
masts, sails, and compasses in each. The cooper was also set to work to
fill a few quarter-casks of water out of some of the butts on deck, and
provisions and other necessaries were got up from the hold.

Many hours previous to this, Lieutenant Riou had privately declared to
his officers that he saw the final loss of the ship was inevitable, and
he could not help regretting the loss of so many brave fellows. "As
for me," said he, "I have determined to remain in the ship, and shall
endeavour to make my presence useful as long as there is any occasion
for it." He was entreated, and even supplicated, to give up this fatal
resolution, and try for safety in the boats. It was even hinted to him
how highly criminal it was to persevere in such a determination; but
he was not to be moved by any entreaties. He was, notwithstanding, as
active in providing for the safety of the boats as if he intended to
take the opportunity of securing his own escape. He was throughout as
calm and collected as in the happier moments of his life.

At seven o'clock the _Guardian_ had settled considerably abaft, and the
water was coming in at the rudder-case in great quantities. At half-past
seven the water in the hold obliged the people below to come upon deck;
the ship appeared to be in a sinking state, and settling bodily down; it
was, therefore, almost immediately agreed to have recourse to the boats.
While engaged in consultation on this melancholy business, Riou wrote a
letter to the Admiralty, which he delivered to Mr. Clements, the master.
It was as follows:--

     "H.M.S. Guardian, Dec. 25, 1789.

     "If any part of the officers or crew of the _Guardian_
     should ever survive to get home, I have only to say their
     conduct, after the fatal stroke against an island of ice,
     was admirable and wonderful in everything that relates to
     their duty, considered either as private men, or in His
     Majesty's service. As there seems to be no possibility of my
     remaining many hours in this world, I beg leave to recommend
     to the consideration of the Admiralty a sister, who, if my
     conduct or service should be found deserving any memory,
     their favour might be shown to, together with a widowed
     mother.

     "I am, &c,

     "Phil. Stephens, Esq."

     "E. RIOU.

With the utmost difficulty the boats were launched. After they were got
afloat and had cleared the ship, with the exception of the launch they
were never afterwards heard of; the launch with nine survivors was
picked up by a passing vessel ten days after she left the wreck, her
people reduced to the last extremity for want of food and water.

Among the survivors was the parson mentioned by the boatswain. This was
the Rev. Mr. Crowther, who was on his way as a missionary to the penal
settlement. The Rev. John Newton, of Olney (poet Cowper's Newton), had
got Crowther the appointment, at "eight shillings per diem, of assistant
chaplain of the settlement," and Newton, writing to the Rev. R. Johnson,
chaplain of Sydney, tells how he heard of the loss of the Guardian, "and
the very next morning Mr. Crowther knocked at my door himself." Then Mr.
Newton writes a letter which shows that Mr. Crowther had had enough of
the sea. "It is not a service for mere flesh and blood to undertake. A
man without that apostolic spirit and peculiar call which the Lord alone
can give would hardly be able to maintain his ground. Mr. Crowther,
though a sincere, humble, good man, seems not to have had those
qualifications, and therefore he has been partly intimidated by what he
met with abroad, and partly influenced by nearer personal considerations
at home, to stay with us and sleep in a whole skin." But after his
experience it was not to be wondered at that he preferred to stay at
home and sleep in a whole skin.

Meanwhile Riou, in spite of a ship without a rudder, and with the water
in her up to the orlop deck, succeeded, as the boatswain's letter shows,
after a voyage of nine weeks, in bringing his command to the Cape. A
letter from Capetown, written on March 1, 1790, tells us she arrived
there "eight days ago in a situation not to be credited without ocular
proofs. She had, I think, nine feet of water in her when she anchored.
The lower gun-deck served as a second bottom; it was stowed with a very
great weight equally fore and aft. To this, and to the uncommon strength
of it, Captain Riou ascribes his safety. Seeing an English ship with a
signal of distress, four of us went on board, scarcely hoping but with
busy fancy still pointing her out to be the _Guardian_, and, to our
inexpressible joy, we found it was her. We stood in silent admiration
of her heroic commander (whose supposed fate had drawn tears from us
before), shining through the rags of the meanest sailor. The fortitude
of this man is a glorious example for British officers to emulate. Since
that time we have gone on board again to see him. He is affable in
his manners, and of most commanding presence.... Perhaps we, under the
influence of that attraction which great sufferings always produce, may,
in the enthusiasm of our commendation, be too lavish in his praise; were
it not for this fear I would at once pronounce him the most God-like
mortal I ever viewed. They were two months from the time the accident
happened until they reached this place. Every man shared alike in the
labour; and not having at all attended to their persons during the
whole of that dismal period they looked like men of another world--long
beards, dirt, and rags covered them. Mr. Riou got one of his hands
crushed and one of his legs hurt, but all are getting well. None of his
people died during their fatigues. He says his principal attention
was to keep up their spirits and to watch over their health. He never
allowed himself to hope until the day before he got in here, when
he made the land. Destitute of that support, how superior must his
fortitude be! He has this morning, for the first time, come on shore,
having been employed getting stores, &c., out to lighten the ship. He
wavers what to do with her--whether to put Government to the expense
of repairing her here (which would almost equal her first cost, perhaps
exceed it) or burn her. Most likely the last will be resolved on."

The ship was in such a state that she was condemned by the experts at
the Cape, but Riou, bearing in mind the distressed state of the colony
of New South Wales, did not rest until he had sent on in other vessels
all the stores he could collect.

Neither did he forget the behaviour of certain convicts. In a letter
to the Admiralty he wrote: "Permit me, sir, to address you on a subject
which I hope their Lordships will not consider to be unworthy their
notice. It is to recommend as much as is in my power to their Lordships'
favour and interest the case of the twenty convicts which my duty
compelled me to send to Port Jackson. But the recollection of past
sufferings reminds me of that time when I found it necessary to make use
of every possible method to encourage the minds of the people under my
command, and at such time, considering how great the difference might
be between a free man struggling for life and him who perhaps might
consider death as not much superior to a life of ignominy and disgrace
I publicly declared that not one of them, so far as depended on myself,
should ever be convicts. And I may with undeniable truth say that, had
it not been for their assistance and support, the _Guardian_ would never
have arrived to where she is. Their conduct prior to the melancholy
accident that happened on December 23rd last was always such as may be
commended, and from their first entrance into the ship at Spithead they
ever assisted and did their duty in like manner as the crew. I have
taken the liberty to recommend them to the notice of Governor Phillip;
but I humbly hope, sir, their Lordships will consider the service done
by these men as meriting their Lordships' favour and protection, and I
make no doubt that should I have been so fortunate as to represent
this in proper colours, that they will experience the benefit of their
Lordships' interest."

The prisoners were pardoned, and the Secretary of the Admiralty wrote to
Riou--

"I have their Lordships' commands to acquaint you that their concern
on the receipt of the melancholy contents of the first-mentioned letter
could only be exceeded by the satisfaction they received from the
account of your miraculous escape, which they attribute to your skilful
and judicious exertions under the favour of Divine Providence....
Their Lordships have communicated to Mr. Secretary Grenville, for his
Majesty's information, your recommendation of the surviving convicts
whose conduct, as it has so deservedly met with your approbation, will,
there is every reason to hope, entitle them to his Majesty's clemency."

[This story of the gallant behaviour of these twenty prisoners does not
stand alone in the convict annals of Australia. There were many other
instances in which convicts behaved with the greatest heroism. Many of
the earlier explorers, such as Sturt, received most valuable aid from
prisoners who were members of their expeditions; and in the first
days of the colony both Phillip and Hunter were quick to recognise
and personally reward or recommend for pardon to the Home Government
convicts who had distinguished themselves by acts of bravery.]

When Riou returned to England he was promoted to post-captain's rank,
and at Copenhagen, in 1801, he commanded the _Amazon_. Perhaps we may
be forgiven for reprinting from Southey's "Nelson" an account of what he
did there. "The signal" (that famous one which Nelson looked at with his
blind eye), "the signal, however, saved Riou's little squadron, but
did not save its heroic leader. The squadron, which was nearest the
commander-in-chief, obeyed and hauled off. It had suffered severely in
its most unequal contest. For a long time the _Amazon_ had been firing
enveloped in smoke, when Riou desired his men to stand fast, and let
the smoke clear off, that they might see what they were about. A fatal
order, for the Danes then got clear sight of her from the batteries,
and pointed their guns with such tremendous effect that nothing but
the signal for retreat saved this frigate from destruction. 'What will
Nelson think of us!' was Riou's mournful exclamation when he unwillingly
drew off. He had been wounded in the head by a splinter, and was sitting
on a gun, encouraging his men, when, just as the _Amazon_ showed her
stern to the Trekroner Battery, his clerk was killed by his side,
and another shot swept away several marines who were hauling in
the main-brace. 'Come, then, my boys!' cried Riou, 'let us die all
together!' The words had scarcely been uttered before a raking shot cut
him in two. Except it had been Nelson himself, the British Navy could
not have suffered a severer loss."





JACK RENTON

Some yarns of an exceedingly tough and Munchausen-like character have
been spun and printed by men of their adventures in Australian waters
or the South Seas, but an examination of such stories by any one with
personal knowledge of the Pacific and Australasia has soon, and very
deservedly so, knocked the bottom out of a considerable number of them.
Yet there are stories of South Sea adventure well authenticated, which
I are not a whit less wonderful than the most marvellous falsehoods that
any man has yet told, and the story of what befell John Renton is one
of these. A file of the _Queenslander_ (the leading Queensland weekly
newspaper) for 1875 will corroborate his story; for that paper gave the
best account of his adventures in one of their November (1875) numbers,
and the story was copied into nearly every paper in Australasia.


Like Harry Bluff, John Renton "when a boy left his friends and his home,
o'er the wild ocean waves all his life for to roam." Renton's home was
in Stromness, in the Orkneys, and he shipped on board a vessel bound to
Sydney, in 1867, as an ordinary seaman, he then being a lad of eighteen.
When in Sydney he got about among the boarding-houses, in sailor-town,
and one morning woke up on the forecastle of the _Reynard_ of Boston,
bound on a cruise for guano among the South Pacific Islands.

Renton had been crimped, and finding himself where he was, bothered no
more about it, but went cheerfully to work, not altogether displeased at
the prospect of new adventures, which would enable him to by and by go
back to the old folks with plenty of dollars, and a stock of startling
yarns to reel off. He was a steady, straightforward lad, though somewhat
thoughtless at times, and resolved to be a steady, straightforward man.
The vessel first called into the Sandwich Islands, and there shipped a
gang of Hawaiian natives to help load the guano, then she sailed away
to the southward for McKean's Island, one of the Phoenix Group, situated
about lat. 3? 35' S. and long. 174? 20' W.

On board the _Reynard_ was an old salt known to all hands as "Boston
Ned." He had been a whaler in his time, had deserted, and spent some
years beachcombing among the islands of the South Seas, and very soon,
through his specious tongue, he had all hands wishing themselves clear
of the "old hooker" and enjoying life in the islands instead of
cruising about, hazed here and there and everywhere by the mates of the
_Reynard_, whose main purpose in life was to knock a man down in order
to make him "sit up." Presently three or four of the hands became
infatuated with the idea of settling on an island, and old Ned, nothing
loth, undertook to take charge of the party if they would make an
attempt to clear from the ship. The old man had taken a fancy to young
Renton, and the youngster, when the idea was imparted to him, fell in
with it enthusiastically; for he was exasperated with the treatment he
had received on board the guanoman--the afterguard of an American guano
ship are usually a rough lot The ship was lying on and off the land,
there being no anchorage, and before the plan had been discussed more
than a few hours, the men, five in all, determined to put it into
execution.

A small whaleboat was towing astern of the vessel in case the wind
should fall light and the ship drift in too close to the shore. It was
a fine night, with a light breeze, and there was, they thought, a good
chance of getting to the southward, to one of the Samoan group, where
they could settle, or by shipping on board a trading schooner they might
later on strike some other island to their fancy.

By stealth they managed to stow in the boat a couple of small breakers
of water, holding together sixteen gallons, and the forecastle bread
barge with biscuits enough for three meals a day per man for ten days.
They managed also to steal four hams, and each man brought pipes,
tobacco, and matches. A harpoon with some line, an old galley
frying-pan, mast, sail and oars, and some blankets completed the
equipment For they took no compass, though they made several attempts to
get at one slung in the cabin, and tried at first to take one out of the
poop binnacle; but the officer of the watch on deck was too wide awake
for them to risk that, and the cabin compass was screwed to the roof
close to the skipper's berth; and so the old man who was their leader,
old sailor and whaler as he was, actually gave up the idea of taking a
compass, and these people without more ado, one night slipped over the
side into the whaleboat, cut the painter, and by daylight the boat was
out of sight of land and of the ship. They were afloat upon the Pacific,
running six or seven miles before a north-east breeze and expecting
to sight land in less than a week, and were already anticipating the
freedom and luxury of island life in store for them.

Three days later it fell calm, and they had to take to the oars. The sun
was intensely hot, the water a sheet of glass reflecting back upon them
the ball of fire overhead. Now and again a cats-paw would ripple across
the plain of water, but there were no clouds, there was no sight of
land. They kept on pulling. For three, for four days--a week--for ten
days--they tugged at the oars, except when a favouring breeze came. The
water was reduced to a few pints, the food to a few days' half-rations.
Their limbs were cramped so that they could not move from their places
in the boat, their bodies were becoming covered with sores; and the wind
had now died away entirely, the sea was without a ripple, and for ever
shone above them the fierce, relentless sun.

Gradually it had dawned upon them that they were lost--that perhaps they
had run past Samoa. The first eagerness of their adventure gave place
to despair, and by degrees their despair grew to madness of a more awful
kind.

On the fifteenth day there appeared to the south and east a low,
dark-grey cloud. "Land at last!" was the unspoken thought in each man's
heart as he looked at his comrade, but feared to voice his hope. And
presently the cloud grew darker and more clearly defined, and one of the
men--the next oldest to the author of all their miseries--fell upon
his weak and trembling knees, and raised his hands in thankfulness
and prayer to the Almighty. Alas! it was not land, but the ominous
forerunner of the fierce and sweeping mid-equatorial gale which lay
veiled behind. In less than half an hour it came upon and smote them
with savage fury, and the little boat was running before a howling gale
and a maddened, foam-whipped sea.

And then it happened that, ill and suffering as he was from the agonies
of hunger and thirst, the heroic nature of old "Boston Ned" came
out, and his bold sailor's heart cheered and encouraged his wretched,
despairing companions. All that night, and for the greater part of
the following day, he stood in the stern-sheets, grasping the bending
steer-oar as the boat swayed and surged along before the gale, and
constantly watching lest she should broach to and smother in the
roaring seas; the others lay in the bottom, feebly baling out the
water, encouraged, urged, and driven to that exertion by the gallant old
American seaman.

Towards noon the wind moderated, in the afternoon it died away
altogether, and again the boat lay rising and falling to the long
Pacific swell, and "Boston Ned" flung his exhausted frame down in the
stern-sheets and slept.

Again the blood-red sun leapt from a sea of glassy smoothness--for the
swell had subsided during the night--and again the wretched men locked
into each other's dreadful faces and mutely asked what was to be done.
How should they head the boat? Without a compass they might as well
steer one way as another, for none of them knew even approximately the
course for the nearest land; search the cloudless vault of blue above,
or scan the shimmering sea-rim till their aching eyes dropped from out
their hollowing sockets, there was no clue.

Twenty days out the last particle of food and water had been consumed,
and though the boat was now steering as near westward as old Ned could
judge, before a gentle south-east trade, madness and despair were coming
quickly upon them, and on the twenty-third day two of the five miserable
creatures began to drink copiously of salt water--the drink of Death.

Renton, though he had suffered to the bitter full from the agonies
of body and mind endured by his shipmates, did not yield to this
temptation; and by a merciful providence remained sane enough to turn
his face away from the water. But as he lay crouched in a heap in the
bottom of the boat, with a silent prayer in his heart to his Creator to
quickly end his sufferings, he heard "Boston Ned" and the only remaining
sane man except himself muttering hoarsely together and looking
sometimes at him and sometimes at the two almost dying men who lay
moaning beside him. Presently the man who was talking to Ned pulled out
of his blanket--which lay in the stern-sheets--a razor, and turning his
back to Renton began stropping it upon the sole of his boot, and even
"Boston Ned" himself looked with awful eyes and blood-baked twitching
lips upon the youngster.

The lad saw what was coming, and as quickly as possible made his way
forward and sat there, with his eyes fixed upon the two men aft, waiting
for the struggle which he thought must soon begin. All that day and the
night he sat and watched, determined to make a fight for the little life
which remained in him, and Ned and the other man at times still muttered
and eyed him wolfishly.

And so, on and on, these seeming outcasts of God's mercy sailed before
the warm breath of the south-east trade wind, above them the blazing
tropic sun, around them the wide, sailless expanse of the blue Pacific
unbroken in its dreadful loneliness except for a wandering grey-winged
booby or flocks of whale-birds floating upon its gentle swell, and
within their all but deadened hearts naught but grim despair and a
dulled sense of coming dissolution.

As he sat thus, supporting his swollen head upon his skeleton hands,
Renton saw something astern, moving slowly after the boat--something
that he knew was waiting and following for the awful deed to be done, so
that _it_ too might share in the dreadful feast.

Raising his bony arm, he pointed towards the moving fin. To him a
shark meant no added horror or danger to their position, but possibly
deliverance. "Boston Ned" and the other man first looked at the coming
shark, and then with sunken eyes again turned to Renton. Voices none of
them had, and the lad's parched tongue could not articulate, but with
signs and lip movements he tried to make the other two men understand.

No shark hook had they; nor, if they had had one, had they anything
with which to bait it. But Renton, crawling aft, picked up the harpoon,
placed it in "Boston Ned's" hands, and motioned to him to stand by.
Then with eager, trembling hands he stripped from his legs the shreds
of trousers which remained on them, and, sitting upon the gunwale of the
boat, hung one limb over and let it trail in the water.

Three times the shark came up, and thrice Ned prepared to strike, but
each time the grim ranger of the seas turned aside as it caught sight
of the waiting figure with weapon poised above. But at last hunger
prevailed, and, swimming slowly up till within a few yards of the boat,
it made a sudden rush for the human bait, missed it, and the harpoon,
deftly darted by the old ex-whaler, clove through its tough skin and
buried itself deep into its body between the shoulders.

It took the worn-out, exhausted men a long time to haul alongside and
despatch the struggling monster, which, says Renton, was ten feet in
length.

Then followed shark's flesh and shark's blood, some of the former, after
the first raw meal, being cooked on a fire made of the biscuit barge
upon a wet blanket spread in the bottom of the boat. The hot weather,
however, soon turned the remaining portion putrid, but two or three days
later came God's blessed rain, and gave them hope and life again.
They managed to save a considerable quantity of water, and, though the
shark's flesh was in a horrible condition, they continued to feed upon
it _until the thirty-fifth_ day.

On this day they saw land, high and well wooded; but now the trade-wind
failed them, and for the following two days the unfortunate men
contended with baffling light airs, calms, and strong currents. At
last they got within a short distance of the shore, and sought for a
landing-place through the surrounding surf.

Suddenly four or five canoes darted out from the shore. They were filled
with armed savages, whose aspect and demeanour warned old Ned that he
and his comrades were among cannibals. Sweeping alongside the boat, the
savages seized the white men, who were all too feeble to resist, or even
move, put them into their canoes, and conveyed them on shore, fed them,
and treated them with much apparent kindness. Crowds of natives
from that part of the island--which was Malayta, one of the Solomon
Group--came to look at them, and one man, a chief, took a fancy to
Renton, and claimed him as his own especial property.

Renton never saw the rest of his companions again, for they were removed
to the interior of the Island--probably sold to some of the bush tribes,
the "man-a-bush," as the coastal natives called them. Their fate is not
difficult to guess, for the people of Malayta were then, as they are
now, cannibals.

On August 7, 1875, the Queensland labour recruiting schooner _Bobtail
Nag_ was cruising off the island, trading for yams, and her captain
heard from some natives who came alongside that there was a white man
living ashore in a village about ten miles distant. The skipper of the
_Bobtail Nag_ at once offered to pay a handsome price if the man was
brought on board, and at the cost of several dozen Birmingham steel
axes and some tobacco poor Renton's release was effected. He told his
rescuers that the people among whom he had lived had taken a great fancy
to him, and had treated him with great kindness.

If the reader will look at a chart of the South Pacific, he will see,
among the Phoenix Group, the position of McKean's Island; two thousand
miles distant, westward and southward, is the island of Malayta, upon
which Renton and his companions in misery drifted.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of "The Gallant, Good Riou", and Jack
Renton, by Louis Becke

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK "THE GALLANT, GOOD RIOU" ***

***** This file should be named 25106.txt or 25106.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/1/0/25106/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
