Project Gutenberg's Light On the Child's Path, by William Allen Bixler

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Light On the Child's Path

Author: William Allen Bixler

Release Date: April 27, 2008 [EBook #25205]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIGHT ON THE CHILD'S PATH ***




Produced by Joseph R. Hauser, Sam W. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









                            Light
                     On the Child's Path

                      By Wm. A. Bixler


    Jesus said, "Suffer little children, and forbid them not
    to come unto me; for of such is the kingdom of heaven."
        --Matt. 19:14.


THE WARNER PRESS
Anderson, Indiana




[Illustration: ON GRANDPA'S FARM]




Copyright, 1918
by
Gospel Trumpet Co.

Printed In U.S.A.




CONTENTS


    Our Best Friend                                       11

    The Good Book                                         16

    What God Made                                         18

    In the Garden of Eden                                 20

    Our Heavenly Home                                     22

    The Day and Night                                     23

    The Rain and the Snow                                 25

    Winter's Blessings (poem)                             29

    Planting Seeds                                        34

    Flowers of Springtime                                 36

    A Walk in the Woods                                   38

    Our Feathered Friends                                 41

    A Bird of the Night                                   44

    Our Tame Birds                                        47

    Wee Pretty Kitty (poem)                               50

    Creatures of the Water                                51

    Our Tame Animals                                      52

    Little Foxes                                          56

    The Squirrels                                         58

    The Shepherds                                         60

    Jesus as a Child                                      62

    The Good Shepherd                                     64

    Parable of the Sower                                  70

    Parable of the Leaven                                 71

    Laborers in the Vineyard                              72

    The Wicked Husbandmen                                 74

    The Wheat and Tares                                   76

    The King's Marriage-Feast                             78

    A Lesson on Forgiveness                               80

    Jesus Loves the Children                              82

    Jesus Heals the Sick                                  84

    Jesus Nearing Jerusalem                               86

    Jesus Changed                                         88

    Feeding the Multitude                                 90

    The Death of Jesus                                    93

    Jesus Our Savior                                      94

    Moments of Prayer                                     96

    Morning Praise (poem)                                 98

    Evening Prayer (poem)                                 99

    Asking Blessing (poem)                               101

    Visit the Sick                                       102

    Do a Kindness (poem)                                 104

    The Blind Girl                                       106

    The Little Cripple (poem)                            108

    Country Children                                     110

    The Country Boy (poem)                               113

    God Sees All Things                                  114

    Be Kind to the Aged                                  117

    God's Garden (poem)                                  120

    A Baby for a Nickel                                  121

    We All Must Die                                      122

    The Path of God (poem)                               125




[Illustration: COUNTING THE STARS]


[Illustration: MORNING CHEER]




Our Best Friend


In a log cabin in the mountains lived a little boy. He often played
near the house, but did not go far away. Near the house were many
trees and rocks and among these wild animals stayed.

[Illustration: DOWN BY THE SPRING]

One day the boy missed his mama and thought he would try to find her.
He went down the path toward the spring, where he had often gone after
water. He went on and on. Finally he wished to return, but did not
know the way. Poor boy, he was lost.

[Illustration: THE BEST FRIEND WE HAVE IS MOTHER]

He started toward what he thought was home, and walked and walked.
Becoming very tired, he sat down to rest and soon fell asleep.

His mama missed her boy and hunted everywhere for him. Night came on,
but she did not give up her search. She hunted and called, but no
answer came. She feared the wild beasts would get him, but prayed to
God to protect her child. She hunted all night and in the morning
found him safe and still asleep.

The best friend we have on earth is a good mother. She thinks of her
children at all times. She loves them and lives for them. She seems to
know all about our little cares and trials. When we are willing to
help her, it shows that we think of her and love her, too.

Have you ever thought how she toils and cares for you? She works for
you every day--gets your meals, breakfast, dinner, and supper; washes
and mends your clothes and stockings; and at night makes your pillow
nice and soft for you so you can sleep well.

She seems to know just what to do if we happen to get hurt.

[Illustration: A MOTHER LIVES FOR HER CHILDREN]

Mother is watching after her little ones all the day long, and when
she puts her hand upon our heads at night as we bow at her knee in
prayer, she seems to say, "God bless and keep my darling child." When
she tucks the covers tight about us and sits by our bedside, we think
that Mama is the best friend we have. Don't we?

Now I will tell you of another friend. This friend lives in heaven.
His name is God. We can not see God, but he looks down from heaven and
sees us. He sees everything we do, and hears everything we say. He
knows all things.

It was God who made this earth where we live, and everything that has
life. We pray to God, and he hears us and answers our prayers.

[Illustration]

    Now I lay me down to sleep;
    I pray Thee, Lord, my soul to keep.
    Thy love be with me through the night,
    And bless me with the morning light.




The Good Book


The Bible is a good book. In it we read about God, and about his
making the earth, sun, moon, stars, trees, flowers, rocks, water,
birds, fishes, animals, and man.

We read of Adam and Eve, the first man and woman; of their beautiful
home, the Garden of Eden; and also of their children and their
children's children.

In it there are many, many stories about how God helped people in
times of trial.

We also read about Jesus, the Son of God, who came down from heaven
and died for us, that we might have eternal life.

Good men wrote the Bible long, long ago, and the contents have been
kept, until now we all have Bibles. The Bible is called Holy Bible
because it is God's Word, and is a record of God's work and God's
words.

If we live now as the Bible teaches, after we die we shall receive a
crown of life in heaven.

[Illustration]




What God Made


Our God is a very great God. He made all things. He made this earth
where we now live.

It seems strange that there was a time, many, many years ago, when
this earth was nowhere to be found; but that is so.

When men make things, they must have tools to work with. They have to
make things little by little, working at them a long time before they
are done.

It was not so with God when he made this earth. "He spake, and it was
done." At first all was dark. He then said, "Let there be light," and
it was light. He called the light day, and the darkness he called
night. This, the Good Book says, took place on the first day.

On the second day God made the air we breathe, and in which the birds
fly.

On the third day he made the land, sea, and rivers, and the grass,
flowers, and trees.

On the fourth day he made the sun, moon, and stars, to give light to
the earth by day and night.

[Illustration]

On the fifth day he made the fish that swim in the water and the birds
that fly in the air.

On the sixth day he made all the animals, and at last he made man. He
gave them for food the grain of the fields, the fruits of the trees,
and the vegetables of the garden.

On the seventh day God rested "from all the work which he had made."
"And God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very
good."




In the Garden of Eden


When the Garden of Eden was planted with all the beautiful flowers and
trees, God gave it to Adam for a home. He told him to take good care
of it. Adam was glad to work in the garden and use it as he chose; but
he had no one to enjoy the things that he enjoyed, no one to help him
to be just what God wished him to be, no one to love.

[Illustration]

God said, "It is not good that the man should be alone: I will make
him an help meet for him." So he made a woman and Adam called her Eve.

Eve was very much like Adam in some ways, yet unlike him in other
ways. Man has some gifts that woman does not have; one is helpful to
the other.

Adam's heart must have been glad to see the woman whom God had made
for him. He now had some one to enjoy the home with him. Adam and Eve
were happy in Eden as long as they loved God more than they loved to
have their own way. He knew better than they did what was good for
them and what would make them happy, and they were glad to obey him.

But by and by their own way seemed better than God's way, and they did
things that God had said they should not do. When we do things that
God says we should not do, we sin. So Adam and Eve sinned, and were
ashamed to see God, and when he came into the garden, they hid among
the trees.




[Illustration: _The Lord hath done great things for us whereof we are
glad_]

Our Heavenly Home


God loves men too well to leave them in sin and sorrow. And though we
have sinned, he will forgive us if we are sorry for our sins and ask
his pardon. He will give us good thoughts, and help us to love him and
to love one another.

We shall all die, but we shall live again; and if we serve God in this
life and are Christians, we shall live with him in heaven. There we
shall never sin and never die. We shall never be sick or sad; we shall
be happy forever. There we shall see God. Jesus will be there, and so
will all the good people who have ever lived.

God saw that the people he had made were doing wrong, and he had pity
on the whole world of sinners. So he sent his only Son to this earth
as the Savior of the world. You will find somewhere in this book how
God's Son came to this world.




The Day and Night


God made the sun to give light by day. The sun not only gives us
light, but also makes the earth warm and causes everything to grow.

Sometimes when the sun rises in the morning, it looks very close, but
it is really far away--away off in the sky. When the sun goes down in
the evening, darkness comes all around us. This is called night.

We do not want all daytime, in which to work and play; neither do we
want all nighttime, in which to sleep; but we enjoy both the day and
the night as God made them.

[Illustration]

Also, we see the moon and the stars. When the moon is full and round,
how large and pretty it looks! God made the moon and stars to shine at
night. Have you ever noticed the stars twinkle at night? How pretty
they are! There are so many of them that we could never count them
all. At one time some shepherds saw a beautiful large star; it was a
sign that the Savior of the world was born.




The Rain and the Snow


    Patter, little drops of rain,
    Patter on the window-pane.
    How I love to watch them pass
    In their races down the glass!
    Soon the shower will be o'er,
    Then the sun will shine once more.
    But I love to hear the rain
    Beat against the window-pane.
    Soft and gentle April showers
    Will bring May-time's pretty flowers.

I think it is pleasant to sit by the window and watch the rain as it
falls, sometimes in tiny drops and sometimes in large ones.

The warm showers make the grass, trees, and flowers grow. After the
shower is over, the grass looks fresh and green.

The birds also seem to be glad for the rain. They chirp among the
trees when the shower is over.

We see the pretty clouds in the sky. The wind moves them about.
Sometimes a storm comes, and then we see the lightning and hear the
thunder.

[Illustration: PLAYING IN THE LEAVES]

When winter-time comes, it gets cold, and the ground is all covered
with pure-white crystals of snow. Everything looks so clean and pretty
with its white coat on. We see the little snowbirds flying around, and
they are so happy picking up seeds for food.

Then we love to get on our mittens and warm coats, and go out in the
snow, too. People hitch horses to sleighs and enjoy rides. They put
bells on the horses, and these jingle merrily when the horses go fast.

[Illustration]

In the far north it gets very cold, and when the people go anywhere,
they hitch dogs to sleds.

In the Bible we read that the Lord will make our hearts white as snow
if we confess our sins and take him for our Savior.




[Illustration]

    Beautiful snow, so soft and so white,
    Sparkling like gems in the sunshine bright,
    Robing the earth and decking the trees,
    Sent by the Lord, the children to please.




Winter's Blessings


    Pretty little snowflakes
      Falling to the ground;
    Here is one, there is one,
      Ev'rywhere they're found.

[Illustration]

    See them fall so gently
      Through the frosty air;
    Every little snowflake
      Has its beauties rare.

    Soon the ground is covered,
      With the pretty snow;
    Then we see the snowbirds
      Flying to and fro.

    Do you think the snowbirds
      Like the wintry day?
    Do you think they're happy
      As they chirp and play?

    Happy little creatures--
      Do not reap or sow,
    Yet the Master feeds them,
      Even in the snow.

    Jesus made the birdies
      Blessings to enjoy;
    Then, oh, do not harm them,
      Little girl or boy.

    In the pleasant evenings,
      Then the rabbits go
    Through the woods and bushes,
      Playing in the snow.

    All the night they ramble,
      But at break of day
    They must hunt a refuge,
      There to hide away.

    So these little creatures
      Love the fallen snow;
    Should not we enjoy it,
      Who God's blessings know?

[Illustration: Love thy neighbor as thyself.
    Rom. 13:9.]

    Should we ever murmur,
      Should we e'er complain,
    When God sendeth blessings,
      As the snow and rain?

    No; we ought to thank him,
      Yes, for everything;
    And we ought his praises
      Daily to him sing.

[Illustration]

    He is love and kindness
      To us all below;
    On the just and unjust,
      Sendeth rain and snow.

    Let us e'er be thankful
      For his love to us;
    He's so kind and faithful,
      Giving blessings thus.

[Illustration]

    Let us ask the Savior,
      As we kneel to pray,
    "Help us to be thankful,
      More and more each day.

    "Thankful in the morning,
      Thankful noon and night;
    Thankful for the rain-drops,
      Thankful for the light."




Planting Seeds


    Birds are singing, clear and sweet;
    Flowers are springing neath our feet;
    Spring at last has come to stay.
    How we welcome lovely May!
          Lovely May,
          O lovely May!
    Oh, how glad we are to say,
          Lovely May!

    Winter days were cold and long,
    But we waited for thy song--
    Songs of birds and humming bees,
    And the fresh and lovely breeze.
          Lovely May,
          O lovely May!
    Oh, how glad we are today,
          Lovely May!

You may have helped your papa or mama plant seeds in the garden or in
the flowerbed. The warm sun and the rain make them grow rapidly.

We do not plant weed-seeds, but in some way they get into the ground,
and come up along with the garden-plants. If the weeds are not cut
out, they will crowd out the good plants.

[Illustration: AN ACT OF KINDNESS]

When we do little acts of kindness, it is like planting good seed.
When we are not kind, and say bad words, it is like letting the weeds
crowd out the good plants.

If you are good and kind to papa and mama, brother or sister, today,
you will find it easy to be kind to them tomorrow. It makes you happy
to be good to those around you.

If you are cross and say bad words, you may want to say them again.
You can not feel happy when you have said and done bad things.

God can help you sow good seed. He will help you to be good. He will
help you to love all around you.




Flowers of Springtime


How pretty and sweet are the apple, peach, pear, plum, cherry, and
orange blossoms! How good God was to make all these things for us to
see and smell! We can enjoy the blossoms. Also, we can see the little
apples or other fruit grow until they become large, juicy, ripe fruit.
Then we can eat them, and oh, how good they will taste! God is very
good to us.

[Illustration]

Not a leaf nor a blade of grass could grow if God's hand did not care
for it. He causes the warm sun to shine and the gentle rains to fall
so that everything can grow. Things could not grow without the warm
sun and the rain.

God has caused the wild flowers to grow along the road-side and in the
woods and meadows so we can enjoy them. How glad we should be that we
have such a good God to worship! When we kneel to pray, we can say,
"O Lord, I thank thee for all the pretty things I see each day." The
pretty things are some of the blessings that he daily gives us.




A Walk in the Woods


Have you ever taken a walk through the woods by the brook on a warm
day? How cool and pleasant the water looked as it ran along over the
rocks! Did it not make a pleasing sound?

[Illustration]

It is delightful to go through the woods where you can see the
beautiful trees. You can nearly always find some flowers growing along
the edge of the brook. Besides, the little birds fly among the trees
and sing so sweetly. Almost any child would enjoy a walk through the
woods. But there are many children in large cities who never have the
pleasure of going to the woods.

[Illustration]

How pleasant it is to sit down in a cool, shady place, and think of
the lovely things that God has given us to enjoy. As we look around
us, we can see so many blessings that God has given us.

[Illustration]

Even the little birds and flowers seem to be telling us that Jesus
loves us. God has made many beautiful things for us to enjoy. It makes
us happy to see the beautiful flowers, and to hear the little birds
sing so sweetly.




Our Feathered Friends


When all the trees and bushes and grass are green in the spring, we
see the little birds and hear their sweet songs.

How happy they seem as they fly about from tree to tree, and scratch
in the ground to find little seeds and insects to eat!

Sometimes we find a bird's nest in the bushes or on the ground. God
teaches the little birds how to build their nests with small sticks,
leaves, and feathers.

This is the bird's house. We sometimes see tiny eggs in the nest. The
little eggs hatch, and then there are little birdies in the nest in
place of the eggs. The mother bird hunts worms and bugs to feed the
little ones.

[Illustration]

Did you ever see a nest of young birds? How they open their little
mouths when you come near! They think you have something for them to
eat.

[Illustration]

Once a little boy found a meadow-lark's nest with young birds in it.
As they opened their little mouths, he thought he could feed them
better than the mother bird. He decided to raise them for pets, and so
carried them home. He fed them bread; but as the little birds were not
used to that kind of food, they did not thrive on it; and when one day
the boy forgot to feed them, they died. How sad he felt! And how sad
the mother bird must have felt when she could not find her babies!

God made the birds to enjoy the woods and fields. We must not destroy
their nests, for that would be wrong.

The Bible says, "Behold the fowls of the air: for they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father
feedeth them."

[Illustration]




A Bird of the Night


[Illustration]

Did you ever see an owl? Owls fly around at night, as they can see
better after dark than in the daytime. They stay in some dark and
quiet spot all day, unless disturbed, but at night they hunt around
for something to eat. They eat some kinds of birds, rats, mice, fish,
reptiles, and insects.

The nest of the owl is made of sticks and twigs, and is oftentimes
built in rocks or ruins or old houses.

Some owls are as white as snow, and their feathers are as soft as
cotton. Some are brown, and others are gray.

Sometimes in the night we hear their noise, which sounds much as if
they were saying, "Who? who? who?"

The owl can not turn his eyes about as we can; so when he wants to
look around, he must turn his head.

In the cold countries where snow stays upon the ground most of the
time, there are owls with pure-white feathers. They are very large,
too; yet they can hardly be seen, since they look so much like the
snow.

[Illustration]




[Illustration: GEESE

THE QUAIL]




Our Tame Birds


Chickens and ducks and geese are birds, too. But they are tame and
stay where people do. They do not fly like the little birds, but they
stay around the barnyard and lay eggs for us to eat.

[Illustration]

Ducks and geese love to swim in the water. Both the big and the little
ones can swim, but chickens can not.

The old mother hen sometimes has many little chicks running around
her. They stay pretty close, because they are afraid that something
might harm them.

[Illustration]

Chicks are sometimes caught by hawks, which fly around watching for
them. In the picture we see a dog driving a hawk away from the old hen
and chickens. Don't you think he is a good dog?

[Illustration]

A farmer had a dog whose name was Ring. Even though he was asleep, if
a chicken gave the note of alarm, he would jump up and bark at once.
Then he would run after the hawk and drive it away.

[Illustration]

When lying quiet it was amusing to see how quickly he would jump up
and bark when any one would say, "Hawk!"




Wee Pretty Kitty


    "Wee pretty kitty,
      With nothing to do,
    Only to take
      Little naps in a shoe.
    You look very nice
      While lying in there,
    With never a thought
      Of sorrow or care.
    Yet I am so glad
      That I am not you,
    For I can love Jesus,
      Which you can not do."

[Illustration]




Creatures of the Water


[Illustration]

Fishes are queer creatures that live in water. Men catch them with
hooks and lines or nets and use them for food.

[Illustration: THE GUPPY]

Some fish are very large. We read in the Bible of a man named Jonah.
He was trying to run away from the Lord, who had called him to a work.
While on a ship, during a storm he was thrown into the water. But he
did not drown, for a great fish swallowed him, and carried him
ashore. He then knew that God meant what he said, and so did as God
had commanded.

There are hundreds of different kinds of fishes, and many, many men
earn their living by catching and selling them for food.

Some of Christ's disciples were fishermen when he called them. He told
them that he would make them fishers of men. This meant that he would
prepare them to help other people to become Christians.

[Illustration]




Our Tame Animals


There are some kinds of animals that are tame, as the sheep, hog, cow,
horse, dog, and cat.

[Illustration]

The horse is a faithful beast and does much work for man. He draws
the heavy loads on the road and works in the fields. We hitch him to a
wagon or a carriage and enjoy a ride, or we can put a saddle upon his
back and ride there also.

The cow gives us milk for our food, and from the milk we get cream,
butter, and cheese.

The flesh of the hog is valuable for food.

The dogs are useful to guard our homes, and cats catch mice and rats.
Both dogs and cats make good pets.

Sheep have long wool all over their bodies, and men cut it off and use
it to make clothes to keep us warm.

Young sheep are called lambs. They like to run and play very much. In
the picture we see a lamb that has fallen into the water. The mother
sheep stands close by and watches the man trying to pull the lamb out.

I suppose the man had missed these two from the flock. He was in
search of the lost ones, and seeing the mother standing near the
water, he came and found the lamb nearly drowned. The mother would not
leave her babe, but waited a long time until help came.

[Illustration]

Lambs are innocent-looking animals, and do not make a noise when
hurt. Jesus said that children are his lambs.




Little Foxes


Foxes are wild animals. They live in the woods and swamps, in places
where not many people live.

They are very cunning and sly, and catch young chickens, ducks,
turkeys, and geese whenever they can.

Night is the time when they slip around and catch these barnyard
fowls. They carry the fowls off to their holes in the ground, and eat
them there.

Little foxes are very destructive, and often spoil grape-vines. In the
Bible we read that it is the little foxes that spoil the vines.

This also means that our little unkind words and actions spoil the
peace in our lives and make us feel bad.

Let us be careful that our words and deeds do not make ourselves or
others unhappy. If we live to please God, we shall please God's
people, and we shall not have to feel sorry on account of some bad
words said or deeds done.




[Illustration: THE PET PONY]




The Squirrels


When the frosts have colored the leaves of the trees of the woods with
many hues, and the nuts have ripened and fallen to the ground, it is
then that the squirrels gather a good supply of the different kinds of
nuts and acorns into their little homes in the hollow trees, to be
eaten during the many long days of winter.

Have you ever seen a squirrel? They love to play in the woods, and run
among the branches of the trees, and jump from one limb to another.

God made the squirrels to enjoy the woods, and he has provided the
nuts for them to eat.

[Illustration: FEEDING THE SQUIRRELS]




The Shepherds


A shepherd is a man who takes care of sheep. During the day he watches
them while they are eating grass, and in the evening he takes them to
their fold or barn.

Now, we read in the Bible that an angel of the Lord appeared to some
shepherds in the night. The shepherds were very much afraid, but the
angel said to them:

"Fear not: for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which
shall be to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of
David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign
unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling-clothes, lying
in a manger."

[Illustration: THE ANGEL'S APPEARANCE]

"And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
host praising God, and saying, Glory to God in the highest and on
earth peace, good will toward men."

The babe's name was Jesus, who came as a Savior to all the world.




Jesus As a Child


[Illustration]

God, who is in heaven, was full of pity for the unhappy people of
earth. He loved them so much that he sent his Son to the earth in the
form of a child, a baby in his mother's arms. He came to earth to show
us how to obey God--how to live so as to do good in this life and be
happy both in this life and in the life to come.

He came as a child, so as to show children how to live. He came like
other children, and grew up as other children do, only better and
wiser.

When God sent his Son to the earth, he gave him into the care of two
good people who lived in a small town called Nazareth.

[Illustration: THE BOY CHRIST WITH THE WISE MEN]

When Jesus came to them, they were in Bethlehem. They had gone there
on a journey. There was no room for them in the inn; so they had to
stay in a place made for cattle. God was not ashamed to place his Son
in the care of poor people. He was not ashamed to have him born in a
stable and cradled in a manger.

A bright star appeared over the place where the young child lay, and
by this sign the wise men that came from the east seeking him were
enabled to find him.




The Good Shepherd


Jesus once lived on this very same earth on which we live. He walked
through grain-fields. He climbed mountains. He noticed the birds and
flowers, and watched the fishermen and farmers and shepherds. He used
the things he saw to teach lessons to his disciples and others who
came to hear him.

[Illustration]

In the land of Palestine, where he lived, sheep-raising was very
common. He said at one time: "I am the good Shepherd, and know my
sheep. My sheep hear my voice, and they follow me."

[Illustration]

He was trying to show the people that he was just as anxious to help
people live right and to keep them from danger as the kind shepherds
who watched over their flocks upon the hills of Palestine were anxious
to keep their sheep from harm at all times.

[Illustration: JESUS TEACHING THE WAY OF SALVATION]

At another time Jesus spoke of the lambs and compared them to
children.

Jesus went into meeting-houses and taught the people. Many times he
brought joy to the hearts of fathers and mothers by healing their sick
children. He did good wherever he went. He was always trying to help
those in trouble. He was the best and greatest man who has ever lived.

[Illustration]

Reading and studying about him will help us to stand for the right and
to do good, kind deeds.

We are his sheep if we are Christians, and the way we follow Jesus now
is by reading the Bible and living a Christian life.

[Illustration]

Jesus gave his life for his sheep while he was here on earth. Now he
is up in heaven, but he loves the people who follow him, and is still
our Good Shepherd.

[Illustration: LEARNING OF JESUS]




Parable of the Sower


Jesus taught many spiritual lessons by parables, that is, by stories
about the common things people could understand.

[Illustration]

One day as he sat by the sea of Galilee, he told the people the
parable of the Sower. The sower cast some seed by the wayside, that
is, along the edge of the field or road-side. Some seed fell upon
stony ground, some among thorns, and some on good ground.

The people did not know what he meant till he explained the lesson to
them.

The great sower is Jesus, but all Christians are sowers under him. The
seed is the Word of God. People's hearts are the four kinds of soil.




Parable of the Leaven


Among the stories that Jesus told was the parable of the leaven.

A woman put leaven in the flour as a baker puts yeast in his bread
dough. The leaven kept working until it affected all the dough and
made it rise and become light.

As the yeast or leaven goes through all the dough, so the gospel of
Jesus will go to all the nations in the world.

Each one who believes on Jesus enters the kingdom of God. The kingdom
of God is righteousness, peace, and joy, which we get when we become
Christians.

[Illustration]




Laborers in the Vineyard


Jesus told another parable, a story of the laborers in the vineyard.
You can turn in your Testament to Matthew 20:1-16, and read about the
man who hired laborers to work in his vineyard.

[Illustration]

He had agreed to pay the laborers a penny a day. The men who worked
all day thought they should receive more than those hired later in the
day, but the master paid them all alike. Just so those of us who have
been Christians only a short time will receive the same heavenly
reward as those who have lived a Christian life for years. Salvation
is just the same to all--it takes sin out of our hearts and fills them
with the love of God.

We must not put off getting saved; for Jesus said, "Watch, for ye know
not the hour when your Lord doth come." This means that we are liable
to die without a warning, and we should always be ready.




The Wicked Husbandmen


Another parable is about a man who had a vineyard and let it out to
husbandmen. When the time for gathering grapes came, he sent his
servants to the husbandmen that they might receive the fruit. But the
husbandmen took his servants and beat one and killed another. He sent
other servants, and they were treated in the same way.

Last of all he sent his son, thinking they would honor him, but they
caught him and killed him.

[Illustration]

Jesus spoke this parable to the wicked people about himself at that
time. Christ himself had been sent to the Jews, who had been the
people of God for ages past, but who had wandered into sin. From time
to time God had sent good prophets to warn the Jews, but often the
prophets were persecuted.

At last God sent Jesus, his only Son, and him they killed.




[Illustration]

The Wheat and the Tares


Christ told another parable. It was of a man who sowed good seed in
his field; but while the servants slept, an enemy came and sowed
tares, or weeds, and then went away so that the servants knew nothing
of it.

When the wheat grew, the tares also grew. When the servants noticed
the tares, they asked the owner what it meant, as they sowed only good
seed. He answered that an enemy had sown the tares. But he said that
they should let both grow till the harvest, and that then the tares
would be gathered and burned, but the wheat gathered into the barn.

[Illustration]

Jesus explained this: The field, he said, means the world; the owner
means Jesus himself; the wheat means the persons who become
Christians; the tares are sowed by Satan; and the weeds are wicked
men.

The wicked men and Christians are together here in this world, but at
the judgment-day the righteous will go to heaven and the wicked will
be punished.




[Illustration]

The King's Marriage-Feast


Another parable was of a king's marriage-feast.

The king invited certain ones to the feast, but they would not come;
so he made an open invitation and sent his servants into the highways
to invite as many as they could find, and these people came.

God sent Jesus to the world, and he invited the Jews to accept the
kingdom of God, but they would not. Though some Jews accepted Jesus,
yet as a nation they did not, and God was displeased with them for it.
When the Jews would not accept Jesus, God extended the invitation to
the Gentiles, or all other people.

God now has the feast prepared. He invites people to come to Jesus and
have their hearts made pure and enjoy the rich blessings of the
kingdom--righteousness, joy, and peace. He extends the invitation to
all.

If we will not give heed to his invitation to accept Jesus, we shall
be left out of the kingdom, and others will take our place.

[Illustration]




A Lesson on Forgiveness


[Illustration]

The man kneeling in the picture owed the king hundreds and hundreds of
dollars. He had no money to pay the king. The king said that this man
and his wife and children must be sold and the money used to pay the
debt. The man begged the king to wait a while, promising that by and
by he would give him the money. The king then felt sorry for the poor
man and said the man would not need to pay him any money. The man
arose and walked away.

Soon he met a friend who owed him a little money. He spoke harshly to
the friend and told him to pay the money. The friend did not have any
money. He kneeled down before the man and said, "Wait a while, and by
and by I will give you the money." But the man seemed to have
forgotten that the king had been kind to him. He had the friend put in
jail. When the king heard about this, he did not like it, and he
punished the hard-hearted man.

We are like the man in the picture. We ask God to be good to us and
forgive us when we do wrong. Then, maybe, we are not good to our
little friends when they do wrong to us. If they do a bad thing to us,
we want to pay them back. We should not do this way. Jesus said that
if we would not forgive others, God would not forgive us. To forgive
our friends means to be just as good to them when they do wrong to us
as when they do good to us.




[Illustration]

Jesus Loves the Children


At one time when Jesus was teaching the people, some women brought
their children to him for a blessing. The disciples thought the women
should not do this, and thought Jesus did not wish to be bothered
with the children.

Jesus said, "Suffer little children, and forbid them not, to come unto
me; for of such is the kingdom of heaven." He loved them and held them
upon his lap and blessed them.

[Illustration]

At another time he said that unless people become converted and become
as little children, they can not enter the kingdom of heaven. This
means that it is necessary for them to have their sins forgiven and to
be pure and innocent and free from sin in order to be in God's church
in this world and to go to heaven after they die.




Jesus Heals the Sick


Jesus spent his whole life doing good. He always helped those who were
in trouble. He seemed to know of the sick and suffering of the land
and was always anxious to heal them.

[Illustration]

At one time he went into the meeting-place of the Jews and saw a man
there who had a hand so withered that he could not open it or stretch
it out. Now, there was a Jewish law that said no work should be done
on the Sabbath. The wicked people watched Jesus to see if he would
heal this man on the Sabbath-day.

[Illustration: HEALING THE BLIND]

Jesus knew their thoughts, and so he asked the people, "If any of you
had a sheep which should fall into a pit on the Sabbath, would you not
help it out?" Then he said that if it was right to help a sheep, it
was much more so to be good to man.

After that he said to the man, "Stretch out your hand," and he
stretched it out.




[Illustration]

Jesus Nearing Jerusalem


One day Jesus and his disciples were on their way to a great city.
This city was Jerusalem. Jesus told them that there many cruel things
would be done to him and that he would be killed.

The disciples did not think this would happen to Jesus. They thought
he would be a great king and sit on a throne. Two of these men were
James and John. They came with their mother and bowed before Jesus as
you see in the picture. James and John wanted to be great. They asked
Jesus to let one of them sit on the right side and the other on the
left of his throne. Jesus told them that the way to be great was to do
good, kind deeds.

[Illustration]

Jesus was the greatest person who has ever lived, and he spent all
his life doing good to those who were in need of help.

[Illustration]

As Jesus and his men went toward the city, many people went with him.
Two blind men were sitting by the road. They heard the crowd coming.
When they knew that Jesus was coming, they asked him to open their
eyes. Jesus was always ready to help those who were in trouble. He
opened the eyes of the two blind men so they could see.




Jesus Changed


Many little boys and girls kneel down at mama's knee or by the bed in
the evening and pray to God. Often Jesus went up on a high hill to
pray. In the picture Jesus is on a hill-top. He went there to pray. He
took three of his disciples with him. They were Peter, James, and
John.

[Illustration]

See the two men by the side of Jesus, and see how bright Jesus looks.
The two men came from heaven to talk with Jesus. Peter, James, and
John had never seen Jesus look so beautiful before. The Bible says
that his face shone like the sun and that his clothes looked bright
like snow when the sun shines upon it.

The three disciples heard God's voice. The voice said, "This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." When they heard
it, they fell on their faces, for they were afraid.

Soon the two men went away, and Jesus looked as he did before. He
touched his disciples and told them not to be afraid.

Then they went down the hill. They found many people. They saw a poor
boy who was sick, and Jesus made him well.




Feeding the Multitude


When Jesus was here on earth, he preached to the people, and many
listened to his words. He went from place to place talking of God,
healing the sick and lame, and doing much good everywhere he went.

At one time when he had been preaching to about five thousand people
for a long time, they all became hungry. There was no food for the
people to eat, except five small loaves of bread and two small fishes.

[Illustration]

But Jesus blessed the bread and broke it and gave it to the people.
They all had all they wanted, and there was a good portion left.

Jesus was the Son of God, and anything he said would be done. So it
was with the bread. He multiplied it, so that the people were all
satisfied.

[Illustration]

In the Bible we read: "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and
forever." This means that he has just as much power today and can do
as much for us as he did when he was here upon earth.




The Death of Jesus


Many were the good deeds done by Jesus while he was here on earth, and
many people believed on him and followed him.

[Illustration]

Some very wicked men did not like Jesus and abused him whenever they
could. Just before they killed him, they put a crown of thorns on his
head, and the sharp points pierced his brow and were very painful.

He was nailed to a large cross, and was left there until he died. Some
good men buried him in a stone tomb, but in three days he arose and
afterwards he went up to heaven.

[Illustration]

He died for our sins, so that we can be saved from our sins in this
life and go to live with him when we die.




Jesus Our Savior


Our Savior is Jesus. He died to save us from our sins in this world,
and to save us from eternal death when we die.

Suppose that a girl should be out on the water in a boat and should
fall out of it into the water, and some men close by with a large boat
would get to her right away; they would save her life, would they not?
Yes.

Just so Jesus came to save us. We were lost because we all have
sinned and disobeyed God, but we can be saved from our sins if we ask
Jesus to forgive us. He will forgive our sins and will not hold them
against us any more.

When our sins are forgiven, we are Christians, and Jesus will help us
to live right from that time on.

[Illustration: GOING UP TO HEAVEN]

We shall not have a desire to do the bad things which so many boys and
girls do, but we shall want to live right and be good.

He can keep us from sin every day and hour if we trust him. So Jesus
is our Savior.




Moments of Prayer


How good it is that all can pray! The Lord is always waiting to hear
and answer our prayers. When we pray, we talk with God; we must listen
closely when he talks to us and do whatever he says.

[Illustration]

When we get ready for bed in the evening, we should not forget to
pray. We should remember that the Lord has been good to us all the day
long. He has kept us from all harm, and given us food and clothes. We
should also thank him for a home and parents and friends. Even the air
we breathe comes from him.

Then in the morning we should again kneel down, and thank God for his
care through the night. The Lord loves to hear children pray.

After we pray, we should try hard to be good. The Lord will surely
help us if we ask him. Then, do not forget to pray.

[Illustration: WE REAP WHAT WE SOW]




Morning Praise


[Illustration]

    Father dear, I humbly bow
    By my little bedside now.
    Thou hast kept me through the night,
    Till the morning, clear and bright;
    Thou hast given rest and sleep;
    Thou dost e'er a vigil keep
    Through the silent hours of night
    While the stars and moon are bright.
    Blessed Father, through the storm
    Thou hast kept me from all harm;
    And thy loving hand is near,
    Guarding me from harm and fear.
    Help me now, I ask of thee,
    That my daily walk may be
    Like a little Christian true,
    In my words, and actions too;
    Keep me from all harm again
    As thou didst last night. Amen.




Evening Prayer


    Father dear, I humbly bow
    At thy feet and ask thee now:
    Keep me through this dreary night,
    Wake me with the morning's light;
    Let no danger hover near,
    Let no sorrow, sigh, or fear
    Break my slumber; but on thee
    Let my thoughts and dreamings be.
    Father bless, and may I prove
    That I've tasted of thy love.
    Keep my tongue and let me talk
    Of thy goodness. Help me walk
    As a Christian every day;
    Keep me ever true, I pray.
    Let no harm or sickness come
    Near our happy little home.
    In thy hands my all I lay;
    May I never from thee stray.
    Keep me, Lord, I ask again.
    Praise the blessed Lord! Amen.

[Illustration]




Asking Blessing


    O Lord, I bow
      My little head
    To thank thee for
      My daily bread.
    I pray thee bless
      This daily food;
    I pray thee bless
      It to my good.

    Oh, may my soul
      This day be giv'n
    The Bread of Life,
      Sent down from heav'n.
    Oh, keep me now
      This day from sin,
    From harm and sickness
      Free. Amen.




Visit the Sick


Do you not know some one who is sick? Some little boy or girl may be
in bed with a fever, and would be so glad to see you come into the
room with a bunch of flowers or some other little gift. How happy the
sick one would be!

Are you not glad to see your friends when you are sick? It makes you
forget some of your pain for a time, does it not?

When we give a bunch of flowers to a friend, a teacher, or some one
who is sick, it is the same as saving, "I love you."

Can you not get a good book and show the sick ones some pictures, or
read to them? You can read about Jesus, who had pity on all the sick
and healed them.

Jesus was very kind, and was glad to take away the aches and pains
when the people came to him.

He had great power to heal all kinds of sickness, and in several
places in the Bible we read that "he healed all the sick" that came to
him.

[Illustration: TAKING FLOWERS TO A SICK FRIEND]

He can heal us now if we trust him and ask for his healing power.
Jesus can do all things.

He can do many things for us if we live true to him, and ask him for
the things that we need as we would ask mama for a piece of bread or
cake. Jesus never fails to supply our needs if we are his true
children and live for him. Let us have faith in God.




Do a Kindness


    "Do a kindness, do it well;
    Angels will the story tell.

    "Do a kindness, tell it not;
    Angels' hands will mark the spot.

    "Do a kindness, though 'tis small;
    Angel voices sing it all.

    "Do a kindness, never mind!
    What you lose the angels find.

    "Do a kindness, do it now;
    Angels know it all, somehow.

    "Do a kindness any time;
    Angels weave it into rhyme.

    "Do a kindness, it will pay;
    Angels will rejoice that day.

    "Kindly deeds and thoughts and words
    Bless the world like songs of birds."

[Illustration: FLOWERS FOR MOTHER]




The Blind Girl


Blind persons can not see anything. They can not tell what any person
looks like. They can not see the sun, moon, trees, birds, flowers, or
any of the pretty things that we see.

They can not read as we do, but they read by feeling with the ends of
their fingers. There are books with raised letters or dots on the
pages for the blind, and by feeling the shape of them they can read.

See the poor blind girl reading the book. Poor girl! she can hear the
birds sing, and can smell the pretty flowers, but she can not see how
lovely they are.

[Illustration: BLIND GIRL READING]

When Jesus was here on earth, he healed the blind who came to him. He
is still just as able to heal the blind eyes so people can see as he
was while here on earth. But it takes faith in God, who is
all-powerful.




The Little Cripple


    I am sitting by my window
      In my lonely little room;
    Every little boy seems happy,
      While my life is filled with gloom.
    Yonder see the children running,
      Hear them laugh in childish play;
    Like the butterflies and birdies,
      Playing all the live-long day.

    Once I ran as other children;
      Now I'm but a cripple-boy.
    As I watch them through my window,
      How their games they do enjoy!
    How I'd love to hear their footsteps
      Coming to my open door!
    It would make me feel as cheerful
      As in happy days of yore.

    Yet I'm thankful for dear mother,
      Who so gently smooths my brow,
    Tells me pleasant little stories
      Of her childhood days, and how
    She once wandered in the meadow,
      With the cattle and the sheep,
    Picking buttercups and daisies
      Till the stars began to peep.

[Illustration]

    Then she tells me of the Savior,
      How upon this earth he trod,
    How he came to us from heaven--
      Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
    Now his home is up in glory
      With the happy angel band;
    But he comes and blesses children
      And protects them by his hand.

    Then she kneels down by my bedside,
      As the twilight shadows fall,
    And we ask the Lord to kindly
      Guide and keep us one and all;
    Then he makes us very happy,
      Gives us blessings rich and true,
    And I know with all the children,
      Jesus loves the cripples too.




Country Children


Children love to play on the bridge over the creek, or sit down in the
tall grass on the banks and pick wild flowers.

Sometimes the dog swims in the water after a stick and brings it
ashore. Dogs can swim in the water; but if the children should get
into deep water, they could not get out, and would drown if some one
did not come to help them out.

There are many, many children living in the cities who do not have the
chance to play in the green grass or pick wild flowers like the
children who live in the country. How much they would enjoy doing so!

[Illustration: IN THE COUNTRY]

God made the water and land, the grass and flowers, and intended that
the children and all people should enjoy them.

Jesus once said, "Consider the lilies, how they grow; they toil not,
they spin not; ... if then God so clothe the grass which is today in
the field, ... how much more will he clothe you, O ye of little
faith?"

God takes care of the flowers, the grass, and the trees, and he can
care for us.

[Illustration: FUN ON THE FARM]




The Country Boy


    I love to see the country boy,
      With body large and strong.
    He sings while he is doing chores,
      And whistles all day long.

    He drives the cows down to the lane,
      And feeds the chickens, too.
    He carries wood for mama dear,
      Who has so much to do.

    He goes to school and studies hard
      His lessons day by day;
    He's always ready at recess,
      To romp and jump and play.

    God bless the boys! the country boys!
      They soon will be our men.
    We know not then what they may do
      With deed or thought or pen.

    But other boys as well as he,
      Can study, learn, and do,
    Can live a grand and noble life,
      To right and God be true.




[Illustration: HERE'S A PLACE SISTER WHERE WE CAN HIDE OUR BEANS]




God Sees All Things


[Illustration]

One time a little boy was sent by his papa to plant some beans. He
worked a while, then he sat down to play. While he was playing, he
spilled part of his beans. At once he began to pick them up.

There were so many beans that he became tired. Then he thought he
could cover them up with dirt. He thought no one would ever know he
had spilled them. At last he got the rest of the beans planted and
went home.

He often thought of the beans he had spilled. But he did not tell his
papa. Some time after this his papa went to the patch. He wanted to
see how the beans were growing. He found that all of them had come
up--even those that the boy had spilled and had not picked up. The boy
did not need to tell his papa then what he had done. For his papa knew
it all.

So it is with some bad things you may have done. You may think that no
one will ever know of them. But the secret will come out some time.
Even if no person should ever find it out, God sees all you do. You
can not hide anything from him.

[Illustration]




Be Kind to the Aged


One fine spring day six children went to the woods to gather wild
flowers. Oh, how they enjoyed the warm sunshine while they filled
their little baskets with violets, buttercups, and spring beauties!
And the air was filled with the sweet perfume.

[Illustration: KIND TO THE AGED]

The flowers were so pretty and there were so many that the children
could hardly stop when the baskets were filled. Soon they started for
home. "Let's give some flowers to the old people," said one. "Yes,
let's do," said the rest, and off they went, and many were the smiles
from the old people that day.

Let us be kind to the aged. When we meet any one who is old, let us
speak to them kindly and give them a smile.

[Illustration: READING TO OLD PEOPLE]

The old people did much for us when we were too small to care for
ourselves. Let us not forget their kindness.

[Illustration]

    Little thoughts of kindness,
      Little deeds of love,
    Lead you from the wrong way
      To the heaven above.




God's Garden


    "My heart is God's little garden,
      And the fruits that grow each day
    Are the things that he sees me doing,
      And the words that he hears me say.

    "The flowers in God's little garden
      Are 'joy' and 'truth' and 'love';
    And the seed by the Master planted
      Is raised in the garden above.

    "There's a spring in God's little garden,
      Whose waters, so sweet and clear,
    Flow out into other gardens
      Which God plants very near.

    "I must tend to God's little garden,
      Lest the weeds and the sharp thorns grow;
    If the flowers should droop and wither,
      His heart would be sad, I know."




A Baby for a Nickel


A man told a little girl that he would sell his baby for a nickel. She
liked babies well and thought that was very cheap. She ran home
quickly to get the money. Her mama was very busy. She gave her the
nickel and did not stop to listen to what the little girl wanted.

The little girl ran back to the man to get the baby. Of course, the
man would not give up his baby. He did not mean what he had said. This
made the little girl cry very hard.

Her mama always told the truth. She thought others meant what they
said, just like her mama.

It was wrong for the man not to tell the truth. We often make others
feel very bad when we say things that we do not mean.




We All Must Die


Some people are very wicked. This means that they do many bad things
and do not love God. Some men swear and lie and steal and also do
other sinful things.

[Illustration: MARILYN'S TEACHER TELLS HER OF THE HEAVENLY HOME]

To tell a lie is to say things that are not true, and to steal is to
take something that belongs to some one else.

Now, it is very wrong to swear, lie, or steal. God does not want us to
do any such things. All who do wicked things will some day be
punished.

[Illustration]

Some day we shall die, for all of us must die. If a man should be
going some place through the deep snow and should get lost and the
cold should freeze him, it would kill him. He would not live any
longer, but would be dead.

If we love God and live for him, he will give us a home in heaven
after we die; but if we are wicked, we shall be lost and punished for
our wicked ways after we die.

We should think about our life here and see that we live to please
God.

If we do not, when we come to die we may be like the man in the boat.
At one time he could have been saved--while he was floating on the
smooth waters. But he has let it go too far, and can only look forward
to his doom.

Let us love God and live for him on earth, so we can live with him in
heaven after we die. When Christ was here on earth he said: "I go to
prepare a place for you, ... that where I am, there ye may be also."




The Path of God


        The path of God
        That Jesus trod
    Is just the path for me;
        I'll walk each day
        The narrow way,
    Where all is victory.

        Oh, let us fight
        For truth and right,
    And Satan e'er defeat;
        God giveth grace
        In every place
    And victory complete.

        Our life we give,
        And e'er we'll live
    For Christ, and tell his love
        To fallen man
        Where'er we can;
    At last be crowned above.




Transcriber's Note:

The frontispiece illustration has been moved to follow the title page.
Other illustrations have been moved, where necessary, so that they do
not fall in the middle of a paragraph or verse.

The page number in the Table of Contents for Be Kind to the Aged has
been amended from 118 to 117.





End of Project Gutenberg's Light On the Child's Path, by William Allen Bixler

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIGHT ON THE CHILD'S PATH ***

***** This file should be named 25205.txt or 25205.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/2/0/25205/

Produced by Joseph R. Hauser, Sam W. and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
