Project Gutenberg's The Masters and their Music, by W. S. B. Mathews

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Masters and their Music
       A series of illustrative programs with biographical,
       esthetical, and critical annotations

Author: W. S. B. Mathews

Release Date: November 17, 2008 [EBook #25213]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MASTERS AND THEIR MUSIC ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: W. S. B. MATHEWS.]





THE

MASTERS AND THEIR MUSIC



  A SERIES OF ILLUSTRATIVE PROGRAMS, WITH
  BIOGRAPHICAL, ESTHETICAL, AND
  CRITICAL ANNOTATIONS



  DESIGNED AS AN INTRODUCTION TO
  MUSIC AS LITERATURE



  FOR THE USE OF CLUBS, CLASSES, AND
  PRIVATE STUDY



BY

W. S. B. MATHEWS


Author of "How to Understand Music," "A Popular History of Music,"
"Music: Its Ideals and Methods," "Studies in Phrasing," "Standard
Grades," Etc., Etc.




Philadelphia

Theodore Presser

1708 Chestnut Str.




COPYRIGHT, 1898, BY THEO. PRESSER




PREFACE.

When a musical student begins to think of music as a literature and to
inquire about individualities of style and musical expression, it is
necessary for him to come as soon as possible to the fountainheads of
this literature in the works of a few great masters who have set the
pace and established the limits for all the rest.  In the line of
purely instrumental music this has been done by Bach, Haydn, Mozart,
Beethoven, Mendelssohn, Schumann, Chopin, Liszt, and Wagner.  The
latter, who exercised a vast influence upon the manner of developing a
musical thought and in the selection of the orchestral colors in which
it can be expressed advantageously, powerfully stimulated all composers
later than himself, nevertheless exerted this influence at second-hand,
so to say, never having written purely instrumental movements, but
merely dramatic accompaniments of one intensity or another.  Hence, for
our present purposes we may leave Wagner out altogether.  Practically,
down to about the year 1875, everything in instrumental music is
original with the masters already mentioned, or was derived from them
or suggested by them.  Hence, in order to understand instrumental music
we have, first of all, to make a beginning with the peculiarities,
individualities, beauty, and mastership of these great writers.  Such
is the design of the following programs and explanatory matter.

My first intention has been to provide for the regular study of a
musical club, in which the playing is to be contributed by active
members designated in advance, the accessory explanations to be read
from these pages.  I have thought that the playing might be divided
between several members, through which means the labor for each would
be reduced, and, on the whole, an intimate familiarity with the music
be more widely extended in the club.  This method will have the
disadvantage of leaving a part of every program less well interpreted
than the others, whereby it will sometimes happen that valuable parts
will not be properly appreciated.  The advantages of this method,
however, will outweigh the defects, since the awakening influence of a
course of study of this character will greatly depend upon having as
many members as possible practically interested in it.

While designed primarily for the use of a club, this course is equally
well adapted to serve as a manual for individual study, in which case
the individual himself will necessarily study every composition upon
the list, and advance to a new program only after having completely
mastered each and understood its relation to the remainder of the
course.  The only exception to this rule will be in the case where
several programs of increasing difficulty are given.  In this case the
player should take the easiest; after mastering this, let him go on to
the next most difficult, and, having succeeded with this, if possible
let him attack the most difficult given.  In case the latter should be
impracticable for his technical resources, let him at least familiarize
himself with the general features of all of the pieces mentioned, and
get into their meaning and beauty as much as he can.

The course is also well adapted for use as a text-book in female
seminaries and the like.  In this case the forms of a musical club or
definite musical organization had better be observed, and the meetings
conducted weekly or bi-weekly.  The teacher should remember that all
the most important works, in which the maturity and mastership of the
composer come to their fullest expression, should be studied by the
most advanced members of the class, according to their ability, and
afterward played by the teacher himself, should he happen to possess
the necessary technical qualifications.  When the maturity of the
teacher comes in to supplement the immaturity of the pupil, after the
latter has done his best, the best results will be produced.

It will be noticed, and with disappointment to some, that the analyses
and comments are free from so-called "poetry," and gush of every kind.
Particularly are they free from attempts to connect each piece with a
story or poetic idea.  In the opinion of the writer, the first step
toward musical growth lies in learning to appreciate music, as music.
In instrumental music the development of a musical idea, the creation
of musical symmetries, figures, and arabesques, and the legitimate
building up of musical climaxes upon purely harmonic and rhythmic
grounds are the phases of thought which interested the composer and
gave rise to the composition.  And while we may not attempt to assign
limits to the inspiration and uplifting effects of great tone-poetry,
it is quite certain that effects and influences of this kind are
arrived at in the consciousness of the listener only when purely
musical appreciation is active and deep.  Without the background of
living musical appreciation of this kind, the highest flights of the
composer will pass as mere noise and fury, the hearer being in no whit
uplifted or inspired.  The uplifting which comes from the supposed
assistance of a "story" or a poetic idea attached to the composition by
some outside person is quite likely to fail of being the same in
quality as that intended by the composer.  Music is one thing, poetry
another.  While aiming at like ends,--the expression of spiritual
beauty,--they move in different planes, which in the more highly
organized minds are not proximate.  The hearer specially gifted in
music does not need the story or the poem; he finds it a hindrance.
The hearer specially gifted in poetic sensibility does not care very
much for the music; to him it is merely a foreign speech, trying to say
vaguely and imperfectly what the poetry has said definitely and well.
To put the immature and unspecialized hearer upon the poetic track as
an aid to understanding a piece of music is, therefore, to place him at
a disadvantage, leading him to expect phenomena which he will find only
in literature; just the same as it would be a mistake to intrude pieces
of music as explanations in a course in poetry or imaginative
literature.

There is a time in both cases when these accessory or related provinces
of mind can be called into friendly activity to the advantage of each
other.  In a poetic training this might be at the point where the
motive of the poem is of that vague, mystical character--a mere
soul-mood--which words express so imperfectly; or, in a course of
music, when it is a question of a piece in which the composer has
definitely attempted to express a poetical idea--as happens often in
dramatic music, occasionally in symphonic poems and elsewhere.  Here
the outside help is needed not so much in order to explain the music as
to supplement its shortcomings.  But in the earlier stages of musical
training in this higher sense, purely musical observation (not so much
technical as esthetic) comes first, since without this all our
rhapsodies upon the greater works signify nothing.

In the course of the book there are two essays embodied which are very
important to the true mastery of the material.  They are the essay upon
"Moving Forces in Music," the first chapter, and that upon "The Typical
Forms of Music," at the end of Part I.  The first should be taken up
where it occurs.  The other may be left to the end or introduced at any
stage of the discussion preferred by the student or by the conductor of
the class or club.




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


PART I.

THE MASTERS AND THEIR MUSIC.


CHAPTER I.

MOVING FORCES IN MUSIC


CHAPTER II.

BACH AND HAeNDEL

The importance of Bach in the world of music. Pleasing and
  representative compositions.


CHAPTER III.

HAYDN AND MOZART

The importance of Haydn as the creator of the sonata.


CHAPTER IV.

CHARACTERISTIC MOODS OF BEETHOVEN


CHAPTER V.

BACH, MOZART, AND BEETHOVEN COMPARED


CHAPTER VI.

SCHUBERT AND MENDELSSOHN


CHAPTER VII.

ROBERT SCHUMANN


CHAPTER VIII.

CHOPIN


CHAPTER IX.

BACH, BEETHOVEN, SCHUMANN, AND CHOPIN IN THE DIFFERENT
  PHASES OF THEIR ART


CHAPTER X.

LISZT


CHAPTER XI.

BACH, BEETHOVEN, CHOPIN, SCHUMANN, LISZT


CHAPTER XII.

CONCERNING THE TYPICAL MUSICAL FORMS



PART II.


MODERN MASTERS AND AMERICAN COMPOSERS.


AUTHOR'S NOTE


CHAPTER I.

NATIONALITY IN MUSIC


CHAPTER II.

JOHANNES BRAHMS


CHAPTER III.

EDVARD GRIEG


CHAPTER IV.

RUBINSTEIN AND TSCHAIKOWSKY


CHAPTER V.

THE LATER ROMANTICISTS


CHAPTER VI.

GOTTSCHALK AND MASON


CHAPTER VII.

E. A. MACDOWELL


CHAPTER VIII.

ARTHUR FOOTE AND MRS. H. H. A. BEACH


CHAPTER IX.

MISCELLANEOUS PROGRAM BY AMERICAN COMPOSERS




ILLUSTRATIONS


W. S. G. Mathews . . . . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

Joh. Sebastian Bach, Geo. Fred. Handel

Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang A. Mozart

Ludwig van Beethoven

Franz Schubert, Felix Mendelssohn

Robert Schumann

Frederic Francois Chopin

Franz Liszt




PART I.

THE MASTERS AND THEIR MUSIC.


CHAPTER I.

MOVING FORCES IN MUSIC

The art of music shows the operation of several moving forces, or
motives, which have presented themselves to the composer with
sufficient force to inspire the creation of the works we have.  The
most important of these motives is the Musical Sense itself, since it
is to this we owe the creation of the folk-song, with its pleasing
symmetries, and the greater part of the vast literature of instrumental
music.

Aside from the expression of the musical consciousness as such, the
composer has been moved at times by the motive of Dramatic Expression.
In opera, for example, a great deal of the music has for its object to
intensify the feeling of the scene.  Accordingly, the composer
carefully selects those combinations and sequences of tones which in
his opinion best correspond with the dramatic moment they are intended
to accompany.  And since many of these moments are of extreme
intensity, even tragic in character, very strong and intense
combinations of tones are sometimes employed, such as could not be
justified in an instrumental composition to be played independently of
any illustrative scenery or story.

There is a third motive of composition which also has had a large place
in the development of instrumental music--viz., the Expression of the
Individual Mood of the Composer; and the further we come down in the
history of music, the more unrestricted we find the operation of this
motive.

In the order of development, the purely musical is entitled to the
first place; and it has also been the principal moving cause in the
development of the art of music, from its universality--its power to
act upon all grades of musical consciousness according to the ability
of the individual musician.  For example, the desire to realize in
tones agreeable symmetries of rhythm and strong antitheses of melodic
sequence has given rise to the folk songs, all of which operate upon
what are now very elementary lines, since they never exceed very simple
and obvious rhythmic proportions and the most common chords of the key.

Recent investigations of the music of barbarous and half-civilized
tribes show that the attainment of symmetry in the folk-song is a
somewhat late experience.  In many of the songs of the American
Indians, for example, the first phrase moves practically along the
track of the common chord; the second phrase frequently repeats the
first, and in some instances the repetition goes on indefinitely
without any answer or conclusion.  In other cases a second phrase
follows along the track of a closely related chord, but I have never
noticed a case in which a third phrase appeared, corresponding to the
first, after a digression of the second phrase into another chord.
Generally the rhythm runs out with a series of what might be called
inarticulate drum-beats, as if an impulse existed still unsatisfied,
blindly making itself felt in these insignificant pulsations; an
impulse which a finer melodic sense would have satisfied by the proper
antithesis in relation to the first phrase, thus leaving the melody and
the rhythm to complete themselves together, as always takes place in
civilized music.

The art of music seems to be an evolution from the sense of number and
the feeling for the common chord, combined with a certain fondness for
reverie, which in the earlier stages of the art was perhaps
semi-religious in character, and in the later stages is more nearly
related to the dance, until finally, in the highest stage, it is a
reverie of the beautiful or the pathetic, pure and simple.  The
existence of the harmonic sense in rude natures, where music has not
been heard, seems very difficult to account for, since, while it is
true that any resonant tone contains the partial tones constituting the
common chord, a resonant tone is very seldom heard among rude
surroundings; and the discovery of the instinct of barbarous melodies
to work themselves along the track of the chord is one of those
unexpected finds of modern investigation which, while at first seeming
to explain many things, are themselves excessively difficult to account
for.

In a sense, there is no difference in kind between the folk-song and
the most complete and highly organized art-music; that is to say, both
alike are primarily due to the operation of simple musical instincts
working off along the track of rhythmic proportion and harmonic
relation.  The vast difference in the grade of the results attained is
due to the capacity of the composers.  The simple man giving himself up
to reverie and being gifted with a certain amount of musical feeling,
produces a commonplace melody of serious import or of lively rhythm
according to the nature of the reverie in which he indulges.  This is
to him a complete expression of his mood, and it is received as such by
others in like state.

A Bach, a Beethoven, or a Schumann, giving himself up to tonal reverie,
will also arrive at more or less symmetrical melodic forms
proportionate to the mood of the composer and the idea which he is
seeking to bring to expression; but instead of his reverie terminating
at the end of one or two periods, as is invariably the case with the
simple man (an additional idea having to be sought with much diligence
and imperfect success), he goes on for a series of periods, and perhaps
develops a quite long discourse, all having relation to the simple
conception with which he started and to a fundamental mood.  It is
evident that, owing to the time consumed in writing out a musical
discourse, the high composer will not have been able to complete his
composition, or at least the written expression of it, at a single
sitting; and upon examining it we do, in fact, find it to consist of
successive chapters or paragraphs, each one of which might be taken as
the expression of a mood, and all having reference to the central mood
underlying the beginning, which by the arrangement of material
necessarily becomes the characteristic mood of the entire work.

Moreover, Bach, Beethoven, or Schumann, in bringing their tonal mood to
expression, will permit themselves all sorts of freedom in bringing
together unexpected motives, rhythms, or chords, and the result,
consequently, will be of a very different character from that attained
by the composer of simple pieces, and will, therefore, be intelligible
to those only who have the musical capacity to realize these more
remote and less obvious relations.

Our composer also will have embraced in his tonal reverie, or at least
in the extreme moments of it, all those extraordinary means of intense
musical expression which the dramatic composer may have found out in
his effort to represent the tragic and extreme moments of dramatic
complication.  And thus the tendency of the musical art is constantly
toward the complex, and toward the bringing together of relations so
subtle as to have been unintelligible to earlier musicians, and
unintelligible now, at first hearing, to common ears, lacking in these
finer perceptions of advanced musical endowment.  It is to be noticed,
however, that these extraordinary combinations and relations of the
advanced composer occur only at remote intervals in the works of any of
the great masters.  The extremely intense or dramatic or tragic is not
the staple of human life.  They are incidents in a checkered and
tempest-tossed existence, and the music representing these moods is
also a little outside the range of the purely beautiful.

In one department of the higher art of music--viz., that of
symphony--there has been a working-out of the taste for the symmetric,
the well proportioned, and the agreeable sounding; in other words, the
beautiful as to proportion, charm of melody, and the satisfactory in
harmony.  In symphony the tragic and the extremely dramatic have had
but a limited realization, while the purely beautiful in tonal relation
has been the main creative motive.  This we find in Mozart and
Beethoven to a remarkable degree.

The general color of instrumental music, or its increasing complexity
and high flavor, has been very much influenced by the writers of songs,
as well as by the dramatic composers writing for the stage.  There have
been a few great geniuses in the art of music who, while gifted with a
wide musical fantasy of their own, have taken pleasure in deriving
their inspiration from poetry, and have occupied a large part of their
time as creative composers in setting to music such lyric texts as
interested them.  In this way Schubert, for example, wrote something
like 700 songs, Schumann a considerable number, and there have been
various other composers who have written extensively in this line.  The
experience of the song-writer has, on the whole, been of great use to
instrumental music, since it has tended not alone to diversify the
music by encouraging a freer and more graphic employment of tonal
forms, but also to retain the melody within the compass suitable to the
voice and to preserve the agreeable proportions of phrases, such as we
already find in poetic meters.  Still, the fact remains that for
intensification and for the extravagant element in the higher art of
music, the dramatic composer is the influence mainly to be thanked,
since in opera all these things are done upon so much larger a scale
and with so much greater intensity.

It is not easy in words to point out how extremely large a factor in
art-music is the operation of the unconscious.  Instinct governed the
operation of Bach and Beethoven almost as much as it does the swimming
of the swan or the flying of the pigeon.  For although the instinct of
tonal relations is not one of those universal endowments shared by
every individual to the same degree, there have appeared in the art of
music a series of remarkable geniuses who seem to have had within
themselves the power to turn all kinds of moods and experiences into
musical expression.  What part of this was due to fortunate heredity,
and what to environment, and how much to original genius, pure and
simple, it is impossible to say.  The nature of genius always remains a
mystery.  At the same time, the currency which the music of these
masters has gained in the world, and still maintains, goes to show that
the instinct which governed them in putting together tonal forms for
expressing delight, and for operating upon the feelings of the hearer,
is not different in essence from that of the common listener; since
experience shows that all this music affords gratification to the great
majority of individuals who can be brought to listen to it a few times.
Of course, it is not to be expected that a casual hearer, inattentive,
it may be, and unaccustomed to remembering what he has heard, will be
impressed by a long instrumental composition to the same degree as a
practised hearer, and especially a hearer who has already followed the
composition through several times before; but the longest symphony or
sonata always contains a variety of moments which are intensely
pleasing to the ordinary hearer listening seriously to them for the
first time.  The difference between the casual hearer and the more
cultivated one is that with practice will come a perception of a larger
number of these attractive moments, and finally, at last, the
realization of the entire discourse as a one, having a central idea; in
the same way as in a sermon a casual hearer notices here and there an
idea which strikes him; then he goes off into reverie, and is only
recalled by some other striking idea which attracts his attention,
while the trained hearer may have followed the discourse entirely, and
found it interesting from first to last.

Moreover, the repeated experience of hearing brings out in ordinary
listeners a capacity which they had not previously realized--viz., the
experience of feeling in connection with the music.  We are still very
far from understanding the relation between music and feeling.  The
most that is known about it as yet is that to a listener of even a very
slight amount of experience the minor chord suggests unhappiness, while
the major chord sounds brighter and more agreeable; a pleasant rhythm,
somewhat lively, betokens cheerfulness; a slow and heavy rhythm
betokens seriousness, perhaps sadness; but beyond this elementary
beginning of musical feeling, which is common to the most
insignificantly endowed individuality, there is a vast world of finer
sensibilities connected with music.  A certain chord, or succession of
chords, or especially a certain melo-harmonic phrase, touches the
sensitive ear with a peculiar thrill, and this happens over and over
again, and continually in the more fortunate works of all the great
masters, when followed by sympathetic hearers.  The point in this
connection which we have to notice is that the capacity of feeling to
be touched and awakened by tonal incitations is practically universal
as regards civilized man.  The extent of the influence which music will
exert varies enormously in individual cases, but from the fact that
every normal hearer will be touched more and more by music with a
little practice in hearing it; that the number of those who are
extremely sensitive to this form of spiritual suggestion is much larger
than is ordinarily supposed; and from the fact of this capacity in the
average individual, and the universality of the admiration awakened by
the works of the great geniuses in music, it is a fair conclusion that
the future is destined to throw more light upon this obscure part of
the psycho-musical capacity of mankind; and it is obvious, as said
before, that the great geniuses whose works are demonstrated to contain
this power to touch hearers had this endowment in an extraordinary
degree, but not to such a degree as need place any bar upon the popular
appreciation of their music, if a comparatively small amount of
education has been given in hearing.

To sum up, then, the results arrived at in this discussion.  The
programs and discussions now about to be undertaken have been arranged
for the purpose of assisting the listener to a recognition of the
peculiarities and individual charms of the works of the masters
represented, and also, incidentally, to afford the listener a certain
education in the art of hearing, and, by bringing together strongly
contrasted musical moments, to afford the musical feeling a strong
incitation, in the hope of awakening in every listener this capacity of
musical delight, when the sense of the beautiful and of the expressive
is appealed to through exquisite tonal incitation.

All the music in these chapters, without exception, has been created
upon musical grounds, since it is the instinctive following out of
musical ideas which has operated through the greater part of them,
while the pursuit of the highly dramatic and strongly marked has had
but a small influence.

The higher musical fancy has many ways of expressing itself or of
elaborating musical ideas, but there are two of its characteristic
modes which the student will do well to observe at the start.  These
are what I call the "thematic" and the "lyric."  The ordinary
folk-song, which starts off with a melodic phrase, this phrase being
partly answered, followed by a third phrase like the first, and then a
final answer, is the general type of the lyric moment.  The thematic is
generally based upon a short phrase or melodic figure, and this figure
is repeated over and over in a variety of ways and different chords and
the like until a complete idea is formed from it.  These two modes of
construction are traced at greater length in the concluding essay in
this work on "The Typical Musical Forms," and the student will do well
to fortify himself from time to time by reference to that chapter.

In all the programs of this course there is one caution which the
student will do well to observe: All kinds of technical analysis of
art-works put the hearer in a mood essentially different from that
necessary for properly enjoying the works as art.  Every art work is
intended to awaken an artistic delight after its kind.  In painting, a
delight in form and color, and in some a kind of suggestion or story by
means of them.  In music, a delight in tone and tonal relations and
rhythm, and always a sense of tonal beauty, with a strong flavor of
feeling awakened by means of them.  This entire expression of musical
masterworks belongs to the unconscious operation of mind, and the
hearer who occupies himself with the effort to recognize all the
various devices and artifices of the composer, and to follow the form
as such, or who occupies himself mainly with the idea of the story
which the composer is trying to tell, puts himself in a wrong attitude
for deriving the most complete gratification from the work.  In a
cultivated realization of the beauty of a great musical masterwork,
these perceptions of technical skill on the part of the composer no
doubt enter to some degree, but they are always more or less in the
background, and form a part of the actual pleasure of hearing the
symphony or the sonata scarcely more than the capital initials and
punctuation marks enter into the enjoyment of a poem.  All the
incidents of punctuation and typography we take instinctively, and are
conscious of them only when some one of them is missing and an error
exists in the work.  This is the case with music.  Symmetry and flow of
imagination are presupposed.  Hence, whatever analyses may be made in
the class as a part of the operation of studying these different
master-works, the end to be sought by the student is the enjoyment of
the work as music; to take an active and lively pleasure in the melody;
to feel the harmony and the rhythm; to enjoy the contrast of the
different moods, and so on.  Every piece in the entire list is a voice
in which the composer speaks to us, and the question is not the How,
but the What.




CHAPTER II.

BACH AND HAeNDEL.


JOHANN SEBASTIAN BACH.

  Born March 21, 1685, at Eisenach.
  Died July 28, 1750, in Leipsic.

Johann Sebastian Bach was the son of the city musician of Eisenach, and
a descendant of about ten generations of musical Bachs.  His father
having died when the boy was young, the latter's brother, Johann
Christoph, gave him lessons for some time, after which he studied with
other masters of considerable celebrity, and at the age of seventeen he
was engaged as violinist in the private orchestra of Prince John Ernst,
of Saxe-Weimar.  He held this place, however, for but a few months,
leaving it to accept a more desirable one as organist in the new church
at Arnstadt.  During the time he held this position he made several
journeys on foot to Luebeck to hear the famous Buxtehude play, and later
paid the same compliment to another eminent organist.  The most
important of the early positions which Bach held was that of director
of chamber music, and organist to the Duke of Saxe-Weimar, and here,
after seven years' service, he was made chief concertmeister.  In 1717
he left Weimar to accept a position as musical director at Koethen,
where he had a better opportunity to express himself with orchestra.
In 1723 be became cantor of the St. Thomas School at Leipsic and music
director of the university, as the successor of Johannes Kuhnau.  In
this position he had the direction of the music in the St. Thomas
Church, where he had at his disposal an orchestra, organ, and two
choirs, besides which he trained the school-children.  He here wrote an
enormous amount of church music, consisting of a very large number of
cantatas for church service, of which first and last he seems to have
produced five entire series for every festival Sunday in the year.
These cantatas were short oratorios consisting of choruses, solos,
recitatives, instrumental movements, and were frequently of
considerable elaboration.  Many of them are now lost, but a very
considerable number remain.  He also composed five oratorios for the
Good Friday season--Passion music--of which three yet remain, the most
famous one being the "St. Matthew's Passion."

[Illustration: Joh. Sebastian Bach, Geo. Fred. Haendel]

Bach was married twice, and had, in all, eleven sons and nine
daughters, of whom six sons and four daughters survived him.  As a
practical musician Bach excelled upon the violin, the organ, and the
clavier, and he left a very large number of works in all three of these
departments, works which still remain the admiration of musicians the
world over.  His genius was unquestioned in his own lifetime, and the
memory of it remained lively even during the fifty years following his
death when very few of his works were accessible.

The most complete biography of Bach is the large work by Spitta, in
three volumes, in which the entire life-history of this great master,
and all the circumstances amid which he worked, his discouragements,
and what he accomplished, have been traced with most patient and loving
care.

The list of Bach's compositions includes three sonatas and three
partitas (generally classed as six sonatas) for violin alone; six
sonatas for violin and piano, a large quantity of chamber music of one
sort and another, a few orchestral suites, and about ten large volumes
of music for the clavier and for the organ.



GEORG FRIEDRICH HAeNDEL.

  Born February 23, 1685, at Halle.
  Died April 14, 1759, in London.

Haendel was the son of a surgeon and it was the wish of his father to
educate him to his own profession, but the inclination to music was so
strong that it was impossible to prevent him from following it, and,
accordingly, he had the best training it was possible to get in the
vicinity.  When the boy was eleven years old he was taken to Berlin and
placed under the instruction of Bononcini and Ariosti, Italian music
being then the style at the Prussian court.  At the age of sixteen
young Haendel had obtained a position as organist, and he was also a
fine clavecin player and a good violinist.  A few years later we find
him at Hamburg, where he played the clavecin in the orchestra and was
sometimes conductor.  Here he produced several operas--"Nero,"
"Daphne," "Florindo," "Almira"--with so much success that in 1707 he
made a journey to Italy for further perfecting himself in the Italian
style.  Accordingly he spent some months in Florence, three months in
Rome, thence back to Florence to produce a new opera, and by the new
year of 1708 he was in Venice, where his second Italian opera,
"Agrippina," was produced.  From Venice he went again to Rome, where he
wrote two short oratorios for Cardinal Ottoboni.

He had already made the acquaintance in Venice of Scarlatti, Corelli,
and of Antonio Lotti.  He accompanied the Scarlattis to Naples and
remained with them about a year, and there was great rivalry in regard
to the harpsichord playing of Haendel and Domenico Scarlatti.  This
success made Haendel's name so celebrated that it led to his being
invited to London, where he went in 1712 to bring out some operas.  He
liked London so well that he remained there all the rest of his life.
During a part of this time he was himself the manager of the opera,
importing his principal singers from Italy, producing his own operas as
well, occasionally, as those by other composers, and experiencing in
the vocation of manager the vicissitudes well known to attend it.  He
made and lost several fortunes; but finally, at his death, had paid up
all claims against him and left to charity a very handsome estate.

In London he produced a large number of operas, and then, about 1733,
he began to compose oratorios, and in 1741 produced the "Messiah,"
which had a great success.  He also composed a large amount of
instrumental music, and was very famous as an organist.  He composed a
large number of concertos for organ with orchestra, and he was in the
habit of playing a new organ concerto in the intermission of an
oratorio.

The number of Haendel's works is extremely large.  All his operas are
now forgotten.  Nevertheless individual fragments remain, such as the
famous alto air, "Lascio Pianga," and many others.  From his
instrumental works also many charming bits have survived and still
please the public, such, for instance, as the famous "Largo."  Of the
oratorios, his greatest are the "Messiah" and "Israel in Egypt."  The
most complete biography of Haendel is that by Chrysander.

    *    *    *    *    *

In order to appreciate the importance of Bach and Haendel in the history
of music, it is necessary to know something of the condition of the
world of music when they commenced to work in it.  The music-making of
the world at that time had come from three original sources, and, in
spite of the vast increase in the number of composers and in the volume
of musical production, these streams had been kept, and still remained,
almost entirely distinct from each other.

At the foundation of all the art of music lies the folk-song--simple
melodies which spring up in every country and are easily learned, and
pass from one to another until they become current over large extents
of territory.  The folk-song had its origin, most likely, in the dance;
and the dance, in turn, was an artistic evolution from the cadenced
chant, accompanied by a measured march, with which the early religious
services were performed.  The folk-song of the nation naturally
disposed itself in the tonality most esteemed by the people, and,
accordingly, we find in some countries that most of the folk-songs are
in major tonality, while in others minor tonality prevails; the rhythm
being determined by the favorite dancing step of the people.  Thus, in
Germany, many of the folk-songs are waltzes; in Spain, seguidillas; and
in Italy, tarantellas.  The making of folk-songs must have gone on
continually through the spontaneous creation of new melodies by gifted
but untaught musicians in all parts of the musical world.  These
melodies were seldom written down, but were passed from one to another
orally; and down to the time of Haendel and Bach very little recognition
of the folk-song as a possible element in art had been accorded by any
trained musician.  This is not the place to trace the evolution of the
folk-song into more and more symmetrically disposed phrases and
agreeable relations of tonality.  Enough to say that from the rather
slow and minor songs of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, folk-song
had blossomed out until, in the time of Bach, it had come to express
very much of the simple delights and sorrows of the natural people.

At the opposite extreme from the folk-song were the operations of the
thoroughly trained composer.  While the folk-song developed itself
entirely by ear,--and the ear and feeling of the untaught musician were
his sole guide in the production of an agreeable melody,--the trained
composer for many centuries entirely disregarded the testimony of the
ear, or admitted it in only a slight degree.  His principal care was to
carry out the rules which he had been taught; and in following this
tradition,--the operation of which was almost entirely unchecked by the
musical sense properly so called,--the tendency was constantly toward
greater and greater elaboration, since only in elaboration could the
mastery of the composer be shown.  The art of combining tones had been
handed down for some centuries almost entirely in the form of what is
known as counterpoint, in which the relation of each voice melody to
the others was more considered than the chords resulting as the voices
moved from one tone to another.  This art had its origin apparently in
France, and the most promising of the early compositions we know were
those produced at the Sorbonne about the eleventh century.  By the
thirteenth or fourteenth century the pre-eminence had been transferred
to the Low Countries, and the Netherlands became the great hothouse of
contrapuntal development.

This tendency to extravagant display of learning manifested itself in
the Netherlanders in almost every department; and whoever will read the
accounts of their receptions and festivals, with the elaborate Latin
poems and processions which attended the ceremonies, will find in the
music of those times the same qualities brought to expression.
Nevertheless, the ear could not be entirely ignored, and now and then a
master arose with genius and musical intuition necessitating his
pruning his compositions more or less in accordance with the dictates
of the ear; and thus there were such masters as Adrian Willaert, who
founded a school in Venice somewhere about 1500, and Orlando di Lasso,
who founded that in Munich at about the same time.  Among the
multitudinous works of these men are many which are simple, or at least
musical in the proper sense.  Nevertheless, as yet, simplicity in this
so-called high art was accidental and momentary, and complication was
the rule of its being and the measure of its power.

The complication of the works of the contrapuntal school almost passes
belief.  All kinds of imitations, canons, and fugal devices; inversions
of motives, so that an ascending melody was transformed into a
descending melody and vice versa; the enlargement or augmentation of a
motive by doubling or quadrupling the length of each one of its tones;
the diminution of a motive by shortening its tones to a quarter of
their original value; modification by repeating its rhythm in the
chromatic scale in place of the melodic intervals of the original
figure, and even to the extent of reversing motives, so that the
melodic steps were made in reversed order from the end to the
beginning;--and in the midst of all this elaboration the composer or
the trained listener of the time was supposed to enjoy not alone the
music as such, but all these complicated devices of the composer.

When these things had been carried out in movements having as many as
sixteen voice parts, which was not a phenomenally large number at that
time, two results unexpected by the composer almost necessarily came
about.  The first of these was the production of chord successions
which could be felt by the hearer only as such, since sixteen real
parts moving within the three octaves of choral compass were
necessarily obliged to cross each other continually, whereby the
contour of the different voice melodies became lost in the mixture, and
only the chords and chord successions came to realization.  In this
way, perhaps, the perception of harmonic good and evil was very much
forwarded where nothing of the kind had been intended.  The other
result was the practical exhaustion of all these artificial resources
for conveying an impression of power in a composer.  When everything
had been done that could be done, the new composer necessarily had to
take a different path and arrive in some other way; otherwise he became
merely a repeater of what had been done before.

All the scientific composition up to about the middle of the sixteenth
century had been designed for voices, and the great bulk of it for the
service of the Church.  Presently, however, a distinctly secular music
began to be developed, in which, very naturally, lighter principles of
composition prevailed.  Thus arose a great literature of madrigals,
which generally were love-songs or glees, containing many of the
devices of the extremely well-taught composer already mentioned, but
also having in them a lively rhythm and a pleasant quality which, even
after the lapse of three centuries and more, still has power to impress
and please our ears.  A little later an instrumental music of the
cultivated kind began to be developed.  The two Gabriellis, in Venice,
wrote various kinds of organ pieces of a semi-secular flavor; the
violin found its form, and, by the beginning of the sixteenth century,
had become an instrument somewhat highly esteemed.  The principal
instrument still in use among the people, however, was the lute, which
had taken the place of the harp, and both these instruments naturally
tended to develop a taste for chords, since chords were what might be
called their "natural product."

About the year 1600 a new department of musical creation was opened in
the discovery of opera.  This great form of art, which has now attained
so much importance, was an accidental evolution from the effort to
recover the Greek drama, in which, owing to the size of the theaters,
the lines were chanted or intoned rather than spoken, in order that the
voice might carry farther.  The first operatic composers sought only a
clear expression of the declamation, and intended to give their written
notes similar effects to those which a speaker's voice would produce in
the emphatic delivery of the sentiments and words of the text.
Accordingly, the first opera had no melody, properly so called; but
almost immediately, in 1608, there appeared a genius in this new form
of composition, Monteverde, who not only introduced melodies, but also
made a very intelligent use of harmony, and, above all, showed himself
the founder of modern instrumentation by placing the violin at the head
of the orchestra.  Then ensued in Italy a century of the most animated
musical productivity the world has ever seen.  Operas followed each
other from a great variety of composers, and opera-houses were erected
in all the principal cities; opera was played everywhere, sometimes by
the support of princes and sometimes by the support of the people
themselves.

The development of opera was the most important creative inspiration
which had ever come into the art of music, since, in the nature of the
case, everything was new.  What the music sought to do almost
immediately, beginning with Monteverde himself in his opera "Tancred,"
was to represent the feeling of the dramatic moment.  Almost at the
very first they began to use music in the melodramatic way for
accompanying the critical moments of the action, when the performers
were not singing, and the forms of the singing utterance differentiated
themselves into recitatives for the explanatory parts and arias for the
more impassioned moments; and then, very soon, there came ensemble
pieces, in which several performers sang together.

Thus all kinds of emotional situations were presented to music for
representation and comment, and thus, upon the expressive side, music
received the highest possible stimulation.  At the same time, through
the competition of composers for pleasing the ear, there was an ever
increasing tendency toward symmetry and graceful forms.  And so the
aria became, after a little, a piece of vocal display, often entirely
opposed to the action, and sometimes foreign to the genius of the
scene; still, it was heard for the sake of the pleasure which people
have in a skilfully managed voice.  Toward the end of this century,
somebody, whose name I do not at this moment recall, began to introduce
into opera occasional moments of which the people's song was the type;
short movements which did not aim at display or at immense dramatic
expression, but sought to please by simplicity alone.  In this way,
through the desire of the operatic composers to avail themselves as far
as possible of the technical resources of composition acquired by the
learned musicians of the contrapuntal schools, and to please their
hearers and to astonish them in various ways, all the different forces
in music began to exercise themselves and come to expression in opera;
but as yet nothing of the sort had made any great progress in
instrumental music.

Thus we come to the period of Bach and Haendel, both of whom began to
write shortly after 1700.  In the working out of their respective
talents, both these composers show their well-schooled musicianship,
according to all the learning of the contrapuntal schools--but with
very important differences.  Haendel had all his life a predilection for
diatonic tonality, and it is very rarely indeed that he deals with the
chromatic at all, and never with the enharmonic.  All the music in
which he best expressed himself was written for voices, and as a master
of vocal effect he still holds a distinguished position, particularly
in the creation of compositions in which a large number of voices can
be effectively massed.  He also had a distinct flavor of the folk-song
in many of his melodies, and in some instances the folk-song is the
entire work.  Such, for instance, is the case in "See, the Conquering
Hero Comes," in "Joshua," and in several of the short instrumental
movements in "Joshua," "Solomon," and his other oratorios.

Bach, on the other hand, was of a much more intensely organized musical
temperament.  His genius was of the greatest possible character.  As a
virtuoso he not only played upon the organ, the clavecin, and the
violin better than most of his contemporaries, and upon the organ
probably better than any; he also created works in these three
departments which held the attention of his own time to an astonishing
degree, considering the meager means of communication among men, works
which still remain, in our time, the indispensable corner-stones of the
literature of these three instruments.  The violinist gets a large part
of his mastery through the sonatas of Bach for violin solo, the
organist learns his art from Bach, and the pianist finds "The
Well-tempered Clavier," and many other works of Bach written for the
clavecin of indispensable importance for the development of intelligent
playing.

The peculiar importance of Bach to modern music lies in the delicacy of
his sense upon the harmonic side and upon his intuition of the
emotional value of musical combinations.  In the form of his work he
always more or less resembled his predecessors, the fugue underlying,
probably, something more than half of all the music he wrote.  But he
also showed a strong tendency to impart to his work the vivacity of the
folk-song and the expressive melodic quality which he had already found
in the violin.  Owing to his intensely sensitive harmonic perceptions,
he was never able to confine himself for long to the more obvious
chords of the key.  The diatonic chords and combinations in which
Haendel found an ever complete satisfaction are not sufficient for Bach,
and we find continually new chords, evasive cadences, and a flowing
continuity of thought belonging to the master mind.

Hence to the ordinary student there are two difficulties in the way of
appreciating and enjoying Bach.  The first one is the somewhat antique
flavor of much that he wrote, for it is now almost two hundred years
since many of Bach's compositions were completed; and the second is
this sensitive and evasive harmonic fancy, which surpasses the capacity
of untrained hearers.  Hence, such works as the recitatives in the
"Chromatic Fantasia," the beautiful modulations and changes in the
organ Fantasia in G minor, and scores of other passages that might be
mentioned in the larger works of Bach, are the legitimate pleasure of
advanced musicians or of those especially gifted; but there is a whole
world of Bach which lies nearer, within our reach, and it is this more
accessible part of the land of Beulah that the present program will
approach.

The importance of Bach in the world of art is further attested by the
inspiration which he has been to all great composers since his time.
In this respect he is the musician's musician _par excellence_.  There
has never yet appeared a master so advanced as not to find delight in
the works of Bach, and in the opinion of many, all things considered,
he was the most richly endowed genius who has ever adorned the art of
music.


  PROGRAM.

  Invention in C major.  From the Two-part Inventions.  No. 1.
  Invention in F major.  From the Two-part Inventions.  No. 8.
  Saraband in D minor.  Fifth English Suite.
  Loure in G major.  Heinze.  Third 'Cello Suite.
  Song, "My Heart Ever Faithful."
  Preamble in E major.  Sixth Violin Sonata.  Heinze.
  Saraband in E minor.  Fifth English Suite.
  Gavotte in E major.  Tours.  Sixth Violin Sonata.
  Cradle song, from the Christmas Oratorio.
  Prelude and Fugue in C minor.  Clavier.  Book I, No. 2.
  "Hope in the Lord."  Arranged by William Mason from the celebrated
      Largo.  Haendel.
  Menuet in D major.  First 'Cello Suite.  Heinze.
  Gavotte in B minor.  Saint-Saens.


(All the instrumental pieces of this program except the two inventions
and the Tours arrangement of the Gavotte in E are in the "Bach Album,"
Peters edition, No. 1820, fifty cents.  The inventions are in the
Peters edition, fifty cents.  The prelude and fugue in C minor may be
had separately, as also the two songs.)

The conditions of being pleased with this program are that it be played
in a melodious and expressive manner upon a good-toned piano, and that
the songs are reasonably well done.

The selections from Bach in this program are intended to illustrate the
lighter and, so to say, more superficial characteristics of Bach's
music.  Accordingly, the inventions are taken to show his manner of
developing a piece from a single motive, which by many repetitions
remains as a text all through the movement.  The same principle carried
much farther will be found later in Schumann.

The sarabands illustrate Bach's method in slow movements.  These being
written for the clavier, which in Bach's time had little tonal value,
are rather meager in their development, but when played with a very
sincere, melodic quality of tone, and treated exactly like expressive
singing, with the necessary rise and fall of the phrase (varying
intensity, as the idea advances or retrogrades), will always please.
Moreover, while very short, such is the cleverness of their
construction that they interest a musician very much.

The gavottes, being arranged from pieces which Bach wrote for clavier
with other instruments, are naturally more free; both because Bach had
the benefit of a stringed instrument--violin or 'cello--for
intensifying the melody, and because they have been recently arranged
for piano solo, and hence manifest more of the modern treatment of the
piano.

The song, "My Heart Ever Faithful," is really instrumental in its
character.  In the second part the melody lies very badly for the
voice.  It is practically an instrumental piece in which the voice is
the sole instrument.

Owing to the length of the program and the relatively greater
importance of Bach in the development of music, only one selection is
given from Haendel--Dr. William Mason's adaptation of the words, "Hope
in the Lord," to the Haendel largo.  This melody is so well known as not
to require further comment.  In later programs other selections from
Bach will be given which will illustrate the larger aspects of his
style, and, above all, his intense emotionality.  This quality, which
was once popularly denied concerning Bach, is now recognized by all
musical hearers, and it should be brought out in the playing.  Another
essential characteristic of a successful Bach interpretation is the due
observance of the rhythm, which is always admirably organized in Bach's
works.  Rubato must be introduced in a very sparing manner, and always
in such a way as not to destroy the rhythm of the period as a whole.

If the student is disposed to undertake this work seriously, it will be
advantageous to enter into an analysis of one or more of the Bach
selections (or better, perhaps, assign each selection to one member for
study and report), in order to ascertain exactly in what manner he uses
motives to answer each other, when he continues upon the same motive,
and when he branches off with other material.  The inventions will be
easiest for this purpose.  It would be an advantageous exercise to play
the inventions while the hearers note the number of times the leading
idea occurs in each one.  The object of this exercise is to lead
unaccustomed hearers to note the actual musical idea--motive--instead
of remaining passively attentive, taking in the music by contemplation.
The latter attitude of hearing is the one best adapted for receiving
whatever emotional movement there may be in the music; but since the
larger works depend upon the development of musical ideas as such, it
is desirable to acquire the habit of attending to them.  The passive
contemplation may be applied later to more emotional works.  With Bach
the purely musical is the first object of his work.




CHAPTER III.

HAYDN AND MOZART.


FRANZ JOSEPH HAYDN.

  Born April 1, 1732, at Rohrau.
  Died May 31, 1809, in Vienna.

Haydn came of peasant stock, his father being a wheelwright, and the
little Franz Joseph the second of twelve children.  At the age of eight
his beautiful voice attracted the attention of the director of the
choir of St. Stephen's Church in Vienna and he was entered as a choir
boy.  Here he received a thorough training in singing, in clavier, and
violin playing, and also a good education.  When his voice broke he
managed to sustain himself in an honorable way by various subordinate
positions as organist and violinist, playing the organ at an early mass
in one church, the violin at a mass an hour or two later in another
church, and finally, at eleven o'clock perhaps, reaching his principal
position.  Thus for several years he passed an extremely industrious
and fruitful, but unrecognized, existence.

[Illustration: Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang A. Mozart]

As early as 1750 he had written his first string quintette, and soon
after he was twenty years of age he held various positions as musical
director in noblemen's houses.  In 1761--Haydn being now twenty-nine
years of age--he was appointed assistant musical conductor of the
private orchestra of Prince Esterhazy.  The orchestra consisted of
sixteen men.  Five years later the senior director died, and Haydn
became the chief director and remained in this position until 1790,
when, in consequence of the death of the old Prince Esterhazy, his son
discontinued the private orchestra and dismissed Haydn upon a pension
of 1000 florins a year.  He was now invited by a professional manager
to make a visit to England, which he did in 1790-92 and again in
1794-95, conducting many concerts there, and composing for the English
market a series of twelve symphonies for full orchestra, which are now
considered to represent his best work in this line.  Still later he
turned his attention to oratorios and produced his "Seasons" and the
"Creation."

During his long service in the Esterhazy establishment, where he had to
produce a constant succession of new and pleasing music, he had the
opportunity of trying all sorts of combinations and devices, and in
this way he turned out an enormous amount of music, including 125
symphonies, more than 100 compositions for viol da gamba, an instrument
of which the old Prince Esterhazy was very fond, and a variety of music
of almost every kind then practiced.  All of this music reflects
Haydn's character, which was simple, unassuming, kindly, and sincere.
As a composer he must be considered as the first of what we might call
the homophonic writers,--that is to say, he was the father of the
modern free style in which the normal form of the musical idea is that
of a melody and an accompaniment, as distinguished from the style of
Bach, in which the ground form is that of independently moving voices.
The following list will give a better idea of the astonishing range of
Haydn's activity as composer: One hundred and twenty-five symphonies;
20 clavier concertos and divertisements with clavier; 9 violin
concertos; 6 concertos for 'cello, and 16 concertos for other
instruments (contra-bass, baritone, lyra, flute, horn, etc.); 77 string
quartets; 68 trios; 4 violin sonatas; 175 pieces for baritone; 6 duets
for solo violin and viola; 53 works for piano; 7 nocturnes for lyra,
and various other pieces for the same instrument; 14 masses; 2 Te
Deums; 13 offertoriums; 24 operas.



WOLFGANG AMADEUS MOZART.

  Born January 27, 1756, at Salzburg.
  Died December 5, 1791, in Vienna.

Mozart was the son of an excellent musician, and as soon as the boy
began to show his astonishing sensitiveness of ear and bias for music
in every direction, his father commenced to give him instruction.  His
activity as a composer commenced when he could scarcely read, for
before he was five years old he showed his father a manuscript of a
violin concerto which at first the father took to be mere meaningless
marks, but on having them explained by the boy he found there was
indeed a musical idea and, of course, a composition.

When he was about six years old his father decided to take the boy and
his older sister upon a concert tour, which accordingly he did,
visiting the principal courts of Germany, and finally reached Paris
November 18, 1763.  Here his first compositions were printed--four
concertos for violin.  In Paris he was very successful, and the tour
was continued to London, where he published six additional concertos
for violin.  By the time he was ten years of age he had written his
first oratorio, and now when he was upon a concert tour he was met with
skepticism and misrepresentations, the claim being put forward that the
compositions being published under his name had really been written for
him by his father, since it was evident from the face of them that no
boy of his age could have composed so well.  To counteract these
charges poems were brought to him upon which he had to improvise and
fit the music to the words in the presence of the audience.  In 1769 he
went to Italy, where, being now thirteen years of age and
correspondingly mature as compared with his early appearances, he made
a most astonishing success.  In Bologna and in Rome as well as in
Venice he was examined by the most eminent theorists in Italy, and
received memberships in the societies of artists, and the Pope made him
a Knight of the Golden Spur.  His first opera, "Mitridate," was
composed in 1770, Mozart being then fourteen years of age.  The opera
was played twenty times.  In Milan, two years later, he composed his
opera "Lucio Silla," and the same year his opera "Idomeneo," for
Munich.  His other celebrated operas followed in fairly rapid
succession: "Figaro," 1785; "Don Giovanni," 1787; "Cosi fan Tutte,"
1790, and the "Magic Flute" in 1791.  His last was his "Requiem."  The
works of Mozart included thirteen operas, thirty-four songs, forty-one
sonatas, thirty-one divertisements for orchestra.  The best biography
is that by Otto Jahn.

      *      *      *      *      *

The epoch of Haydn is a very important one in art, since it was in his
time, and almost entirely by his own work, that the sonata and
symphony, the two most important forms in modern music, were invented
or discovered and brought to something like definite form.  Practically
speaking, a symphony is merely a sonata written for orchestra; but the
possibilities of orchestral contrasts and changes in the working out of
the part known as "free fantasia" permits the symphonic composer to
conduct his work in larger lines and carry it to a greater length than
is advisable for the composer of sonatas for a single instrument, in
which monotony of tone-color is an element which must not be forgotten.

The "sonata-piece," as the principal movement of the sonata has been
called, is one of the great typical forms in music.  Its greatness lies
in the latitude it permits the composer and the practically unlimited
field it gives for the illustration of musical beauty, contrast,
sweetness, and musical strength in a single composition.  In this
respect it binds up in itself some of the most valuable possibilities
of the entire art of modern composition.  In order to understand what
we are to have in the sonatas of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, some of
the peculiarities of the form need first to be noticed.

The sonata-piece consists practically of three chapters, of which the
third is substantially a repetition of the first, with a few not very
important modifications.  The first chapter contains from two to four
different melodic subjects, of which one comes as principal, and is
substantially of a thematic character.  The second is almost invariably
a lyric subject.  In the sonatas of Mozart and Beethoven some very
lovely melodies will be found in this position.  Between the first and
second subjects modulating periods may appear; and after the second
there is a concluding subject, which brings up to a close at the double
bar, upon the dominant of the principal key.  In the older practice
there is a repeat sign at this point, and the whole of the first part
is gone over again.  In modern practice this repeat is often
disregarded, since the memory of musical ideas appears more lasting in
our day than formerly.  After the double bar comes the great
characteristic opportunity of this form of art-music, in what the
Germans call a working out (Durchfuehrungssatz), in which the composer
makes a free fantasia upon any or all of the material introduced in the
first division of the work, already described.  This working out is
often mere play, rarely rising to a seriousness at all approaching that
of fugue; still, a clever composer manages to afford many attractive
features in this part of a sonata, and still more in the larger
opportunities of symphony.

Haydn is entitled to the credit of having given the sonata-piece its
main characteristics of form.  In this respect it follows the
suggestion of the older "binary form," in which sarabands, gavottes,
and the like were written by Bach.  All of these, being composed upon a
single melodic idea, necessarily had to develop this idea by means of
sequences, imitations, transpositions, and transformations of one sort
and another, employing in this treatment much of the art which fugue
had supplied.  All the pieces in this old binary form come to a half
close at the double bar upon the dominant of the principal key, or upon
the relative major if the principal key be minor.  After the double bar
the development is taken up in the dominant, or in whatever key the
preceding part had ended in.  Later the principal key is resumed and
the work concluded.

Haydn enlarged this form by completing his leading periods generally to
a symmetrical length of eight measures, and by adding a second subject
and a different melodic material for conclusion, both before the double
bar and at the end of the movement.

The style of the Haydn sonata-piece is generally light and pleasing.
Only in a very few cases, and in those for a few measures only, does he
attempt pathos.  Thus the principal movement of the Haydn sonata seems
to have been developed from a dance motive, and the carrying out is
generally done in regular period forms--the form being substantially
verse throughout, the meter regular and not capricious.  Haydn arrived
at this treatment through his natural fondness for symmetry and order,
and through having had for thirty years to produce a constant
succession of interesting pieces, mainly orchestral, primarily designed
to interest and please his princely patron, the old Prince Esterhazy.
The best symphonies of Haydn were written late in life, after he had
been called to London to conduct some new works of his.  The glance
into the outer world, and perhaps the availability of a larger body of
players, gave his ideas a freer scope; and these twelve London
symphonies belong to a higher type than those of his earlier time.

As yet we have not spoken of the lyric melody, which in the Beethoven
sonata forms almost invariably a second subject.  This idea appears to
have been due to Mozart, whose second subjects not only are sweet and
song-like melodies, but many of his first ones as well.  Thus the
Mozart sonata, while excelling that of Haydn in melodiousness and
sweetness, is almost invariably of less musical interest, the
development of a musical thought being rarely considered.  In the few
cases in which Mozart takes a serious mood he succeeds well, notably so
in the famous sonata in C minor, the last one in the volume of his
works.  But in general, particularly in the sonatas, Mozart is
melodious in pure lyric pattern.  These melodies of Mozart, while of
great sweetness and beauty, do not, as a rule, have much depth; they do
not sing from the soul.  The soul has not "seen trouble," as folks say;
it sings with the instinctive sweetness of childhood, and thus fails to
touch the feelings of adults.  The selections following illustrate
these points:


  PROGRAM.

  Sonata in E-flat (entire).  No. 3, Schirmer edition.  Haydn.
  "My Mother Bids Me Bind My Hair."  Canzonetta.  Haydn.
  Sonata in C-sharp minor (entire).  No. 6, Schirmer edition.  Haydn.
  Trio from "The Creation," "Most Beautiful Appear."  Haydn.
    Soprano, tenor, and bass.
  Sonata in F major.  No. 6, Peters edition (first movement).  Mozart.
  Air of Cherubino in "The Marriage of Figaro," "Voi Che Sapete."
    Mozart.
  Sonata in E-flat (first and second movements only).  Schirmer edition,
    No. 1.  Haydn.
  Quintette, "Magic Flute," Mozart.  Scene X, Act I, Andante.  "Drei
    Knaben, Knaebchen jung."
  Aria of Countess from "The Marriage of Figaro," "Dove sono," Mozart.
  Fantasia and Sonata in C minor.  Mozart.
  Trio from "The Creation," "On Thee Each Living Soul Awaits."
      Haydn.


(The copies for this program are as follows: Haydn sonatas, Schirmer
edition, first volume, paper, seventy-five cents.  This is a very
elegant and in every way satisfactory edition for study or for the
library.  Mozart sonatas, Peters edition, $1.50 (retail).  The songs
are to be had separately.  Copies of "The Creation" and "The Magic
Flute" will be necessary.)

The selections above are made for the purpose of illustrating the more
prominent characteristics of the two composers mentioned.  Haydn is now
beginning to be undervalued, and, in fact, his works are used mainly
for purposes of instruction, and comparatively little for that.  This
is unjust, for while Haydn does not belong to the class of composers
whose music is conceived by them as a message to mankind, but rather is
conceived as an intelligent and refined form of delight, he is as
musical as Bach himself, and consequently his music remains fresh and
interesting despite the comparatively small forms.  This will be
noticed in every one of the sonatas selected here.  The Sonata in
E-flat, No. 3, is the one oftenest selected and studied, because it
shows Haydn in his most genial mood.  The spirit is bright, pleasing,
fresh, and not a little vigorous.  Practically, every single movement
of a Haydn sonata is developed mainly out of one leading motive.  In
the present instance there is a second idea, of a quasi-lyric
importance, introduced in the thirteenth measure--counting each measure
from the first bar.  In the forty-third measure a closing theme is
introduced.  The places are marked in the Schirmer copies, so there
will be no difficulty in finding them.  The second movement, if played
in a very singing but not dragging manner, will be found enjoyable,
although by no means sensational.  The ideas are musical and the spirit
earnest.  The finale, in the tempo of a minuet, is very pleasing
indeed.  Here, also, the purely musical idea rules everything.  The
problem with the composer is to treat an idea which pleased him, and to
carry it through all the changes and modifications which occurred to
him as attractive.

The Sonata in C-sharp minor (No. 6, Schirmer) is more significant, and
approximates the spirit of later works in the same key.  The principal
subject has a great deal of vigor, and the musical treatment is very
fresh and original.  The scherzando which follows is a very light
movement, and needs to be played with great delicacy and spirit.  The
whole concludes with a menuetto, moderate in movement, song-like.

To my mind the strongest of the Haydn sonatas is the one which stands
first in the Schirmer edition, also in E-flat, a favorite key with
Haydn.  The principal subject is very forcible, and the treatment
varied to a degree.  The whole work is one which a musician can play
many times through, and always with enjoyment.

The second movement has the remarkable peculiarity of being in the key
of E major--a violent modulatory relation to that of the first
movement.  I should say that this fact indicated that Haydn did not
conceive of the three movements of the sonata as constituting a single
whole, because if he had he could not have followed a close in E-flat
major with an opening in E major, exactly a semitone higher, without
the slightest modulation.  This proceeding is inexplicable to me, if he
expected the sonata to be played through entire at a single hearing.
The slow movement, however, is a very strong one, the subject full of
musical feeling, and the treatment clever and interesting.  All the
melodic passages in this movement need to be sung with great feeling.
Then the contrast with the lighter portions will produce their proper
effect.  The finale, presto, is a very light and, one might almost say,
insignificant movement, relieved only by a few moments of something
better.

The Mozart collections are calculated to show the peculiar and womanly
sweetness which Mozart introduced into music.  In Haydn, moments of
sweetness do indeed occur, and in his "Creation" they are frequent; but
in his instrumental works they are not so frequent.  The Sonata in F,
of Mozart, is full of pleasing melodic ideas, and the first and second
periods and the first episode are all very attractive melodies.  Note
that each of these ideas comes in the form of a fully completed melody,
and not in the form of a musical motive of one, or at most two,
phrases.  Each of the Mozart subjects is eight measures long.  The
characteristic tone of the Mozart sonatas is this melodic sweetness,
and the stronger parts only intensify this fundamental tone.  The slow
movement is rather meager, but it is also pleasing and well made.  The
so-called "Alberti" bass should be played in such a manner as to
minimize the motion of the sixteenths, and to intensify the chord
feeling.  This will be done by playing softly with the left hand,
bearing down a little, and using the pedal with every chord, except
where it will mix up the melody.

The Fantasia and Sonata of Mozart, which concludes the program, is a
work which is well worth studying.  The fantasia opens with a very
serious subject, which is carried through a variety of delightful
changes, in a manner indicating a poetic intention.  The expression
must be carefully observed in the playing, and in the elaboration,
where the subject occurs in several keys in connection, the first tone
is taken rather strong and with a slight dwelling upon it.  The slow
melody in D major, as well as the adagio in E-flat, illustrate Mozart's
faculty with sweet and rather deep melodies which, while perfectly
simple in structure, nevertheless have in them the soul of the artist.
The tone has to be full, round, singing, and never loud.  There are
parts of the fantasia which do not come up to the level of the others;
particularly the allegro in G minor, which is inconvenient to play, and
almost never played in a musical manner.  It has, however, to be gotten
over the best one can.

The vocal selections are of peculiar attractiveness.  The canzonetta of
Haydn, "My Mother Bids Me Bind My Hair," is a fresh, girlish affair,
which can not fail to please.  The trio, "Most Beautiful Appear," is so
sweet that Mozart might have written it.

Then in the Mozart selections, the "Dove sono" is an aria requiring to
be sung with a very pure tone and good style.  All of Mozart's operatic
arias were intended for well-trained Italian singers having a refined
and high-bred style of singing.  When so done, they are always
delightful.  The Cherubino air is very fresh, and full of the charm of
youth and love.  The trio of girls from "The Magic Flute" is given
because it is so taking, while involving a succession of implied
consecutive fifths.  And the great trio, "On Thee Each Living Soul
Awaits," concludes the concert in a noble manner.  If the resources of
the local society should happen to make it easy, it will afford an
admirable close to give along with this trio the two choruses,
"Achieved is the Glorious Work."

It is to be understood that the selections here offered from these two
great masters illustrate but a small part of their individualities.
The selection has been determined by the convenience of copies and the
likelihood of the resources in every place being equal to their
acceptable performance.




CHAPTER IV.

CHARACTERISTIC MOODS OF BEETHOVEN.


LUDVIG VAN BEETHOVEN.

  Born December 16, 1770, at Bonn.
  Died March 26, 1827, in Vienna.


Beethoven was the son of a very dissipated tenor singer of the chapel
of the Elector of Cologne, and the family had been musical for several
generations.  The boy learned to play the viola and violin as well as
the piano while he was still very young indeed, and by the age of
eleven was regularly engaged as viola player in the orchestra and had
gained such proficiency upon the piano that it was popularly said of
him that he could have played a good part of Bach's "Well-tempered
Clavier" by heart.  While still but a lad he succeeded informally to
the post of assistant conductor of the orchestra, and it was his duty
to prepare the music for the men, making the abridgments, emendations,
and rearrangements that might be advisable to adapt old music to the
then modern orchestra.  In this way he gained, no doubt, much of his
marvelous acquaintance with orchestral effect.  When he was fifteen he
was regularly appointed organist to the private chapel of the Elector,
and he was left in charge of the orchestra for months together in the
absence of the head director, Neefe.

[Illustration: Ludwig van Beethoven]

He began to compose by the time he was ten, but he did not manifest any
especial precocity in this direction: his published compositions with
opus number contain only one movement, it is believed, which he wrote
before he was twenty or twenty-one years of age.  After the death of
his father he was left, as he had been practically for some years
before, the responsible head of the family, with the care of his mother
and his younger brothers.  He remained in Bonn, with one visit to
Vienna in 1787, until he was about twenty-two years of age, when he
left Bonn definitely and took up his abode in Vienna.  Here he studied
with the best masters attainable--Haydn, then in his prime, Salieri,
and others.  His first published compositions with opus numbers--three
trios--date from the Vienna time.

In Vienna he lived all the remainder of his life--about thirty-five
years.  In the earlier part of this period he was considered one of the
great pianoforte virtuosi of his time; his playing was distinguished
for force, strong contrasts, musical quality, and, above all, pathetic
expression.  Czerny states that it was not unusual for a company of the
Viennese aristocracy to be affected to tears by the playing of this
master.  His published works were generally criticized as being too
bold and unconventional.

As Beethoven had the fortune to live to quite a good age, he gradually
established his position with regard to the earlier compositions,
inasmuch as by repeated hearings they sooner or later commended
themselves to the critics as well as to the public; but by the time
this had come to pass with the works of a certain period, he had
advanced and composed others, which now in turn succeeded to the charge
of being too advanced and forced.  These in turn were later on
accepted, only to leave a still later stratum of his compositions under
the same condemnation which had been the portion of the earlier works.

Nevertheless, the want of recognition of Beethoven by his
contemporaries has been greatly overrated.  He enjoyed a fairly
comfortable income, as such things went among the middle-class Viennese
of his time, and during most of his career he was esteemed to be
probably the most eminent composer living.

As compared with the works of Haendel or Bach, those of Beethoven do not
make a great display in volume.  Nevertheless, there are thirty-two
piano sonatas, ten violin sonatas, nine symphonies for full orchestra,
five pianoforte concertos, twenty-one sets of variations for piano
alone, sixteen string quartets, and a very large mass of chamber music
of other sorts.  There are two masses, one opera, and above one hundred
songs.

      *      *      *      *      *

As generally stated, the characteristic point of difference between
what we call the classical and the romantic in the art of music lies in
the feeling actuating the composer, and consequently embodied more or
less successfully in his music.  In the older practice, especially that
of the Netherlandish contrapuntal composers of the sixteenth century,
the motive of composition was that of producing a musical piece more
elaborate, more imposing, or more sonorous than previous works; or,
perhaps, the more commonplace conception of producing a piece as good
as previous works.  The purely musical (conceived from a technical
standpoint) remained the moving principle with the composer.  With the
invention of opera, about 1597, A. D., and the active development which
followed for a century after, a new principle came into operation,
namely, the expression of dramatic contrasts and situations, and so at
length the expression of intense individuality--the working of strong
individualities under the clash of tragic situations.

Along with the invention and development of opera, during the period
here mentioned, the mastery of the violin was carried forward with
great results to the art of music.  About 1685, Archangelo Corelli
published his first collection of pieces for the violin, and in these
are found what are practically about the first examples of a
well-developed lyric melody, of the kind we now mean when we speak of
"bel canto"--the type of melody made the very crux of the art of
Italian singing.  This impassioned, sustained, and expressive melody
took with wonderful rapidity and was almost immediately adopted into
opera, the ideal of which in the beginning had been that of an artistic
and dramatically expressive delivery of the text.  Now, melody as such
has little to do with the dramatic delivery of the text.  In a
sustained melody--as in "Home, Sweet Home," to quote a simple type--it
is first of all a question of sustained sentiment; whereas in a
well-determined declamation it is first of all a matter of effective
delivery of the words and phrases from an elocutionary standpoint,
allowing the voice all the stops, interruptions, shocks, and variations
of intensity requisite for effective delivery.  But by the time this
sustained melody had been introduced into high art (it seems to have
made a beginning earlier in folk-song, although we have no precise
indications upon the subject) the mere delivery of a text, somewhat
after the manner of a liturgical intoning, no longer satisfied the
demands of opera.

Music grew by what it fed upon.  The violin, which Monteverde had
placed in the position of honor at the head of the orchestra in 1608,
had grown upon the ears of the people; and there was a need felt for
something more impassioned, but at the same time more distinctively
musical, than the mere declamation of the first opera, no matter how
sing-song that delivery might be made.  Hence arose the aria, which
practically is a prolongation of a single moment of the dramatic
situation.  The Arias, at first and for quite a long time later, had
very few words, and these were repeated over and over, as we find still
in the well-known arias from Haendel's "Messiah."  Thus opera came into
possession of a simple and sustained melody, patterned after the
cantilena of the violin; and it was employed for marking the successive
points of the dramatic action.  That is to say, as the drama unfolded,
one new situation after another developed itself.  Each new entrance of
a dramatic person made a new complication and a new situation, brought
to the attention of the hearer by means of the lines and then enforced
by the aria, which the singer of greatest momentary importance had to
sing.  That these arias very soon degenerated into show pieces for
virtuoso singers was an accident due to the popularity of the operatic
stage, the development of the new art of singing, and a delight in the
human voice as a musical instrument.  It has no concern with our
present subject.

Moreover, it inevitably happened that as composers multiplied and
competed for the favor of the public, they tried more and more to bring
out in their music the very innermost passions and passing feelings of
the leading individuals in the play; hence the art of expressive music
was greatly developed, and the ears of the public learned gradually to
feel after and enjoy the human heart-beat in the music.  Thus music
passed beyond the stage of working for itself as a development of
musical forms or science of construction, and became more and more, in
opera, the expression of individualities and moods.  At the same time
that this tendency was working for making the music more expressive,
the necessity of pleasing the public tended also in the opposite
direction of pleasing the hearer by means of agreeable combinations of
tone-colors, delightful symmetries of tone-forms, and the like.  So at
the very time when composers of one class were laboring in opera for
the development of deep expression, those of another class were working
no less effectually for making the music merely shallow and pleasing.
Light operas dealing with shallow situations--comedy, farce, expressed
by means of light and pleasing music--came to occupy more and more the
operatic stage, where, after all, the question of amusement will always
prevail.

All of these different tendencies came later on to their expression in
music purely instrumental.  We have seen already how Bach managed to
compose truly expressive music which, nevertheless, is first of all
strong music, yet highly humoristic and fanciful.  Then Haydn and
Mozart introduced various types of pleasing and simply expressive
melody, but it is only in occasional moments that their music touches
the deeper feelings of the heart.  It is music to admire for its
cleverness, to enjoy at times for its sweetness and tenderness, and its
fresh melodic symmetry; but it is only in very rare moments that the
accent of emotional individuality is given.

In Beethoven we find this quality for the first time illustrated in
instrumental music; and, along with this occasional accent of
intensity, we have also a great and inexhaustible variety of moods and
manners appertaining to the different sides of the mighty individuality
of this great tone-poet.  Along with this variety of moods, which in
their inner nature must be regarded as representing different facets of
individuality, we have also in Beethoven a certain comprehensive
element.  Everything that he says to us belongs somehow to a larger
whole, and that larger whole is the entire man of the composer.  It is
like the conversation of some highly gifted person, which, while
lasting perhaps for only a few minutes, nevertheless affords us a
glimpse into a remarkable personality, and appears in our memory as a
chapter accidentally revealed out of the entire soul of the talker.

Hence in trying to form an idea of the individuality of Beethoven and
of the range and peculiar beauty of his music, we have to learn his
most characteristic moods in order to get the range of his genius; and
then to see how he combines these widely different moods into a
whole--as he does in his sonatas and symphonies.  Accordingly, this
first program begins with several pieces, comparatively small in
compass, but directly illustrating the variety of his humoristic
tendencies.  All of these little pieces, moreover, have that accent of
intense individuality mentioned above--an accent very much more
observable in Beethoven than in any of his predecessors, and surpassed
only by Schubert and Schumann later.  The latter, it may be
anticipated, is the most humoristic of all composers of instrumental
music.

There are certain conditions of largeness in a piece of music intended
to say something without words, and to work up to an imposing climax,
which give it a different form from what is practicable in pieces
having a text for doing a part of the talking.  In order to reach a
great effect, an instrumental music piece has to last for some time,
and to continue quite a while in the same movement, as to rate of
pulsation and frequency of measure accent.  It has to work within a
single tonality--remain in one key or revolve around one key in such a
manner as to preserve its own unity as a single being.  Hence arise the
long movements of the sonata and symphony.  It is not possible to
arrive at similar impressions upon hearers by the use of shorter,
disjointed movements.  Only by carrying a movement on for some time,
and so developing it as to impress some one idea as central, and at the
same time to arrive eventually at some kind of a climax or goal, can a
serious instrumental movement become expressive and effective.

In Mozart these long movements have nothing like the unity of those of
Beethoven.  A beautiful variety prevails, and the main ideas are
repeated a sufficient number of times; but it is for beauty rather than
for completing a cycle of moods or a cycle of soul-experiences.  Or if
a cycle, then a cycle of pleasant and youthful experiences.  In
Beethoven this is not the case.  When he is much in earnest he takes
plenty of time for saying his say, and says it so thoroughly that you
are quite sure of what he is at.  This will be shown in the present
program by means of the Sonate Pathetique, and phases of the manner
will appear in all the selections.


  PROGRAM.

  Selections of a quasi-lyric character:
    Menuetto in E-flat.  Opus 31, No. 3.
    Menuetto in D major.  Opus 10, No. 3.
    Subject from Allegretto from Sonata, opus 90.  Thirty-two measures.
    Andante from Sonata, opus 27, No. 1.
  Formal Variations:
    Andante and Variations.  Sonata in G major.  Opus 14, No. 2.
    Andante, from Sonata Appassionata.  Opus 57.
  Humoristic Variations and Moods;
    Theme and Variations.  Opus 26.
    Scherzo in C, Sonata in C.  Opus 2, No. 3.
    Allegretto from "Moonlight Sonata."  Opus 27, No. 2.
    Scherzo in A-flat, Sonata.  Opus 31, No. 2.
  Sonata-piece:
    Allegro (first movement), from Sonata in G.  Opus 14, No. 2.
    Allegro (first movement), Sonata in F minor.  Opus 2, No. 1.
  Sonata-piece, Impassioned;
    Introduction and Allegro (first movement), Sonate Pathetique.
        Opus 13.


The minuet proper, in the first selection, is a simply expressive
folk-song throughout its first period.  It is only at the beginning of
the second period, with the dissonant C-flat, that something different
comes to illustration.  The distinction of the mood is further
illustrated in the trio which follows, where the chords by their skips
and their delightful changes afford a most agreeable and charming
contrast with the main subject.  (It is upon this trio that Saint-Saens
has written his lovely variations for two pianos, four hands.)

The minuet in D, from the very strong Sonata in D major, opus 10,
affords very strong contrasts before we pass beyond the minuet proper.
The first period (eight measures repeated) is purely lyric and very
lovely.  The second period starts out with an imitative bit, quite in
the manner of fugue, one voice after another responding in a vigorous
and spirited manner.  When this is completed by the delightful return
of the principal subject, we are led to a trio in the related key of G
major, which is in a totally different style.  It goes like a scherzo,
and when it in turn has been completed the main minuet returns with
most agreeable effect.  At the end, a short coda.  Both these
selections contain much which is not purely lyric, but rather thematic.
This occurs always in the trios, and in the second period of the minuet
in D.

The next selection is the beginning of the beautiful closing movement
of the Sonata, opus 90.  This movement takes the place of a slow
movement in this sonata, and it is entirely in lyric style, except
where the imperative need of relief has led to the introduction of less
connected and sustained matter.  The melody itself is one of the best
of Beethoven's.  The illustration comprises the first thirty-two
measures.

In the next division of selections we come upon the Beethoven faculty
of diversifying a musical theme in the form of variations.  The
examples here given represent certain of the simpler phases of this
part of his art, and if the student is ambitious in this direction he
might read for himself the variations upon the waltz in C, or the
famous thirty-two variations, in which endless varieties are obtained
from a very simple theme.  A still more highly developed example of
this art is found in the last sonata of all, opus 111; but these are
too difficult for our present use.

The theme and variations in C, from the Sonata in G, opus 14, are easy
and pleasing.  The theme itself affords a very pretty contrast between
the staccato of the first period and the close legato of the second
period.  Then the sweetness of it is relieved by the strong
syncopations which break it up, toward the end (measures 17 and 18).
The first variation has the melody in the tenor, unchanged excepting to
make it legato.  The right hand deals mainly with syncopated repeated
notes.

The second variation is much more broken.  The left hand plays the bass
upon the beat, while the right hand comes in with a chord containing
the melody at the half beat.  The third variation brings the melody
again in the bass, with an accompaniment figure in sixteenths for the
right hand.  At the end there is a lovely coda of six measures.
Throughout these variations the harmony and the melody have not been
changed.  Only the place of the melody and the rhythm of the accessory
accompanying figures have been changed.

A still more remarkable illustration of this phase of the Beethoven
genius is found in the andante and variations which form the second
movement of the Sonata Appassionata, opus 57.  Here the variations are
not indicated in the notation, but the player has to find them for
himself, which is easy enough, because the two periods of the theme,
each of eight measures, are exactly repeated in the following
variations.

The theme itself has a church-like character, almost "sacred."  This is
due to the first harmonic step from tonic to subdominant and back
again, in the manner of the "Amen" cadence so well known in anthems.
In the second period there is an intense and almost strained expression
due to the chord of 4-2, the seventh low in the bass.  The first
variation plays the melody in the same place as in the theme, and in
the same chords; but the bass enters a half beat later and holds over,
so that a restless and searching expression results.  The second
variation, again, is very reposeful.  The melody is only suggested in
the upper tones of the right-hand part, and the sixteenth motion is
intended to have a certain chord-like character; meanwhile the bass has
a part somewhat like a melody suitable for 'cello.  The third variation
brings the melody high in the treble (later changing again to the left
hand in the middle range of the piano), while the left hand performs an
arpeggio figure in thirty-seconds.  At the end a lovely coda of sixteen
measures, recalling the theme in its original form.  Throughout these
variations not only is the harmony and melody of the theme never
varied, excepting in time of coming in, but the spirit of the theme is
everywhere retained.  Observe that the coda is not concluded, but
interrupted by the entrance of a diminished chord, leading into the key
of F minor.  In place of this chord, end with a chord of D-flat,
directly after the dominant chord preceding the diminished chord, when
the finale is not to be played.

Quite different from the foregoing are the highly humoristic variations
of the Sonata, opus 26.  These, being designated in the copy, require
only mention and characterization.  The theme is three periods in
length, the second opening with a syncopation.  The first variation
follows the harmony of the theme, but in a broken manner, not alone in
the cutting up into sixteenth notes, but also in changes of position
upon the keyboard.  This tendency to excitement continues in the second
variation, where the melody is in the bass, in octaves broken into
sixteenth notes.  The third variation changes the mode to minor, and
the musical treatment contains strong syncopations, implying much
suppressed passion.  The fourth variation is a scherzo, bounding from
one point of the keyboard to another, like a musical Ariel.  The fifth
variation returns to the harmony and manner of the theme, but in the
first eight measures the melody is held in reserve, suggested rather
than fully brought out, in order that the complete appearance of the
melody, legato, in the ninth measure shall be more effective.  The
whole closes with a beautiful coda of fifteen measures.  (Count back
from the end, if you do not find it at first.)

Still more humoristic is the scherzo from the Sonata in C, opus 2, No.
3.  Here the principal subject is quite in fugue style, excepting the
order of keys.  In place of answering in the fifth, it answers in the
octave.

It is unnecessary to add that this is a pure fancy-piece, the
imitations being unexpected and capricious, and never for the sake of
completing a pattern or form.  The trio is a complete contrast, and
very free and effective upon the keyboard.  Then, after the return of
the scherzo, we have a delightful coda of twenty-three measures.

Less pronounced, but very beautiful, is the allegretto from the
so-called "Moonlight Sonata," opus 27, No. 2.  This is gentle, and
designed to mediate between the intense sadness of the first movement
and the equally intense and impassioned sorrow and longing of the
finale.

The sonata-piece is one of the most serious and diversified movements
known to music, and while continuous and characterized by great unity,
it is also rather complicated.  Hence it will not be properly
appreciated except by those who observe the leading ideas as they enter
and recall them when they turn up again in the course of the treatment
and development.  When a sonata is written for orchestra it becomes a
symphony, in which form the different ideas are more easily followed
because they derive a certain individuality from the tone-color of the
instrument first announcing them.  When an artist plays a sonata he
seeks to intensify the individuality of the leading ideas and thus aid
the hearer in recognizing and remembering them.

The first example of sonata-piece is the rather light and pleasing
allegro which begins the Sonata in G, opus 14, No. 2.  The Principal
subject lasts through twenty-four measures, the Second entering in the
key of D with the beginning of the twenty-fifth measure.  The
Conclusion begins with the forty-seventh measure.  Counting from the
double bar, the Elaboration lasts, including the pedal point upon the
dominant which prepares for bringing back the Principal, sixty-one
measures.  There the first part begins over again.

The first movement of the Sonata in F minor, opus 2, No. 1, is shorter
and the subjects less marked than in any other sonata of Beethoven.  It
also has less "stuffing," the ideas following with very little passage
work between them.  The Principal lasts twenty measures, the Second
beginning with the F-flat in the soprano at the end of the twentieth
measure.  The Conclusion begins with the C-flat in the soprano, in
measure forty-one.  The Elaboration lasts sixty-two measures.

The "Sonate Pathetique" begins with a slow introduction, lasting ten
measures of very slow time.  Then enters the headlong allegro, of which
the Principal, with its retinue of modulating sequences, lasts forty
measures.  The Second enters in measure forty-one, and the Conclusion
in measure seventy-nine.  The Elaboration lasts sixty-two measures,
beginning with a few measures of the introduction.

Time will not be wasted if before playing each of these movements the
subjects themselves be played through separately.




CHAPTER V.

BACH, MOZART, AND BEETHOVEN COMPARED.

The present program brings together a few representative
selections from the two greatest masters already
noticed, for the purpose of bringing out more clearly
the individualities of their style and the predominant
flavor of their work.  In this comparison we are not as
yet undertaking to represent either Bach or Beethoven
in their moments of greatest and most impassioned
abandon.  The so-called "Moonlight Sonata"
approaches this point in the case of Beethoven, but if it
had been desired to perform the same service for Bach
larger works would have been taken, such as the
"Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue," the "Fantasia and Fugue in
G minor" for organ (arranged for piano by Liszt), and
the like.  And for Beethoven the sonatas in F minor,
opus 57, "Appassionata," the opus 106 in B-flat, and
opus 111 in C minor.  All these go much farther in the
untrammeled expression of deep feeling than any of the
works brought together upon the present program, even
the "Moonlight Sonata," although the finale of this is
distinctly representative of Beethoven in the impassioned
and strong.  As for Mozart, this headlong passion was
not at all in his line.  But for the sake of showing the
peculiar sweetness of his imagination in contrast with
the more concentrated expression customary with Bach
and Beethoven, his Fantasia in C minor is here included.

Before entering upon the actual acquaintance with the
works in the program, it is advisable for the hearer to
be disabused at the outset of certain prepossessions
likely to be harmful.  The most important of these is
that which regards Bach as having had a higher idea of
his art than later composers had, and of having intended
to illustrate in his works a very high degree of skill,
contrapuntal cleverness, and the like.  This prepossession
is included in the phrase which describes all serious music
as "classical," as contradistinguished from that which is
merely beautiful and pleasing.

Bach had, indeed, great originality, but he came by it
honestly.  His mental activity in musical directions was
of such a spontaneous character that immediately a
theme presented itself all sorts of possible treatment
occurred to him.  If the theme pleased him he
immediately began to develop it, and in the course of this one
happy thought after another presented itself, without
having been sought for or worked out in the slightest.
Thus his highest and largest works have a good deal the
character of play, so easily were they composed.  True,
they do not present to the player of the present day
nearly so much of this quality, for the technic required
to play them well is not quite that of the ordinary
pianist.  Bach expects the hands to play melodiously and
very fluently, and the player to think in fugue; _i.e._, be
able to follow the answering voices in a fugue without
becoming confused when there are three, four, or five,
and without losing any one of the threads.  This habit of
thought--for this is what it amounts to--is not natural
to the present generation, since nearly all our music is
more or less monodic (having one leading melody and
an accompaniment.)  Therefore the art of playing Bach
has to be diligently mastered by much playing and
a great deal of hard study.


  PROGRAM.

  Bach, Prelude and Fugue in C-sharp major.  Clavier, No. 3.
  Beethoven, Sonata in C-sharp minor ("Moonlight"), opus 27, No. 2.
  Bach, Fantasia in C minor.
  Mozart, Fantasia in C minor (from Sonata and Fantasia).
  Bach, Allegro from Italian Concerto.
  Beethoven, Sonata in E minor, opus 90.
  Bach, Prelude and Fugue in G major.  Clavier, No. 15.
  Beethoven, Sonata in D minor (Shakspere's "Tempest"), opus 31, No. 2.


Every art-work, in whatever line, has to satisfy three
prime conditions: unity, symmetry, and variety.  There
can not be an impression of beauty into which these
three qualities do not at the same time enter, but the
beauty will differ in quality according as one or the other
element preponderates.  In the successful music of Johann
Sebastian Bach (and he wrote unsuccessful music as well
as other men) we find all these qualities represented,
but not in the modern way.  A prelude or a fugue of
Bach is essentially a "monody," a composition of one
idea, which preponderates so decidedly as to enforce its
character and individuality upon the work; nay, it is the
work.  Variety and symmetry are always present, but
the variety is to be found in the modulatory treatment
and in the counterpoint--the various accessory ideas
which appear in the course of the work for better setting
off the leading idea forming the substance of the
composition.  Hence we have in Bach, along with a
unity which pervaded every single idea and every
succession of ideas, a variety also going on at the same
time (as in the melody of the different voices, rhythm,
etc.); and symmetry, which also expresses itself as
between ideas heard simultaneously and between ideas and
paragraphs introduced successively.  A Bach work,
therefore, is rather complicated almost always, and needs
to be studied a little, and the art of hearing it
appreciatively has to be acquired; but once we have mastered it,
there are no works in music which are more fresh or
permanently pleasing.

The Bach selections upon the present program include
three preludes and fugues, those of C-sharp major, C
minor, and G major, all from the first volume of the
"Clavier."  There is no necessary connection between
the prelude and the fugue following, except that in
Bach's idea they somehow corresponded or contrasted
in such a manner that they could be heard agreeably in
connection.

The prelude in C-sharp, which opens the program,
consists of a long leading idea (eight measures) which
is repeated completely six times in the course of the
work.  After it has been heard four times,--in the
keys of C-sharp, G-sharp, D-sharp minor, and A-sharp
minor,--it is relieved by a modulatory interlude,
constructed out of new material (measures 33 to 46).  Then
the original theme is resumed in the subdominant of the
principal key (F-sharp major) and is given entire in the
original key of C-sharp, the repetition being exact.  In
measure 63 the conclusion begins.  It consists of a pedal
point upon G-sharp, treated very pleasantly, and relieved
and developed in measures 75 to 91 by interesting
matter of a more impassioned character.  At measure 91
the pedal figure returns, and is abandoned only at
measure 101, after which the end speedily follows.  (Before
playing the piece have the parts played and explained
separately, each division as here marked, and then the
whole prelude entire.) The work as a whole is singularly
light and pleasing.

The fugue is built upon the subject in the soprano at
the beginning, running two measures.  This subject is
repeated entire ten times, and fragments are used over
and over again.

In immediate contrast with this work is placed the
so-called "Moonlight Sonata"--the title affixed not by
Beethoven but by some fanciful writer.  The first
movement of this is quite as much a monody as anything of
Bach's, but with a difference.  Little is attempted in the
way of modifying the harmony of the theme except to
carry it through several different keys, nor is there much
accessory matter employed as filling.  It is practically a
song,--an ode if you like,--of a melancholy, grieving
character.  Its structure will be understood by aid of the
following analysis: It begins with a prelude of four
measures, after which the leading idea enters in the key
of C-sharp minor, closing in E-major, four measures.
After a measure of accompaniment the subject resumes
in C major, proceeding immediately to B minor, after a
cadence in which an accessory melodic bit is introduced,
having the character of suspending the action, eight
measures, ending in F-sharp minor.  The leading idea
now enters in F-sharp, five measures, and three little
melodic bits followed by eleven measures of arpeggio
matter hold back the action for the return of the theme
in measure 42 (first accent in 43).  Everything in this
movement grows out of the leading melody, and the
movement has no skeleton or orderly arrangement of
parts except in a very general manner.

The allegretto which follows is practically a sort of
scherzo, in song-form with trio.  Then comes the very
dramatic finale, consisting of three main elements handled
in the style of a sonata-piece.  The Principal extends to
the first beat of the twentieth measure.  On the second
beat of this the Second enters and runs twenty-three
measures.  With the second eighth note of this measure
a movement of eighth notes in chords enters, which
forms the concluding piece.  This carries us to the
double bar, after which a free fantasia follows upon the
same material.  The free fantasia extends to two
measures of whole notes, thirty-six measures in all, where
the original theme returns and the first part is recalled
in different keys.  At the end there is an added coda of
thirty-four measures counting from the end of the piece.

The Prelude in G major of Bach is another pleasing
illustration of his manner.  It is very simple in
construction and needs only to have the first two measures and a
half played in advance for defining the subject, and the
fourth measure once, to define the second leading idea.
Everything else is developed out of these ideas.  In
measure 11 some new material is introduced and treated
with excellent effect.

The fugue is rather an elaborate one.  After the
subject has been carried through the first time, the subject
is introduced in a new form, in inversion (measure 43,
alto), all ascending passages in the original being now
imitated in downward directions and by the same
interval.  This taken as a new subject affords ground for
much additional development, and later on the fugue
becomes very complicated and interesting.  When well
played, however, the complication is only an incident of
a very playful and varied composition.  In the entire
work there is no lyrical idea; everything comes thematically.

In the Beethoven sonata which I have chosen for
contrast, D minor, opus 31, No. 2, the thematic mode of
construction is also marked, but the contrast of subjects
is very much greater than in the Bach work, and the
effect of the whole impassioned to a high degree.
Beginning with a slow arpeggio chord (two measures) the
first theme follows only to be interrupted in the sixth
measure.  In the seventh the Principal subject is resumed,
and in measure 10 a new motive appears in the
vigorously ascending bass theme, which is immediately
answered by a soprano counter theme, measures 11, 12,
14.  This carries us forward to measure 30, where an
episode comes in not unrelated to the first theme, and
again in measure 44 a passage of chords practically
forming a pedal point, and the conclusion proper in
measure 55.  In the elaboration these themes are delightfully
treated, and the entire movement has much the character
of an improvisation.  The slow movement continues the
rhapsodical spirit of the first movement.  The finale is
one of the most delightful examples of charming effect
reached by means of composition essentially thematic.

The Sonata, opus 90, in E, is one of the most pleasing
of Beethoven, and, aside from a certain figure in tenths
for the bass (measures 55 to 58, and again later on), it
presents no serious difficulties for the player.  The
second movement is a delightful song, which is carried out
at great length.

The first movement of Bach's Italian concerto is much
more modern in style than the other pieces of Bach in
this program.  Without ever quite reaching the
modern conception of the lyric, it at least approaches it
closely at times, and produces a beautiful effect.

Of the Mozart fantasia there is not room to speak in
detail.  Note, however, the very clever modulatory
treatment of the leading idea in the first two pages, and
the entrance of the lovely slow melody in D major near
the end of the second page.  The latter is Mozart-like
in the extreme.




CHAPTER VI.

SCHUBERT AND MENDELSSOHN.


FRANZ PETER SCHUBERT.

  Born January 31, 1797, at Lichtenthal, near Vienna.
  Died November 19, 1828, at Vienna.


Franz Peter Schubert, the great song-writer, was born, the son of a
parish schoolmaster, at Lichtenthal, near Vienna.  The family was
musical, and the father and a few of his friends used to hold quartet
parties every Sunday afternoon, at which the works for string quartet
then current were played, also compositions by Haydn and other good
composers.  The boy very early showed such talent that his father
taught him the violin, and occasionally allowed him to take part with
the rest.  He had a beautiful soprano voice, which, attracting the
attention of the director of the music at St. Stephen's Cathedral,
secured him admission to the choir and to the Imperial Convict, or
school for educating the choristers for the Court-chapel, where,
besides the usual branches of education, he was taught music
thoroughly.  This continued until his voice broke, whereupon he was
turned out to shift for himself.  For the three years next following he
assisted his father in the school, teaching the lowest class in it, and
proved himself, it is pretty certain, a very indifferent teacher.
Later he resigned this position, and struggled on during his short life
mainly by the assistance of friends, one of whom saw to it that the
indefatigable composer was supplied with music paper; another shared
his room with him, etc.  Between 1818 and 1824 he spent his summers at
the Hungarian estate of the great Prince Esterhazy, teaching the
daughters music and arranging music for the household.  Here many of
his works were written.  In Vienna he had an orchestra of school-boys
for quite a long time, which probably played his works occasionally, as
well as those of composers of less complicated works.

[Illustration: Franz Schubert, Felix Mendelssohn]

Schubert began to compose in earnest very early, and by the time he was
twenty years of age he had written about 400 of his songs.  His works
comprise a volume of pianoforte sonatas, several volumes of light works
for piano, about 600 songs, nine symphonies, of which two are among the
greatest we have, one opera, several masses, and a large number of
compositions for chamber music.



FELIX MENDELSSOHN-BARTHOLDY.

  Born February 3, 1809, at Hamburg.
  Died November 4, 1847, at Leipsic.

He was the nephew of the celebrated Jewish philosopher and reformer,
Moses Mendelssohn, and a son of the well-known banker, Abraham
Mendelssohn.

The family was Israelitish, but Felix Mendelssohn was brought up a
Lutheran.  The boy was of a very amiable and thoughtful disposition,
and was well instructed in music from his earliest years, his principal
teacher having been the celebrated theorist, Zelter.  His first
appearance in concert was made at the age of nine, in the piano part of
a trio by Wolf.  A year later he appeared as a singer.  His
acquaintance with the orchestra commenced very early.  There was a
small orchestra which met at his father's house on Sunday afternoons,
and by this means the compositions of the boy were tried and he himself
acquired his experience as a director.  His activity as a composer
commenced about 1820.  In this year he wrote a violin sonata and two
clavier sonatas, a little cantata, and an operetta.  In 1821 Zelter
brought him to the great poet Goethe, who heard his music and conversed
with the lad with great interest.  The friendship with Goethe continued
for many years.  In one of his letters Mendelssohn tells of having
visited the poet and having had a long conversation with him, in which
the poet had given an account of Hegel's lectures on esthetics, which
Mendelssohn had heard that winter in Berlin, and in which Goethe was
very much interested on account of the novelty of the ideas presented.
The first of the important compositions of Mendelssohn to be published
and played was the overture to the "Midsummer Night's Dream," which was
written in 1826 and played immediately.  He seems to have worked this
out upon the piano, improvising it piece by piece as he became excited
in reading Shakspere's comedy.  This overture is of most complete
mastery in its working out and of thorough originality, and scarcely
anything of his later works surpasses it in merit as a finished
composition for orchestra.

It was largely through Mendelssohn's influence that the "St. Matthew
Passion" of Bach was brought out and given entire in Berlin, in 1829,
just one hundred years after its first production in Leipsic.
Mendelssohn was the conductor, and it was given in the Sing-Akademie.
This was the work of a boy of twenty.  Nothing could speak more plainly
of the authority which his genius gave him than that he should conceive
and bring to completion an undertaking of this magnitude in a city like
Berlin at so early an age.  He made many journeys for pleasure and
instruction.  Full accounts of these will be found in his charming
letters, which are among the most delightful contributions of this kind
that any literary man or artist has left.  During one of these journeys
he visited the Hebrides, and afterward produced his overture called
"Fingal's Cave," as a memory of that visit.

Mendelssohn attained great celebrity as a pianist and organist, the
latter mainly by his improvisations, although he has the credit of
having been one of the first to play Bach's fugues in England.  The
late August Haupt, however, told one of his pupils that Mendelssohn, in
his time, never had an adequate pedal technic but played upon a sort of
hit-or-miss principle, which generally succeeded from his thorough
grasp of the music.  He early produced his concerto for pianoforte in G
minor, and played it at many musical festivals.  He was in great demand
as a director for festivals in Germany and also in England.  He became
director of the Gewandhaus concerts at Leipsic in 1835, and in 1843,
with very distinguished artist associates, he founded the Conservatory
of Music at Leipsic, which, under his management, became so celebrated.
Mendelssohn produced works in almost every department of musical
composition, a great variety of chamber music, symphonies, overtures,
one opera, and a very large collection of music for the piano-forte and
organ.  Probably his fame will last longer through the influence of
three works--viz., the "Midsummer Night's Dream" overture, which opened
the new world of the romantic; the oratorio of "Elijah," which is in
very many respects one of the most beautiful ever written, just as it
is also fortunate in the selection of subjects and of the episodes for
treatment; and the "Songs Without Words" for the pianoforte, which,
while not of remarkable depth, are very beautiful and poetic
compositions of such quality as to awaken in the musical world a new
appetite and a new appreciation of an instrument which has now become
the most universal in use.

All the works of Mendelssohn are distinguished for clearness of form,
elegance of sentiment, and delicate fancy.  They are more feminine than
masculine, although at times he has a great deal of strength.  His
pianoforte writing is not so well suited to the instrument as that of
some other composers, such as Chopin and Liszt, and his concertos,
although very popular, are not ranked among the master works of this
form of composition.  Of all the pianoforte music which he produced,
the "Rondo Capriccioso" is the one which most completely represents the
characteristic range of his imagination.

The two composers for the present chapter have distinguished themselves
in almost every walk of composition.  Schubert left a large quantity of
manuscript, most of it unheard until after his death, consisting of
about 700 songs, nine symphonies, various pieces of chamber music,
pianoforte sonatas, dances, marches, overtures, one opera, and many
miscellaneous compositions.  In every department of this vast activity
there are a few works which stand out as masterpieces.  To begin at the
top, his "Unfinished Symphony" and the great Symphony in C are in the
very first line of orchestral masterpieces, standing well up alongside
the greatest of Beethoven, and with an originality of style and beauty
wholly independent of the overshadowing Beethoven, who was, just at the
moment of their composition, engaged in his last works, including the
immortal Ninth Symphony.

Nevertheless, while Schubert was great in all musical directions, he
marked an epoch in one direction, and therefore has a fame peculiarly
his own.  As a songwriter he was one of the greatest the world has ever
known.  His fame in this department rests upon two wholly different
considerations, the union of which in the same composer forms the
epoch-marking peculiarity already mentioned.  As a melodist he stands
in a rank by himself.  His melodies move easily, now within the
diatonic mode, and now in the chromatic, but generally, within the
limits of each period, in the diatonic mode.  The melodies are
flexible, well balanced, very singable, and natural.  Each comes up,
lives its day, and dies away into silence, like a lovely flower
unfolding from its own germ in the moment of the year when the sunshine
and the showers have brought the time for its appearing.  In this case
the predisposing external cause leading to the appearance of one of
these melodies is found in the poem chosen for text.  Whatever Schubert
read, if it interested him, immediately called up within him a melodic
form.  These melodies not only differ from one another by degrees of
indescribably delicate gradation, but each as it comes proves itself
adapted to the text which gave it birth.  These lovely melodies,
moreover, are supported by pianoforte accompaniments which at times
rise to a co-ordinate rank with the melody itself as part of the
expression of the poem.  Sometimes the so-called accompaniment is
itself almost the main thing.  Such cases are found in "The Erl King,"
"To Be Sung on the Waters," and "Gretchen at the Spinning-wheel."  At
other times the accompaniment is as simple as the melody, and serves no
other purpose than that of supporting the voice.  A typical case of
this kind is found in "Hedge Roses," and in "Hark!  Hark! the Lark."
It is another peculiarity of Schubert that, beginning with an entirely
simple melody, he sometimes digresses to a remote key, within which for
a moment he goes quite as simply, only to return again immediately to
the main key.  The "Hark!  Hark! the Lark" is a case of this kind.
(Note the transition to G-flat in the ninth measure.)

The universal type of Schubert's music is the melodic.  This we find in
the pianoforte sonatas quite as plainly as in the songs themselves.  In
the minuet and march on the present program the melodic ideas are the
main thing.  Charmingly naive are the little waltzes upon the present
list.  Beautifully simple, delightfully symmetrical, their simplicity
relieved by short modulations into neighboring keys, it is not possible
to find elsewhere compositions so short, so simple, and yet so
beautiful.  In spite of their brevity and simplicity, the student will
find them worth knowing thoroughly.  It is also an excellent exercise
for the student to learn some of these by heart and to play them in
several different keys.

As an illustration of Schubert's cleverness in treating the pianoforte,
which is already sufficiently evident in the dramatic accompaniments of
his larger songs, before mentioned, attention is called to the
Impromptu in B-flat--the air and variations known as "The Fair
Rosamunde," the title due to the appearance of this melody in his opera
of "Rosamunde."  At least three of these variations display great
finesse in treating the pianoforte.  The first needs to be done with
the utmost delicacy and lightness, the melody suggested rather than
brought out.  The third has a new rhythm and a melodic secondary figure
in the left-hand part, which, taken with the treatment of the variation
in the right-hand part, gives this piece a wholly new content and
effect.  The fourth, again, is equally novel and equally significant
for the pianoforte.  The remaining variations are of little importance,
although, as a matter of course, all are to be played.

Mendelssohn as pianoforte composer represents two very important and
characteristic moods--the scherzo and the song without words.  It is
probable that by the good fortune of the latter name for his
collections of little piano pieces Mendelssohn rendered the musical
world a greater service than he did even by the elegant quality of his
compositions themselves.  It was the happy thought of the title which
at once puts the listener upon the right track, and disposes him to try
to discover what the words of the unworded songs ought to be.  It was a
fortunate guess rather than a something thought out by reason, and if
he had been pressed to assign a reason for including some of these
pieces under the name, he would probably have been driven to confess
that they were so included because he did not know what else they were.

The "Songs Without Words" embody many types, the most important being
the true cantabile--pieces in which there is a flowing lyric melody
with a soft accompaniment.  These pieces are in effect nothing else
than "nocturnes," quite after the manner of Chopin, only less elaborate
in treatment and less extended.  Among the best types of this class are
to be mentioned the first, the two folk-songs in the program following,
and the duetto.  In all these the connected legato of the melody is of
the first importance; and, second, the proper sinking and swelling of
the melody in the true manner of impassioned singing.  The
accompaniment follows closely and shares in the fluctuations of
intensity and mood.

Another type of these pieces is illustrated by the eighth, in B-flat
minor.  This piece, which has the speed and restless movement of a
scherzo, has also the true Mendelssohnian flavor of sweet melancholy.
It goes at great speed, and often the melody is suggested by an accent
rather than fully expressed.  Such cases are found in measures 3 and 4,
and elsewhere.  In these instances there is a fragment of melody in the
middle voice.

Somewhat between the cantabile type and the scherzo is to be mentioned
the "Table Song," No. 28, in G.  This is like a part-song of light and
pleasant yet somewhat sentimental character, suitable to be sung at
table.

As a composer for voice, Mendelssohn attained a very high rank,
producing melodies of great sweetness (yet often also of inherent
coldness) and very singable.  One of the most beautiful examples of
this kind is found in the "O for the Wings of a Dove," first sung as
soprano solo and then later for chorus, in his setting of a psalm.
Another well-known example for alto is the "O Rest in the Lord."  The
latter melody derives additional beauty from the contrast it makes with
the rather dramatic place in the oratorio where it occurs.  Further
illustrations of Mendelssohn's powers in this direction may be taken
from the list above, which there is not time at present to discuss more
fully.

The part-songs of Mendelssohn for mixed voices deserve to be more
frequently sung.  They are extremely beautiful and delightfully written
for the voices.  While of moderate difficulty, they belong among the
very best of part-songs for unaccompanied mixed voices.  The omission
of the accompaniment is of very great importance, as these pieces are
strictly written in such a manner that the voices have the complete
ideas, both melody and harmony, and when given independent of
accompaniment it is possible to obtain a purer intonation and better
sympathy.

The present program permits a somewhat greater latitude of arrangement
of parts than those of the preceding chapters.  The works do not
contrast with each other exactly as was sought in previous programs,
but rather form phases of lyric melody, to be sung in such order and
combination as best suits the performers, taking care however, that an
agreeable succession of keys is generally observed.


  PROGRAM.

  Schubert: Waltzes.
    Minuet, opus 79.
    March, from four-hand collection.
    "Fair Rosamunde and Variations."
    Songs: "Hedge Roses."
           "Wanderer."
           "Hark!  Hark! the Lark."
           "Gretchen."
           "Fruehlingsglaube."
  Mendelssohn: Songs Without Words.  The first.
    "Hunting Song," No. 3.
    "Folk-song," No. 4.
    "Gondellied," No. 6.
    B-flat minor, No. 8.
    "Table Song," No. 28.
    Duetto, No. 18.
  Overture to "Midsummer Night's Dream"; four hands.
    "O rest in the Lord."
    "If with all your hearts."
    "It is enough."
    Scene from "Elijah," "Lord God of Abraham," etc.
    "Hunting Song,"              ) part-songs
    "Farewell to the Forest,";   )




CHAPTER VII.

ROBERT SCHUMANN.


ROBERT SCHUMANN.

  Born January 8, 1810, at Zwickau in Saxony.
  Died July 29, 1856, at Endenich, near Bonn.


Schumann was the son of a bookseller and a confirmed music lover.  The
boy showed marked talent for music, playing to some extent upon the
more usual instruments, and even getting together and conducting a
small orchestra of the school-boys.  For this orchestra he very early
composed pieces.  His father died when the boy was sixteen and had
nearly completed his gymnasium course, and in 1828 Schumann entered at
the University of Leipsic as a student of law.  After a time he left
Leipsic in favor of Heidelberg, where some very celebrated lectures
were at that time being given; but at Heidelberg he practically wasted
his time, so far as the law studies were concerned, and devoted himself
entirely to music.  As early as 1829 he made a short vacation journey
into Italy, and at Milan heard the famous violin virtuoso Paganini, and
then became wholly influenced for music.  Schumann's mother was
extremely averse to his fitting himself for the musical profession, and
it was only with great difficulty that she was brought to consent.
Accordingly, his serious musical studies began in 1830, when he came
back again to Leipsic and became a music student with Frederick Wieck
and Heinrich Dorn.  It was Wieck's daughter Clara who afterward became
Mme. Schumann.

[Illustration: Robert Schumann]

Schumann had a great determination to become a piano virtuoso, not so
much for the repetition of effects already standard as for the
invention of new ones.  In this direction he devoted himself to
practice with such assiduity that he very soon reached a point where
his fingers could not keep up with his imagination.  In the effort to
impart a greater individuality and strength to the fourth finger of the
right hand, he made some experiments which resulted in disabling his
finger for a while, and he never afterward regained the use of it to a
complete degree.  Thus his career as virtuoso was cut short, but the
studies he made and the playing he was afterward able to do resulted in
very singular and productive discoveries of musical effects possible to
the piano, so that it is not too much to say that the piano playing of
the present time is more indebted to Schumann than perhaps to any other
master in the history of the instrument.

He began his creative career by the arrangement of a collection of
Paganini's studies, in which he sought to reproduce upon the pianoforte
some of the effects of the famous Paganini caprices for the violin.  He
made two collections of these, about four years apart, and prefaced the
first book with many observations in regard to the methods of practice
and innovations of technic.  Almost simultaneously with this he began
seriously as a composer upon his own account, and, quite
characteristically, as a composer of short pieces.  The Papillons, opus
2, or "Scenes at a Ball," consist of short pieces of from two to six
lines in length, and among them are many of great beauty.  Another of
these early works is the so-called "Dances of the Davidsbuendler against
the Philistines."  These consist of eighteen short pieces without
individual titles.  Already, by the time when the composition of this
work was undertaken in 1835, Schumann had commenced to write as a
musical literary man under two pseudonyms--Florestan and Eusebius, the
one representing the sentimental and tender side, and the other the
impassioned and vigorously moved.  The different numbers in the
"Davidsbuendler Dances" are signed with one or the other of these
initials, and sometimes with both.  The name "Davidsbuendler Dances" was
in allusion to the term Philistine, which, in the German university
towns, signified the old fogies, the conservative element, who take
things as they find them and want nothing changed.  Schumann belonged
to the new party, who wanted about everything changed.

Two or three years later a second work of very similar import, called
the "Carnaval," was produced, consisting of thirty-one short pieces,
each bearing a characteristic title.  This work is of a very
extraordinary character.  The moods of the pieces are extremely
individual and marked, and the range of pianoforte expression covered
by them is as great as can be found in the compositions of any master
for the instrument.  Another characteristic set of pieces at this time
was the "Fantasy Pieces," opus 12, each of which had its own title;
also the "Kreisleriana," a series of queer sayings after the manner of
one Kreisler, an eccentric old musician in a novel popular at that
time.  There are also what he called "Novelettes," a series of eight
somewhat elaborate pianoforte pieces.

In 1834 Schumann, in connection with two other young men, founded the
"Neue Zeitschrift fuer Musik" as an organ of musical progress.  He
remained editor of this for ten years, writing there a great variety of
articles, and in 1844 resigned the editor's chair to Brendel and
removed to Duesseldorf.  It was from Duesseldorf that he wrote his famous
article about the newly-risen star of Johannes Brahms.

In 1840 he succeeded in overcoming Wieck's objections to a marriage
with the young Clara, who was then a very distinguished piano virtuoso,
and in the same year he received a doctorate from the University of
Jena.  In 1839 and 1840 he composed a very large number of songs--viz.,
one hundred in all.  In 1841 his first symphony was played at the
Gewandhaus in Leipsic, and in 1843, upon the founding of the Leipsic
Conservatory by Mendelssohn, Schumann was appointed teacher of playing
from score.  As he was practically no teacher at all, and found the
duties irksome, he soon resigned this position and lived for a while at
Dresden, and made a number of concert tours to various foreign
countries with his wife, his own works forming generally a part of the
program.  It is told of one of these journeys that at some court or
other where they were graciously received, the amiable prince, after
complimenting the brilliant young pianist upon the solidity of her
work, continued, "And is your husband also musical?"  At that time Mr.
Schumann was the husband of Clara Wieck, rather than Clara Wieck the
wife of Robert Schumann.

Early in 1851 Schumann's mind began to show signs of giving way, and in
1853 he was removed to a retreat for the insane, where he died in 1856.

Schumann's compositions comprise four rather large volumes of piano
works, four symphonies for grand orchestra, and a number of chamber
works of different kinds, of which the quintet for piano and strings is
perhaps the most successful; about 100 songs, one opera, several
cantatas, a series of music pieces for "Faust," to be played in
connection with the drama, etc.

In his lifetime his piano music had very slight recognition from any
quarter, its novelties both in the subject-matter of the music and in
the manner of treating the piano making it practically impossible for
piano players at that day, and it was only about the time of Schumann's
death that his piano music began to attract attention upon a
considerable scale.  Schumann's Symphony in B-flat had a great success
under Mendelssohn's direction in Leipsic in 1841, but it was played in
very few other places for a number of years, although it was an
extremely bright and interesting production.  When William Mason was in
Leipsic in 1850 he sent home a score and parts to the orchestra in
Boston.  They held two rehearsals of this symphony and then laid it
upon the shelf in the belief that the composer must have been crazy,
and it was only five or six years later that they mustered up nerve to
produce the work and were astonished to find that it pleased the
hearers.

The universal currency of Schumann's piano music can not be said to
have made much progress until the appearance of Rubinstein.  In the
early days of Schumann's productivity he composed his enormously
difficult and beautiful "Fantasie," opus 17, and dedicated it to Liszt.
Accordingly, not to be outdone in politeness, Liszt introduced some of
Schumann's pieces in his programs once or twice, but the effect of them
upon the audience was so much less than that of his own music or of the
Chopin pieces which at that time he was very fond of playing, that he
discontinued further efforts to aid Schumann's cause, although he wrote
him very polite and encouraging letters.  The first real Schumann
player was Rubinstein, who had the qualities of tone and of
emotionality which Schumann's music imperatively required; and since
Rubinstein, Schumann's music has entered more and more into the
world-current of piano music, until at the present time it occupies a
position inferior to none other.

Of a composer so varied in his capacities, so original, so influential
upon the later course of development in his art, and so interesting in
every way, it is not possible from a single program--no matter how
carefully selected the works may be--to gain a complete idea.  The most
that can be done is to give a glimpse of the man, to bring out a few of
his moods, and to observe the more salient features of his style.  The
following list of selections has been influenced by the same idea as
that underlying all the previous programs of this series--namely: A
preference for selections of moderate difficulty, both for performer
and hearer; and a representation of what might be called the more
elementary characteristics of his art.


  PROGRAM.

  Kinderscenen.  Opus 15.
    "From Strange Lands and People."
    "A Curious Story."
    "Playing Tag."
    "Happy Enough."
    "Traumerei."
  Album for the Young.  Opus 68.
    "The Jolly Farmer."
    "A Little Romance."
  Papillons.  Opus 2.
    Polonaise in D major.
  Songs.
    "The Hat of Green."
    "The Wanderer's Song."
  Forest Scenes.  Opus 82.
    "Entrance to the Forest."
    "The Wayside Inn."
    "Prophetic Bird."
    "Farewell to the Forest."
  Songs.
    "Moonlight."
    "He, the Noblest."
  Night-piece in F.  Opus 23.  No. 4.
  Novelette in F.  Opus 21.  No. 1.
  Songs.
    "Thou Ring Upon My Finger."
    "The Spring Night."
  Fantasy Pieces.  Opus 12.
    "In the Evening."
    "Soaring."
    "Why?"
    "Whims."
    "End of the Song."


The foregoing selections, as will be noticed, are all for piano and
voice; I have thought it better to confine them to these easily
accessible sources than to attempt to cover more ground.  In a later
program more difficult piano selections will be given.  All the
instrumental selections in this list are in the volume of "Selections
from the Works of Robert Schumann," edited by the present writer and
published by the publishers of "Music."  All the songs are in the
collection of Schumann songs published by Boosey and Company.

I have written so many times upon the works and characteristics of
Schumann that it would, perhaps, suffice to refer the student to a few
of those places, such as "A Popular History of Music," pages 464 to
477.  Also in the first volume of "How to Understand Music" there is
something to the point, and at various other places in the course of
the work, as will be found by looking up the references to Schumann's
music given in the index.  At the beginning of the collection of
Schumann pieces, above mentioned, is an essay upon Schumann and his
works which will be found suggestive.  One of the best single articles
I have seen is Mr. W. H. Hadow's essay upon "Schumann and the Romantic
Movement in Germany," which occupies pages 149 to 231 in the first
volume of his "Studies in Modern Music."  In spite of these I shall add
a few observations in the present pages, since it is a peculiarity of
the works of any great writer that they grow upon the appreciation, and
while their shortcomings and limitations of whatever kind become more
apparent as the student grows in years and clearness of thought, the
beauties and originalities also press more and more upon our notice,
and perhaps, in the case of creative artists of the first order, come
out into even greater luxuriance than we at first realized.  Such, at
least, I find in my own case since my first introduction to the works
of Schumann, which practically began with my acquaintance with Dr.
Mason at South Bend, Indiana, in the summer of 1870.  Before that I had
heard but very few of the Schumann works, and these had not been well
done and so had failed of making an impression.  I was much surprised
when Dr. Mason told me that one could not properly understand Beethoven
without knowing Schumann.  And it was like opening a new world when I
began with the Novelette in E, the Fantasy Pieces, opus 12, and the
Romance in F-sharp, opus 28.

The most distinguishing quality of the Schumann music, and the one
which perhaps demarcates it from other music most strikingly, is its
hearty quality, its spontaneity, its headlong driving speed.  Another
quality almost or quite equally notable is its conciseness.  Schumann
is above all the poet of the short, the clear, the well-defined.  In
parallel line with this is his habit of employing fanciful designations
for his short pieces, generally poetical titles suggesting a mood or a
scene.  Examples of this latter peculiarity occur in the present
program.  The titles were perhaps always put on after the piece had
been composed.  It is not known with certainty whether Schumann had the
idea of the title in his mind in composing the piece.  In most cases it
serves merely as a suggestion to the player of a proper standpoint for
conceiving the work.

Another peculiarity of Schumann's writing is the close unity of each
little piece or movement.  He develops his period or his two periods
out of a single motive or a motive and a counter-theme, and the leading
idea is repeated several times.  When the first idea gives place to a
second idea, this proves to be something totally unlike the idea which
it follows, making with it a strong contrast.  In the clearness of his
moods and their contrast is one source of the vigor of impression which
the Schumann music has made and is making upon the musical world.

The first number in the present program contains five pieces from the
set called "Scenes from Childhood," written in 1837, when the composer
was in the very thick of his somewhat diversified course of true love
and had advanced seven years along the pathway of a composer.

Following the "Traeumerei" are two popular selections from the "Album
for the Young," written some ten years later--the "Jolly Farmer" and
the "Little Romance."  This program number closes with the Polonaise in
D, from the "Papillons," written in 1832.  It is a very brilliant and
original piece, full of delightful pianoforte effect.

In the second series of instrumental numbers are included four of the
beautiful cycle, "Forest Scenes."  Each of these is like a little
sonnet--brief, picturesque, and individual.  In the first we have the
vague and shadowy effect of the entrance into the forest, the
shimmering leaves, the sunlight and shade, and whatever fanciful
explanation one likes of the imaginative tone-sonnet of the author.  In
the "Wayside Inn" the thematic style of Schumann is well illustrated,
and also the variety of effect possible to be obtained from a very
small amount of musical material.  The reference to the title is not
very apparent, since the speed of the piece and its quick and forcible
character deprive it of the reposeful "Stimmung" one would anticipate
from the title assigned.  I do not know the true explanation of the
"Prophetic Bird."  It is a most lovely little bit, and is now so well
known in the concert-room as not to need further discussion.

The "Farewell to the Forest" is one of the most delightful songs
without words in the whole Schumann category.  Its melody is musical
and new, and the changing rhythms, the occasional coming out of a
middle voice, and the general effect of the whole are alike interesting
and absorbing.

In the next instrumental number we come upon another mood of Schumann,
or rather upon two of them.  The "Night-piece" is of a lyric quality
enjoyable by every one.  Nearly all young players object to the speed
which Schumann has marked, and many play it much more slowly; this,
however, is not warranted, since in the nature of the case Schumann
must have known what he intended, and when we have made an allowance
for the undue slowness of his metronome at given tempi, we are still
not warranted in making this slower than eighty for quarters.  To take
it still more slowly is to change the character of all the latter part
of the piece.  If well played it is sufficiently reposeful in the form
in which we now have it.  In the second part there is some delightful
imitative work between the motive in the treble and its answer in the
tenor.

With the Novelette in F, opus 21, we come into the domain of what we
might call the higher Schumann, for in these works and in those which
follow upon this list greater demands are made upon the player, and the
music itself is deeper, stronger, more original, and therein more
satisfactory.  The novelette consists of two main parts.  First comes a
march-like movement, in which certain very strong chords with
occasional triplet octaves in the bass impart a singularly driving and
forceful character to the music.  After the double bar at the beginning
of the fifth measure a new motive appears, which sets in operation a
series of sequences, and this period ends in D-flat.

The next period begins in the same manner, but the modulation is
differently conducted, and the period now ends in the key of A.  Now
comes in what he calls the trio, a lovely lyric melody in the key of F.
This is developed to quite a length, after which the main theme of the
novelette returns, and the period ends in the key of F.  Now ensues a
curious sort of intermezzo, in the key of D-flat, where one voice
starts out with a little melodic subject and another takes it up and
imitates it, and this in turn is followed by another, quite in the
manner of fugue, only that here the motive itself is very short and the
imitations follow so fast, one after another, that only the beginning
of each is to be made out.  For the rest, it is a question of mystery.
When he has carried this as far as he cares, the first subject returns;
and after this again the trio, but now in the key of A major.  At the
end of this, again the original subject, and so finally the end.  The
most notable features of this novelette are its vigor, the different
forms in which the subjects return, and the persistence of the two main
ideas--the march and the lyric trio--which form the substance of it.
The mystic and fugue-like interlude is merely an interlude.  It perhaps
represents one of those moments when the mind is too full for clear
utterance--a condition more celebrated in fiction than desirable in
reality.

The Fantasy Pieces, opus 12, are among the most happy of the smaller
works of this composer.  Their general character is sufficiently
indicated by their titles.  "In the Evening" represents one of those
mystic moods suitable to twilight.  "Soaring" has also been translated
"Excelsior," which perhaps more truly represents its spirit.  "Why?" is
a question, just like the word; nevertheless this has become the
greatest favorite of all the smaller Schumann pieces.  "Whims" also is
well named, since in this quickly moving little piece one mood follows
another irrepressibly; among them are some which are highly poetic.
Last of all, "The End of the Song"--a very vigorous and strongly marked
movement which appeals to every one.

The Schumann songs are so remarkable as to demand separate treatment.
Those upon the present list are so placed because they represent in a
general way the more noticeable moods of Schumann in this form of art.
They can be sung high or low, as the singer's voice requires, but they
are more satisfactory if sung by a soprano voice, I think.

The first upon the list is the merry and arch little "Hat of Green,"
which with folk-tone sweetness and simplicity brings out a situation as
old as the world and as new as the morning.  The musical treatment is
very clever and interesting.

The "Wanderer's Song" is characteristically German, representing the
song of the young student as he sets out upon his student career as
traveler, for seeing strange lands; or the emigrant who leaves his land
to find a better home, but never one so well loved as his own native
country.  It is full of heart and courage until the middle part, where
the intermezzo in the key of E major tells of softer feelings--of
longing and homesickness.

"Moonlight," again, represents the peculiarly mystic and dreamy side of
the Schumann nature, and there are few songs in the whole world so
sweet and so beautiful as this; but it needs a pure, clear, and very
true soprano voice, controlled with musical feeling.  Thus interpreted
it is indeed a dream.

The next two songs upon the list are out of the famous cycle called
"Woman's Love and Life"--the poems of no great depth, but the subjects
of lasting and universal application and interest.  "He, the Noblest"
gives a very spirited and sensitive musical setting to the woman's
opinion of the loved one; words and music bring to expression one of
the most ideal moments of woman's life.  The next, "Thou Ring Upon My
Finger," tells its own story, but here, again, the music is well worth
while for its own sake.  It is interesting as an instrumental piece
without the aid of the voice.  Few songs as musical have been written.
The last upon the list, "Spring Night," while out of another
cycle,--the so-called "Liederkreis,"--is nevertheless of quite similar
excellence to the preceding.

All need to be sung with abandon, and above all with sentiment, poetry,
and flexible rhythm, yet always with abounding musical life.  To sing
such songs well is to be an artist.




CHAPTER VIII.

CHOPIN.


FREDERIC FRANCOIS CHOPIN.

  Born March 1, 1809, at Zelazowa-Wola, near Warsaw.
  Died October 17, 1849, in Paris.


Chopin was the son of a French father who had lived in Warsaw and was
teacher in the gymnasium there; his mother was a Polish woman.
Chopin's early talent for music was unmistakable, both his parents
having been gifted in this direction.  The child, therefore, was put at
music very young and appeared as a wonder-child at an early age.  His
teachers were a Bohemian named Zwyny and Joseph Elsner.  But the most
of his work he must have accomplished by himself, since we find that
before he was nineteen he had written his theme and variations upon "La
Ci Darem la Mano," and all his works up to and including the Concerto
in E minor, opus 11.  It is believed that the so-called second concerto
in F minor was also completed before this period.  This mass of works
included not alone the very remarkable variations upon Mozart's air,
already mentioned, and the brilliant concertos, with certain rondos and
mazurkas and other characteristic illustrations of the Chopin genius,
but also the studies for pianoforte, opus 10, which in methods of
treating the piano amount to a most astonishing advance over anything
which had appeared before them.  They are also as beautiful and
original from a musical standpoint as they are remarkable from that of
piano-forte technic.

[Illustration: Frederic Francois Chopin]

Accordingly, when Chopin, in 1828, went upon a concert tour to Paris,
Vienna, and Munich, he was received everywhere with astonishing
enthusiasm, and was very much surprised to hear himself called one of
the first virtuosi of the time, as, indeed, he must have been.  At
Paris his opus 2 was published (the variations just mentioned), and
this was the composition which attracted Schumann's attention and
concerning which he wrote such a glowing and enthusiastic account.  In
1829 he came to Paris to reside, and immediately became an active
member of a small but extremely brilliant art circle, among the members
of which were to be found such celebrities as Liszt, Berlioz, Heine,
Balzac, Ernst, and Meyerbeer.

Chopin's father having died, he assumed the care of his mother, and
supported himself partly by concert playing and partly by teaching.  As
early as 1838 the symptoms of pulmonary weakness began to appear, and
from that time to the end of his life he was more or less an invalid,
always in delicate health and sometimes unfit for any exertion.  From
the brilliancy of his position in Paris, the death of Chopin was a
great shock to the artistic world, and he was buried with most
impressive ceremonies.  His grave is not far from those of Bellini and
Cherubini.  He was a man of fine wit, aristocratic presence,
distinguished manners, and a highly sensitive and poetic nature, all of
which qualities reached expression in his music.

The best biography of Chopin is that by Fr. Niecks, in two volumes.
The so-called "Chopin," by Liszt, is merely a rhapsody upon his
departed friend, having very little biographical but a great deal of
critical value, because no one knew better than Liszt how to estimate
the innovations which Chopin had made in piano playing.

It will be noticed by the attentive reader that the art of modern piano
playing, as we now have it, depends practically upon the works of
Chopin, Schumann, and Liszt, with possibly a little advance help from
Weber and Thalberg.  The three artists first mentioned began to work in
their several provinces at about the same time; Chopin and Liszt
between 1826 and 1830, and Schumann from 1830 on.  Liszt, however, did
not produce works of distinguished originality until after the contest
with Thalberg in Paris and after hearing Paganini, somewhere about
1834, so that, on the whole, if superior eminence were to be accorded
either of these artists in point of priority of invention, we would
perhaps give the credit to Chopin; and in point of precocity of genius,
considering the astonishing innovations he made, I think Chopin is to
be held even in advance of Mozart, Schubert, and Mendelssohn, all of
whom created remarkably mature works in new styles at a very early age.

Chopin's works are almost entirely for the pianoforte, and he was the
originator of several forms which have now become types; the salon
waltz was practically created by him, although Weber's "Invitation to
the Dance" opened the way, and the ballads, scherzi, and nocturnes of
Chopin were new types, showing his genius in the most beautiful manner.


  PROGRAM I.  (Easy.)

  Polonaise in A major, opus 40, No. 1.
  Polonaise in C-sharp minor, opus 26, No. 1.
  Preludes: Opus 28.  No. 4, E minor.
                      No. 6, B minor.
                      No. 7, A major.
                      No. 9, E major.
  Prelude in D-flat, opus 28, No. 15.
  Waltz in C-sharp minor, opus 64.
  Waltz in D-flat, opus 64, No. 1.
  Nocturne in E-flat, opus 9, No. 2.
  Waltz in A-flat, opus 42.

  PROGRAM II.  (More difficult.)

  Polonaise in A major.
  Fantasia Impromptu in C-sharp minor, opus 66.
  Scherzo in B-flat minor, opus 31.
  Nocturne in E-flat major, opus 9, No. 2.
  Nocturne in G major, opus 37, No. 2.
  Ballad in A-flat, opus 47.

  PROGRAM III.  (Still more difficult.)

  Etudes: Opus 10, No. 1, C major.
                   No. 2, A minor.
                   No. 3, E major.
                   No. 4, C-sharp minor.
                   No. 5, G-flat (black key).
  Ballad in A-flat, opus 47.
  Romanza from First Concerto, in E minor.  (Reinecke's arrangement or
      with second piano.)
  Impromptu in A-flat, opus 29.
  Nocturne in D-flat, opus 27, No. 2.
  Polonaise in A-flat, opus 53.


In order to fully understand the individuality and genius of Frederic
Francois Chopin (1809-1849) it would be necessary to study his work
from three standpoints.  First, naturally, for what it is in and of
itself--the moods, the qualities of style, the peculiar individuality
of his musical thought; second, with reference to the modifications of
pianoforte style inaugurated by this gifted genius--modifications
which, while having their source in certain improvements of the
mechanism of the pianoforte made immediately before Chopin began to
write, would not have come so soon but for his genius and insight; and,
third, to study the relation of this master in his style of musical
ideas and working out, his fancy, his imagination, his representation
of many sides of human nature, to the music of the other composers of
the romantic school, and especially to that of Mendelssohn and
Schumann, whose compositions were produced contemporaneously with those
of Chopin.  To cover all this ground is naturally impossible in one,
two, or even in several, chapters, wherefore I shall confine myself in
the present program to illustrating a few of the characteristic
individualities of Chopin and the essential features of his style.
There are difficulties in doing this adequately, arising from the fact
that as piano virtuoso, Chopin, when fully expressing himself, did so
without regard for the convenience of imperfectly-trained hands upon
the pianoforte.  Hence the works of his which represent his genius at
its best are mostly too difficult for any but very accomplished players.

In recognition of this difficulty I have made three programs, each more
difficult than the preceding, from which the student may make his
choice, since the qualities are mainly the same in all, excepting that
his complete treatment of the pianoforte is more perfectly illustrated
in the more difficult examples of his style.  These, I may add, are no
longer the utmost limit of pianoforte difficulty, as they were at the
time when written; later writers have passed considerably beyond even
the most difficult works of Chopin.  But for pianists in general some
of the Chopin works still remain along the farthest borders of their
art.

Among the most striking peculiarities of Chopin's style are, perhaps:
first, melodiousness, combined with a certain melancholy, almost
morbid, mood; second, pleasing running work, especially for the right
hand, generally overlying an entirely simple bass, or a bass
essentially simple upon the harmonic side but broken or modified so as
to conceal this fact from the superficial observer.  All his later life
Chopin was an invalid or semi-invalid, and much of his music
illustrates a certain feverishness and morbidness of temperament.

The originality of Chopin shows best, perhaps, in his polonaises,
ballads, preludes, and nocturnes; but the two sonatas, while presenting
marked differences from those of the older writers, are, nevertheless,
tone-poems of strong originality.  Practically, he may be said to have
invented the polonaise, the nocturne, and the ballad.  The preludes are
short pieces of marked originality and expression, which have always
seemed to me like chips struck off in working at something else.  Very
likely they may have been beginnings of larger works which were never
completed.  Possibly they may have never been intended to reach any
larger dimensions than those in which we find them.  First, his
polonaises.

The polonaise, as perfected by Chopin, is a composition in 3/4 measure,
having really six beats to the measure, arranged in three twos; the
second of these six beats is divided, and there is an extra accent upon
the fifth.

Moreover, this rhythm must be kept quite strictly, like a march, for a
march the polonaise is in its general characteristics, rather than a
dance properly so called.  The fanciful description of the polonaise
given by Liszt in his memoir of Chopin may be taken as in the main
correct.  He says:

"While listening to some of the polonaises of Chopin we can almost
catch the firm, nay the more than firm, the heavy, resolute tread of
men bravely facing all the bitter injustice which the most cruel and
relentless destiny can offer with the manly pride of unblenching
courage.

"The progress of the music suggests to our imagination such magnificent
groups as were designed by Paul Veronese, robed in the rich costume of
days long past; we see passing at intervals before us brocades of gold,
velvets, damasked satins, silvery, soft, and flexible sables, hanging
sleeves gracefully thrown back upon the shoulders, embossed sabers,
boots yellow as gold or red with trampled blood, sashes with long and
undulating fringes, close chemisettes, rustling trains, stomachers
embroidered with pearls, head-dresses glittering with rubies or leafy
with emeralds, light slippers rich in amber, gloves perfumed with the
luxurious attar of the harems."

The delicacy of Chopin's playing is traditional, but Liszt is authority
for the statement that Chopin was fond of hearing his larger and more
heroic works played with a power of which he himself was incapable.  It
is related by some one that upon one occasion a very talented young
pianist called upon Chopin, and, being invited to play, did so, the
great polonaise in A-flat being the matter.  Excited by the work and by
the presence of the author, and full of the heroic spirit of the music,
he broke several hammers--an occurrence quite common in heavy playing
in those days.  Naturally, the young man was extremely mortified at
this, and endeavored to apologize over and over again.  But the
composer cut him short.  "Say not a word," said he; "if I had your
strength I would break every hammer in the piano when I played that
piece."  This may be one of those "ben trovato" anecdotes which, if not
true, ought to be.

Both the polonaises upon the first program illustrate the breadth,
impassioned force, and vigor of Chopin's idea to a marked degree, as
well, perhaps, as anything he ever composed.  The first, commonly known
as the "Military Polonaise," is one of those pompous pieces which
inevitably suggest some kind of great ceremonial.  The movement begins
in stately march-like rhythmic swing, and goes on with interruptions of
brilliant effect, as if where the cannon and drums add their noisy
emphasis.  The pomp resumes its march, but presently gives place to a
middle part--a trio.  This, again, is in the key of D major, with a
great swinging melody like a trumpet, the military rhythm going on
uninterruptedly below.  At length the original movement is resumed, and
presently comes the end.  In all, it is a matter of pomp, brilliant
ceremony, stately march, like some national festival.

The second polonaise is of a wholly different character.  The
expression is even more forcible than that of the first, but the
character is not the same.  It is now as if one remembered some of the
heroes of Poland.  With what fervor enters the leading subject (first
four measures)!  It is complete in itself.  Then comes a softer and
more capricious melody, but little more heroic than a nocturne.  The
second principal idea (measure 25) is mystic, as if some kind of
ceremonial were being conducted.  The rhythm goes on, but softly and
with interruptions.  At length the principal idea again.  Now comes the
middle piece, in the key of D-flat--a beautiful melody, one of the
finest of Chopin's, supported upon very delicate and sensitively
changing harmonies, full of chromatic and enharmonic modulation.  After
this a second idea, in which two voices carry on the interest; the
upper a soprano, the lower a baritone or tenor, and they have a sort of
dialogue (measure 66).  Then the soft melody again.  In the first
editions of this work the da capo was not marked, and for about forty
years critics gave themselves headaches in trying to explain why Chopin
invented a new form of this anomalous construction,--a first part in
the key of C-sharp minor; a second part in the key of D-flat major.
"Where," they asked, "was the unity?"  And by way of emphasis they
spelled the word Unity with a capital initial.  At last, however, some
Solomon among editors affixed the missing letters "D. C.," and behold!
we had our Unity all right.  It was simply a case of a middle piece in
the major key of the same tonic, with the notation changed
enharmonically for the sake of simplicity, the key of D-flat being, for
the majority of players, easier to read than that of C-sharp major.

The preludes which follow represent individual moods.  The first, in E
minor, consists of a slow melody, almost stationary, while against the
long tones a chord accompaniment softly pulsates, the harmonies
shifting chromatically.

The second, No. 6, in B minor, has a lovely melodic idea in the bass,
while the right hand carries a soft harmony and a slow pulsation in the
upper voice.  The impression of the whole is most mysterious,
melancholy, and tender.

No. 7, in A major, is one of the preludes which seems as if it might
have been a beginning for a longer composition, perhaps a slow waltz.

No. 9, in E major, a very grave, serious, organ-like movement, in which
massive, tremendous chord-successions march onward to a climax through
unheard-of modulations.  This piece, by the way, has been arranged for
organ very effectively by A. W. Gottschalg.  In playing it the slow
movement, the sustained and deep melody, and the steady rhythm all
require careful attention.

The prelude in D-flat represents a larger flight of the Chopin fancy.
It begins with a lovely melody, like a nocturne.  This exquisite melody
gives place to a somewhat broken part in the key of C-sharp minor, in
which the remarkable thing is the incessant repetition of the note
G-sharp.  This continues in eighth-note motion throughout all the
measures of this part of the work.  It can only be made tolerable by
careful observance of the "sotto voce" at beginning and gradually
increasing in power up to the fortissimo in the fortieth measure.
Again it subsides into pianissimo, and again the crescendo.  Finally
the original melody in D-flat is resumed--and with what grateful
sweetness!--and the piece is carried through to the close.

The waltzes of Chopin are not to be taken too seriously.  They are
salon music, but of a particularly pleasing character.  One of the most
charming, although a small one, is that in C-sharp minor, which is
built upon three leading motives.  First the motive of two measures
which opens the work; then the little passage of eighth notes which
answers it; and finally the running work beginning in measure 33.
Farther along there is a melody in D-flat, which stands in place of a
trio.  It is a sentimental and lovely melody.  The effect of the whole
is light, capricious, and musical.

Following this is the little waltz in D-flat, opus 64, so often heard,
and so many times built over in all sorts of double notes, thirds,
sixths, etc.  It illustrates the knack which Chopin had of developing a
pleasing whole out of very slight materials.  Observe the extreme
simplicity of the bass.

The name nocturne was invented by John Field, who wrote twelve pieces
with this title (the remaining ones of the twenty usually printed were
named by the publishers) which are, in effect, sonnets; little lyric
pieces, of greater or less depth, having the general type of a song
without words, but preferably of a melancholy or tender character, and
the form of a melody with accompaniment.  Chopin took up this form and
greatly ennobled it.  His nocturnes are vastly more beautiful and
original than those of Field; they have greater variety, deeper
tenderness, and in every way are more distinguished and characteristic.
The little nocturne in E-flat, opus 9, is one which is now very
generally played upon every sort of instrument capable of singing a
soprano melody.

The waltz which concludes the first program is of a more brilliant
character than the two little ones earlier upon the list.  It begins,
after the introduction, with a double rhythm, the right hand playing a
melody in double measure, while the left hand goes on in triple rhythm.
It should be played with brilliancy, the left hand quite crisp and
clear, but light; the right hand rather brilliantly.  The syncopation
gives place to agreeable running work for the right hand, and this
again to another subject in double notes, a very earnest melody.  A
little later there is another short melody, and the double-note subject
returns, and so all the material over again.


SECOND AND THIRD PROGRAMS.

The Fantasia Impromptu in C-sharp minor belongs to that class of
Chopin's works mentioned in the beginning of this chapter, in which
pleasing effects are made by fluent running work, containing more or
less changing notes and other forms of dissonance--running work so fast
that the ear does not follow each note, but skims along the melodic
thread, as it were, the general impression of an "effect" being the
form of conscious delight.  This kind of effect in music, which depends
in part upon the persistence of the pianoforte tone after the keys are
released, was original with Chopin; or, if we can not say that he fully
originated, he certainly brought it to greater perfection than any of
his predecessors ever did.  Moreover, the runs of Chopin are more
complicated and daring, yet at the same time better adapted to rapid
performance than any of those by the older writers for pianoforte.  In
the present instance, moreover, there is a further unsettling element
in the fact that against the six tones of the right hand groups, the
left hand plays groups of four tones.  This, which was never carried
out upon so extensive a scale before, is now perfectly easy to perform,
although in Chopin's time it was considered a difficulty.  It serves to
impart an elusiveness to the effect of the music, entirely in keeping
with the name.

The place of "middle piece" in this Fantasia Impromptu is filled by a
slow melody which in effect is a nocturne--quite in the manner of the
middle piece in the Impromptu in A-flat.  The principal ideas in this
are also somewhat varied in their repetitions, and light and delicate
arabesques occur, which add to the charm.  The slow part affords a
repose, after which the principal subject returns and the whole comes
to a brilliant ending by means of a coda.  The entire piece is
extremely characteristic of Chopin's genius.

The Scherzo in B-flat minor is more analogous to a ballad than to any
one of the varieties of piece known under this title in the classic
works of Beethoven.  It consists substantially of about four primordial
elements.  First there is the principal subject, the characteristic
expression of which is due to the unexpected answer of the suggestive
query of the low notes by strongly accented chords.  Still in emphatic
mood the second idea comes in (measure 48) with running work.

Then follows a delightful melodic idea (measure 64), which is repeated
in different keys no less than five times, the entire period extending
to forty-nine measures.  The accompaniment of this charming melody is
thoroughly Chopinesque, consisting of arpeggio figures generally
covering the compass of a tenth.  In spirit this passage is much the
same as that of the second idea in the Polonaise in C-sharp minor.
After the second idea there is a coda concluding this part of the work.
It is then repeated with a few very slight modifications.  Then follows
the middle piece, a melody in the key of A, a novel relation of keys
which no doubt troubled the contemporaries of the composer more than it
need us, since the key of the piece is properly D-flat, the B-flat
minor predominating only at the beginning, and the first part, as well
as the last, closing in D-flat major.  From this to the key of A,
counting by the keyboard, is a major third, and everybody knows that
the major third above or below is an agreeable relation of keys;
moreover, we have here the music to tell us.  This middle part is
mystic and truly charming.  Several other ideas meet us presently, one
of which, with triplets in the alto, is rather troublesome to play and
still more troublesome when it occurs again near the end of the piece.
Also some very pretty running work, charmingly supported upon a bass
containing considerable melody of its own.  This running work is
afterward given considerable development, as also is the subordinate
idea already referred to characterized by the triplets in the alto, and
then the first part of the piece is repeated, and so at length the end.

The name "scherzo" in this connection is to be taken as signifying a
play of fancy, rather than an especially playful mood in the sense of
mirthfulness; in fact, it is not easy to find a rational explanation of
the grounds upon which Chopin named his pieces, especially as between
the ballad and the scherzo.  Probably, however, he called those ballads
which begin with a lyric melody and depend for their interest mainly
upon the development of lyric melodies, reaching at times a tragic
elevation; but even with this explanation the line between the
nocturnes and ballads will be very difficult to draw, since the
Nocturne in G major, of which we shall speak presently, lacks only a
more brilliant treatment in the middle part to raise it to the grade of
a ballad.  On the whole, we may as well confess that all these names
are more or less fanciful and perhaps applied without any very deep
reason, but simply because it was necessary to call the pieces by some
title in particular.

The Nocturne in G major is one of the most pleasing of all the
compositions of this kind in the works of Chopin.  It is also rather
difficult, since the principal subject runs in thirds and sixths more
or less chromatic and in the course of the treatment these figures are
carried into a large number of keys, in all of which they have to
retain a singing quality of tone in the soprano and a very clean and
legato style of performance; but when adequately done the effect is
very charming indeed.  The middle part again consists of a very
beautiful digression, something like a cradle song, or a barcarolle,--a
gentle, peaceful, rocking motion,--and then again the principal subject
returns.  It will be seen that in spite of the quite considerable
length to which this nocturne is developed, it never rises to the
impassioned diversification which Chopin seems to have considered as
belonging to the ballad.  For all his ballads, no matter how quiet
their opening subject, become more or less dramatic before they are
completed.

The Ballad in A-flat is one of the most frequently played compositions
of Chopin.  It opens with a very pleasing and melodious subject, which,
by the aid of various subordinate ideas, is carried out to the extent
of fifty-two measures.  At this point a new motion begins and a very
pleasing second subject, of a more playful character, perhaps, than the
first.  Later on, in measure 115, some very pretty running work comes
in; then again, still farther on, where the signature changes to four
sharps, the second subject appears in the treble, somewhat changed,
against some very pretty running work in the bass; and then begins a
charming and elaborate building up to the climax, when the first
subject is brought back in fortissimo form.  For the player and for the
hearer this piece, when well treated, is one of the most pleasing piano
solos possible to mention.  I do not know, however, that it is
necessary to turn it wrong side out in the effort to find some hidden
or recondite meaning.  It is pleasing and well made rather than deeply
impassioned, and it is a mistake to overdo the contrasts in it.

The studies of Chopin form a literature by themselves.  In all, there
are twenty-seven published.  The first book, opus 10, containing twelve
studies, was composed when Chopin was a boy of sixteen or seventeen,
and I do not think the history of music shows any similar case of
precocity.  These studies were vastly more difficult than anything
existing at that time excepting the fugues of Bach, and they spring out
at once, fully armed as it were, with a well-developed style in melody,
in harmonic handling, and especially in the application of the hands to
the piano; thus they turned over an entirely new leaf; and what is more
significant, and to the credit of the young genius, is that he seems to
have divined, by a sort of intuition, the strategic points of modern
piano playing as it was to be, so that in spite of these works having
now been before the musical world more than fifty years and their
having entered into conservatory and boarding-school curricula to an
almost universal extent, the pianist who can play them all in the
manner in which Chopin intended is already an artist.  They belong to
the most poetic and sagaciously conceived compositions for the
instrument.  The five here selected are not particularly better than
the five next following, or the last numbers of this same opus, and
perhaps no better than those in the second set, the opus 25.  The first
study, in C major, has for its object to accustom the hand to wide
extensions, the arpeggio figure nearly always covering a tenth and
sometimes an eleventh.  This extension should be accomplished by the
fingers themselves as far as possible, and then by slightly turning the
wrist.  To play this study well betokens first-class execution.  The
second study, in A minor, has a chromatic scale for soprano with
staccato chords below, and its technical object is to impart greater
flexibility and usefulness to the fourth and fifth fingers of the right
hand.  The third, also, is a cantabile in a beautiful singing melody,
with some very interesting contrasts in the middle part.  Here, again,
Chopin addresses himself to the weak fingers of the right hand, since
these are the ones which will experience the greatest difficulty in
securing a proper effect in this study.  No. 4 is a very impassioned
presto in C-sharp minor, in which strong single notes and octaves
occur, along with an insistent and very rapid sixteenth-note motion.
The effect of the whole is very strong and striking, and esthetically
considered it belongs to the dramatically conceived moods of Chopin.
No. 5, in G-flat major, is commonly known as the "black-key study," and
its object is to accustom the hands to the black keys and to very rapid
changes from one part of the keyboard to another.  It is a charming
piece, producing the effect of a delightful scherzo.

It is interesting to note in this connection that all of these studies
and many others belonging to this set have, in recent times, been
rewritten for the left hand.  This has been done in various ways.  Mr.
Phillippe, of Paris, has simply transferred the right-hand part to the
left, and left the right hand with nothing or with but little to do.
Mr. Leopold Godowsky, the distinguished Russian pianist, has taken a
different course.  The first study he has placed with the arpeggio
figure in both hands simultaneously, and a heavy melody of chords is
also added.  The second study gives the chromatic runs to the weak
fingers of the left hand.  The black-key study also is written for the
left hand, while an entirely new part has been composed for the right.
One of the most curious of all these arrangements of Chopin's material
is that of the late eminent organist, August Haupt, of Berlin, who
arranged this fourth study in C-sharp minor for the organ for Mr.
Clarence Eddy, by whom it is often played in concerts with an effect
extremely remarkable, especially when the pedals have the
sixteenth-note motion.

It should not be forgotten that all these five studies, as well as the
others in the whole collection, are tone-poems no less than exercises
for the pianoforte, and they can not be said to have been played until
this poetic sense is derived from them.

The romanza from the Concerto in E minor is a very beautiful
nocturne-like movement, and if given with an accompaniment of second
piano, or, better still, a very soft accompaniment of organ, it
produces the most delightful effect.

The Impromptu in A-flat, opus 29, might just as well have been called a
study, since the essential part of it is a rapid movement in eighth
notes having for its object, in part at least, the freer and more
delicate treatment of the left hand in accompaniments.  It will require
a great deal of practice to play well, but when so played it produces a
very pleasing pianoforte effect.  It belongs to the same class of
Chopin's works as the Fantasia Impromptu in C-sharp minor, already
mentioned.  The middle part of this impromptu, as in the case of the
other, is essentially a nocturne-like movement.

The Nocturne in D-flat, opus 27, No. 2, is very often played.  It is a
very beautiful composition, and while representing a number of serious
technical difficulties, esthetically considered, it is perhaps
sufficiently plain to any student capable of mastering it.  In all
these cases it is to be observed that Chopin takes the implication of
the term "nocturne" somewhat freely, often developing the idea with
considerable force and dramatic spirit.

One of the most celebrated of all the compositions of Chopin is the
famous Polonaise in A-flat major, which seems in the fullest manner to
illustrate the description of the polonaise already quoted above, from
Liszt's Chopin.  This remarkable work opens with a rather striking
introduction, the principal subject entering in the seventeenth
measure, very bold and strong.  In the forty-ninth measure an extremely
forcible and dramatic idea begins which presently, in the fifty-seventh
measure, gives place to a more quiet melody.  The most remarkable part
of this piece, and the one which has had much to do with its use by
virtuoso pianists, is the middle part in E major.  Here, after a series
of heavy chords, a sixteenth-note motion enters in octaves for the left
hand, and for the right hand a melody, which is at first soft and
afterward built up.  This octave middle figure continues without
interruption for sixteen measures, and then, after the chords are
repeated, is continued again for the same length of time.  When this is
properly done, the passage begins quite softly and works up by degrees
until the very imposing climax at the end, and in the repetition the
same thing takes place again.  The difficulty consists in this
insistent repetition of the same figure in the left hand, and a very
clear note of Chopin's genius is seen when he changes this bass figure
from E major to E-flat major.  This change, although apparently not
significant on paper, has the keyboard peculiarity of giving the left
hand a rotary motion in the opposite direction from that necessitated
in the E major, and in three measures of it the player unwinds himself,
as it were, and is ready to begin again with the original figure.
Still another pleasing Chopin peculiarity is noted at the close of this
strong part, where there is a page or more of very delightful dreamy
work, at first in G major, afterward in F minor, and so at length the
original subject is resumed and the Polonaise brought to an end.  A
work of this magnitude admits of being considered in so many different
lights as to make any short discussion of it seem fragmentary and
suggestive merely, and such, in fact, is the intention of the present
comments.  Enough that we have in it a poetic suggestion brought to
expression.




CHAPTER IX.

BACH, BEETHOVEN, SCHUMANN, AND CHOPIN.

There are endless selections of compositions which might be made in
order to bring together into a single chapter enough of the music of
these four great masters to give a taste of their individualities,
style, and sentiment.  Following are examples:


  PROGRAM I.

  Bach, Prelude and Fugue in C minor, Clavier, No. 2.
  Beethoven, Sonate Pathetique, opus 13.
  Schumann, Forest Scenes; "Entrance."
                           "Wayside Inn."
                           "Prophetic Bird."
                           "Homeward."
  Bach, Fantasia in C minor.  Loure in G (Heinze).
  Chopin, Nocturne in G minor, opus 37, No. 1.
  Waltz in A-flat, opus 42.

  PROGRAM II.

  Bach, Prelude and Fugue in D major, Clavier, No. 5.
  Beethoven, Sonata in D, opus 10, No. 3.
  Schumann, Fantasy Pieces, opus 12: "At Evening."
                                     "Excelsior."
                                     "Why?"
                                     "Whims."
                                     "Dream Visions."
                                     "End of the Song."
  Chopin, Nocturne in B major, opus 32, No. 1.
  Ballad in A-flat, opus 47.

  PROGRAM III.

  Bach, Prelude and Fugue in C-sharp, Clavier, No. 3.
  Beethoven, Sonata in A-flat, opus 26.
  Schumann, Fantasy Pieces, Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8.
  Chopin, Nocturne in B major, opus 32, No. 1.
       Ballad in A-flat, opus 47.

  PROGRAM IV.  (Regardless of difficulty.)

  Bach, Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue.
  Beethoven, Sonata, opus III.  C minor.
  Schumann, Etudes Symphoniques, opus 13.
  Chopin, Nocturne in D-flat major, opus 27, No. 2.
       Polonaise in A-flat, opus 53.


To discuss these selections in detail would take us too far, for which
reason only those observations will be made which seem more essential.
Throughout, the intention is to alternate the thematic work of Bach and
Schumann with the lyric or quasi-lyric writing of Beethoven and Chopin.
While Beethoven was also at times thematic, his work is generally well
balanced as to its structure, and so melodious in comparison with
almost anything of Schumann (excepting a few distinctly lyric pieces)
or of Bach, that it seems like lyric melody.  It was also the intention
in these programs to preserve an agreeable succession of keys.  The
first three programs are of moderate difficulty, although not so easy
as might be made.  Still, in the present state of piano playing there
are few seminaries or private circles where these numbers can not be
played well enough to afford pleasure and instruction.

Of the various Bach numbers upon the programs the following
distinctions may be made: The preludes and fugues are generally
contrasted in respect of the qualities of lyric and thematic writing
respectively.  The prelude in C minor, for instance, is almost an
exercise, being without clearly expressed melody (although the accents
in the soprano distinctly suggest a melody), and the whole is rapid and
incisive.  The fugue, on the other hand, opens with a very sprightly
idea, which is carried out delightfully, quite in the manner of a
scherzo.  The prelude in D major, again, is very light and graceful,
yet having a character somewhat between a fancy piece of tone-poetry
and an exercise, being capable of receiving either construction,
according to the ability and skill of the player.  The fugue, on the
contrary, is rather firm, resolute, and marked, yet with distinct
touches of sentiment--which latter quality is always to be sought for
in the playing, but without resorting to rubato.  It is not enough to
present these selections, they must be made to display the best effect
of which they are capable.  It is not a question of composers merely,
but why we should love and reverence them.  The prelude in C-sharp is
one of the loveliest in the entire "Clavier."  It is lyric in its
principal motive, and there is a very pretty interlude of alternating
work between the two hands upon the dominant, just before the return of
the principal theme, which is quite in modern style.  The fugue also is
very melodious, yet at the same time rather difficult, and it will be a
good player who is able to produce this fugue successfully in anything
short of about a month's practice.  With the last program we come upon
a very different grade of difficulty, especially in the matter of
interpretation, for in mere finger work the last Bach piece is not so
much more difficult than the fugue in C-sharp major.

The "Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue" is a very curious illustration of
Bach's genius.  No one knows the circumstances under which it was
written nor the time.  There is absolutely nothing else in his works
which is at all like it, taken as a whole, although each one of its
peculiarities may perhaps be found elsewhere in his works.  It opens
with a bravura run in scale work,--the two hands co-operating
interchangeably,--which must have the character of a bold flourish,
such as a virtuoso might give upon taking his place and beginning his
piece.  This is followed with a delicate harmonic passage in which a
melody is very distinctly suggested; a very delicate and musical
passage it is.  Then the bravura run returns, and then the harmonic
arpeggio motive as before, but always carried out in different keys and
chords.  Upon these two elements the first part of the fantasia is
constructed.

In the forty-ninth measure begins another chapter, in which we have a
series of recitative-like phrases, the most of which end upon
diminished chords and contain or suggest enharmonic modulations of
extreme modern type.  The recitatives are very expressive, and their
proper delivery necessitates a high degree of musical sensitiveness and
experience in singing.  After the recitatives, at measure 76, a coda
begins, which brings the fantasia to an end.  The coda is perhaps the
most beautiful part of this great work.  I have here also forgotten to
mention the series of arpeggios upon chromatic chords, beginning in
measure 27.  These Bach wrote merely as chords to be played arpeggio,
and it was for a long time a question as to what manner of filling up
the time would be nearest his intention.  Mendelssohn, in one of his
letters, says he wishes that he knew what Bach meant here, and I
believe it is generally thought that the carrying out of the arpeggios
in Hans von Buelow's edition of this piece is very near the solution
suggested by Mendelssohn.  At any rate, I advise using the Buelow
edition, particularly as the figures are written out in full and the
fingering is carefully marked--a very important consideration in one or
two places in the fugue.

The fugue also is interesting, and is elaborated to two quite imposing
climaxes, the first beginning in measure 60 and the other in measure
140, where the bass has the principal theme in octaves.  Mr. Liebling
does not regard this fugue as quite up to Bach's standard, inasmuch as
Bach has repeated quite long passages in different keys without
materially changing the treatment, something which he rarely does, his
fertility of fancy being such that he always or nearly always avoids
exactly repeating himself, no matter how many times he chooses to bring
back the principal theme.  The composition as a whole is by far the
most modern of Bach, and it is a veritable tone-poem.  In order to
realize this it will be necessary to hear it several times, its
elaboration being so great and the difficulty of playing so
considerable that only very good players will have enough sentiment and
surplus of technic to interpret it with sufficiently musical quality.
But when so played it is one of the surest masterpieces in the entire
repertory of the piano-forte.  And in consequence of its elevated and
poetic sentiment, its caprice and program-like character, it affords
one of the best possible studies in Bach's style at its best.

The sonatas by Beethoven named upon the programs are of quite
dissimilar value.  The "Sonate Pathetique" is a very strong work
indeed, and, if we have many times seen its name, we must not forget
that after all it is not very often played in any one place.  Moreover,
new players are all the time coming on to whom this strong and original
work is new.  The introduction carries out the emotional spirit of the
Bach fantasia, as also does the work itself.  The headlong allegro, the
slow, sustained, and beautiful adagio, and the easy-going finale all
have their own beauties, and continue the story, which, as Beethoven
thought it, was one story from beginning to end.  The least
satisfactory part of this work is the rondo, the tempo of which is not
altogether easy to determine; I prefer it at rather a slow tempo.
There is a unity of movement in this work which is not always observed.
In a general way the eighth note in the introduction, the whole note in
the allegro, and the eighth note in the adagio, and the half note in
the rondo go at about the same rate--approximately, from sixty to
seventy-two by the metronome.  If any modification is made, take the
rondo faster, say about eighty-four.

A very important technical point of the work is the treatment of the
chords in the introduction and in the allegro.  All must have a melodic
quality in their highest tones, since the melody passes through the
chord.  Neglect of this imparts a brutal and unmusical quality to the
tones of chords struck so forcibly.  Throughout the work strong
contrasts continually occur between the impassioned motive and the
pathetic or appealing idea.  These two elements struggle for mastery.
The adagio is one of those slow movements for which Beethoven was
noted; the cantilena is lovely and the sentiment deep and tender.

In some respects the sonata upon the second program is even more
remarkable.  Its general build is rather light and pleasing, and
neither in length nor in dramatic contrast is it to be compared with
most of the "Pathetique."  Especially is this the case when we confine
our attention to the light and pleasing first movement and the finale.
The latter, opening with that capricious little motive which seems to
say "Why don't you?" is all the way arch, sprightly, and pleasing.  But
the second movement is one of the strongest and most impassioned in all
the sonatas.  It opens grave, serious, as if fate herself impended.  A
very slow and appealing motive is carried out thematically, almost in
the modern style of Schumann or Brahms.  It is a slow movement which
might have been played upon Olympus or in Walhalla--provided the
dissipated gods of the old dispensations had been developed to the
capacity of remorse and repentance.  Out of this profoundly sad,
despondent, slow movement grows the tender flower of the delicious
menuetto in D major which follows it.  This is not to be taken too
fast, remembering that we have our fast movement still to settle with
later.  It is a melodious, tender, gentle movement, which is one of the
most characteristic and beautiful of the kind to be found anywhere in
the entire list of the sonatas.  In point of technical difficulty this
sonata presents no very great problems.

The Sonata in A-flat, commonly remembered from the "Funeral March,"
which takes the place of a slow movement, opens with an air and
variations.  These were for a long time the most played of anything in
the entire collection of sonatas.  Lately, under the influence of the
greater variations of Schumann and Brahms, they are becoming relegated
to the more remote seats in the musical synagogue.  They are,
nevertheless, very interesting variations, quite in the "character"
line, each variation being a new picture, a new mood.  Opposed to this
kind of variations is the "formal" variation, where, although the theme
is varied in its figuration and rhythm, the harmony remains unchanged,
and the esthetic character of the successive variations remains
practically unchanged.  The "Funeral March Upon the Death of a Hero" is
one of the famous pieces.  It no longer presents material difficulties
to the student.  The scherzo must not be played too rapidly; the finale
is to go about as fast as possible, and with the greatest possible
lightness and delicacy.

The great Sonata in C minor, opus 111, is the last which Beethoven
composed, having been written after the Ninth Symphony, about a year or
two before his death.  It is very difficult, technically; very serious
in its spirit, and has the curious peculiarity of consisting of two
movements only, excepting a short but very profound and serious
introduction.  The first movement is very impassioned, and the entire
movement is developed from one or two short germs, thematically, quite
in the manner which Schumann took up and accomplished so much with.
The spirit of the allegro is almost like that of the "Sonate
Pathetique," but naturally much more mature.  The slow movement, again,
consists of an arietta of two eight-measure strains--the first in C
major, the second in A minor.  These two strains alternate throughout
the variations, which are of the formal order; but here Beethoven
manages to attain a very considerable development of interest, and
rises to an imposing climax without ever quite forsaking the peace of
the opening measures of the arietta.  The variations are quite
difficult to play, and the ending is very troublesome to treat in any
manner to make it sound as one thinks an ending should.  The whole,
while perhaps but little more characteristic of Beethoven than the
"Sonata Appassionata" or the great sonata for "Hammerklavier," opus
106, is nevertheless a very beautiful illustration of Beethoven's
tone-poetry for pianoforte.

The Schumann "Etudes Symphoniques," here chosen for illustrating this
capricious and humoristic master, is also a most astonishing work.  It
is in the form of a theme and variations, but the variations almost
require the newspaper libel-saving reservation "alleged," since the
theme in some of them is not referred to at all, while in others it
occurs but for occasional measures here and there.  Except for the
monotony of key, this piece might as well have been called "studies" as
variations.  Nevertheless it is a most delightful example of Schumann's
imagination and of tone-poetry for pianoforte.  Each variation or
successive movement is a new leaf from the world of the ideal.  Nothing
more contrasted, no more agreeable succession of moods, no more
imposing example of poetic treatment of the pianoforte is to be found
in the entire literature of the instrument.  It is a work which the
more one hears the more one likes it.  It is curious, now that this
work is so often played, to remember that Schumann wrote concerning it
to a friend that he had just been writing a set of variations which
interested him very much, but he doubted whether they would ever be
played in public.  Naturally, he said, it is unfit for such a position;
it is for the musician in his closet.  Yet of all the Schumann piano
works this one probably is oftenest played, the immortal fantasia in C
not excepted.

The other pieces here omitted from comment have perhaps already
received sufficient attention in the earlier programs where they first
appeared.

It will be quite possible for the player to substitute still other
numbers in place of some of those here, or to rearrange the matter here
presented, for the sake of using pieces which one can play well.  In
arranging the programs, however, it is desirable to preserve an
agreeable succession of keys, a due contrast of moods, and a fitting
illustration of the masters concerned.




CHAPTER X.

LISZT.


FRANZ LISZT.

  Born October 22, 1811, at Raiding, Hungary.
  Died July 31, 1886, at Bayreuth.


Unquestionably, Liszt was one of the most interesting personalities of
musical history.  This began to show itself in his early childhood.
Born at Raiding in Hungary, the boy had piano lessons at the age of
six, his father having been a good musician himself, playing easily and
well upon the piano and many other instruments.  At the age of nine the
boy appeared in concert with such success that, after a repetition of
the concert in a neighboring town, the great Hungarian magnates, Prince
Esterhazy at their head, united in providing a stipend of six hundred
gulden yearly for his proper education.  Thereupon Liszt's father
resigned his position and attended scrupulously to his son, removing to
Vienna and placing him under the teaching of the famous writer of
etudes, Czerny.  Liszt was now ten years old, and for two years he
studied in Vienna.  At the end of this period a farewell concert was
given, in which the boy played with such astonishing power that
Beethoven, who was present, came upon the stage and embraced and kissed
him at the close of the concert.

[Illustration: Franz Liszt]

Liszt was now taken to Paris, with the intention of entering him at the
Conservatory.  But Cherubini, who was then head of the institution, was
not favorable to gifted children, and admission was refused him on the
ground of his being a foreigner.  Accordingly Liszt went on by himself,
but entered upon thorough private lessons in counterpoint and
instrumentation from Paer and Reicha.  He attracted attention in Paris
at once, his princely letters of introduction giving him admission in
circles where a common person could never enter; once entered, his own
genius and fascinating personality did the rest.  Liszt seems to have
been of a very fine and sincere nature, genial, charming in
conversation, having plenty of wit as well as sentiment; entirely free
from jealousy, yet most likely feeling within himself powers which as
yet had not come to expression.  He was singularly pure in character
and a universal favorite of women as well as men.  In 1824 he made his
first concert journey to England, and he played everywhere in France
and in parts of Germany.  In 1827 his father died, and the boy now had
the responsibility of supporting his mother.  Accordingly he continued
to make his home in Paris, and occupied a part of his time in teaching.
At this time he was in the habit of playing such concert numbers as the
Weber "Invitation to the Dance,"--with perhaps a few cadenzas of his
own, but mainly in the original form,--the Concertstuecke of Weber, and
now and then a sonata of Beethoven.  One of his favorite numbers was a
sonata by Czerny, and we find a letter in which he says, substantially
(I quote from memory): "Dear Master: I wish you would write me another
sonata, for nothing pleases so well as the one you formerly wrote for
me."

Liszt does not appear to have entered upon any course as pianist which
could be called original or marking out a new path until after Paganini
came to Paris, in 1831.  This wonderful genius performed the most
astonishing and unheard-of things upon the violin.  More than a year
before this time Robert Schumann had heard him in Milan, and was
already beginning to try to do for the piano some of the things which
Paganini did upon the violin, in his famous "Studies after Paganini."

Paganini's appearance in Paris set the town on fire, musically, and for
some time all attention was centered upon him, to the neglect even of
such well-tried favorites as Liszt had by this time become.  This fact
and the inspiration of his novel playing inspired Liszt to new efforts
on his own behalf, and he now entered upon the career of original
mastery of the pianoforte and the new style which from this time
characterized his works.  It is probable that some of his famous
"Studies for Transcendent Execution" date from this period, but as he
rewrote them twice afterward, it is not possible now to say which ones,
or to trace the steps by which he arrived at the many new effects in
piano playing which later came from his pen in such astonishing and
epoch-marking number.

Berlioz, the father of program music, came back from his residence in
Italy in 1833, and brought with him his fantastic symphony, "Episodes
in the Life of an Artist."  This work Liszt set for the piano, and, if
I am right, it was the beginning of the enormous number of
transcriptions of orchestral works for piano which are to be found in
his works.  Liszt had already made a certain mark as composer, his
operetta of "Don Sancho" having been produced in 1825.

When Liszt turned his serious attention to composition, which he must
have done about this time, he entered earnestly into the path of the
so-called "music of the future," although this term had not then been
invented.  Berlioz had shown himself very bold in his modulations, and
the learned Fetis had advocated the closer association of keys which
distinguishes the harmonic practice of Richard Wagner from the rules of
the classic school.  So it was with two fixed ideas that Liszt began to
write.  First (from Berlioz), that music ought to signify something,
adhere more or less closely to a poetic or imaginative program; and,
second, that in trying to do this, one might go in any direction needed
for the desired tonal effect.  Meanwhile, upon the keyboard of the
piano he had the individuality of manner which had been developed much
sooner, and which was now taking on an astonishing range.  Add to these
influences the ideas of individuality and human freedom which were in
the air, and we need not wonder that the talent of this great artist
now blossomed out with such luxuriance that its fragrance filled the
world.

It was in 1834 that Liszt's first marriage took place, or as soon after
as circumstances warranted.  The young and brilliant Countess D'Agoult,
wearied with a tyrannic and unsympathetic husband, left him and placed
herself under the care of Liszt.  They lived during the next three
years in Geneva, in a semi-private manner, and here also Liszt
continued his studies and experiments.  Then, in 1836, he entered upon
his great career as performing artist, when he astonished Europe from
one end to the other by playing the piano in a manner previously
unheard of.  His art had everything in it.  He had enormous facility,
his very long hand giving him the same kind of mastery over technical
difficulties that Paganini had upon the finger-board of the violin;
and, while indulging in long stretches of pianissimo, he diversified
his performances by climaxes of prodigious power, under which for a
long time piano hammers gave way, so that often there were three or
four grand pianos upon the stage, and as soon as one was knocked out in
the melee another was rolled forward to be sacrificed in turn.  After a
few years the piano-makers found ways of strengthening the actions, so
that nowadays such a thing as a hammer breaking in a concert never
occurs.

In 1839 Liszt did one of those daring things which hardly any other
musician has ever done.  Hearing that the committee in charge of
raising funds for a Beethoven monument at Bonn had found themselves
making little or no headway, Liszt wrote them offering to raise the
entire missing sum himself.  This he did, and in 1847, I think it was,
he himself conducted the musical festival with which the monument was
dedicated, himself playing the Fifth Concerto of Beethoven in a manner
which Berlioz characterized gloriously in his letters from Bonn to the
Paris "Journal des Debats."

In this same year Liszt entered upon the restful period of his life in
accepting the position of musical director at Weimar, where he lived
and kept up a sort of musical court until 1861, and at intervals
afterward.  In the exercise of his duties here he was able to accept
the manuscript of Wagner's "Lohengrin" when that hot-headed young
musician had gotten himself mixed up in the revolution of 1848 at
Dresden, and Liszt produced the work at Weimar in 1850.  From that time
forward Liszt was the mouthpiece of the new school, or rather he was a
sort of godfather to it, ministering to Wagner's impecuniousness often
and again out of resources which were absurdly small when we consider
the rank of genius which the salary covered.  Liszt's salary at Weimar
was about $1100 a year.

In order to appreciate Liszt's standpoint as pianoforte writer more
particularly, it is necessary for a moment to glance at his celebrated
contemporary, Thalberg.  This artist, born one year later than Liszt,
was taught by Hummel and Sechter at Vienna, and in 1827 he made his
debut as pianist, exciting admiration by the beauty of his tone, his
unexampled equality of running work, and perhaps a little later through
an effect of which he was the inventor (at least for the
pianoforte)--that, namely, in which the melody is carried by the thumbs
in the middle range of the instrument, the long tones being sustained
by the pedal while the hands carry long and light running passages
across the full range of the instrument.  The real inventor of this
effect was Parish-Alvars, a great virtuoso of the harp, who was born in
1808.  Availing himself of the beautiful melodies of his native Wales,
and later of suitable operatic melodies of the Donizetti and Bellini
school, he created beautiful effects upon the harp, previously unheard,
by means of melodies and surrounding variations or accompanying
arabesques of runs, both arpeggios and scales.  When Thalberg began to
be praised for discovering this device in piano playing there ensued a
long and acrimonious correspondence between him and Parish-Alvars, the
latter claiming the prior invention--and rightfully so.

Thalberg arrived in Paris in 1836, and for some time there was quite a
contest between him and Liszt for superiority of art.  Thalberg sang a
melody beautifully, and his running work was of the most delightfully
clear and even description.  He was entirely reposeful in his work,
never manifesting any uneasiness of bodily position, no matter what the
difficulty of his playing might be.  Liszt, on the other hand, being of
an impassioned and nervous temperament, had a great deal more motion,
and in his brilliant climaxes he developed a strength which seemed
excessive to the aristocratic hearers constituting the main portion of
his audiences.  Presently, however, the honors of the competition went
to Liszt, where they have ever since remained.

Liszt had the good fortune to divine the future course of piano
development, as also did Schumann.  Both took for the strategic center
of the piano the principle of what has been called the "differential
touch," or discrimination in touch, by means of which not only long
passages of different kinds were discriminated from one another, as in
the Thalbergian melodies and their surrounding arabesques, but the
infinitely finer discriminations which take place within the phrase,
and especially in chord playing, where at least one tone of the chord
belongs to the melodic thread, and as such receives an emphasis, or at
least a distinctness of delivery, to which the remainder of the chord
has no claim whatever.  Moreover, while Thalberg employed the
pedal,--and it was, in fact, an indispensable condition of the effect
of his pieces,--he did not rightly consider what would be the effect
when the piano should be developed to a sonority and continuance of
vibration which in his time it did not have.  Schumann and Liszt
recognized the inner significance of the pedal, and wrote their works
with reference to what we might call perhaps a sort of pianoforte
chiaro-oscuro (luminous-indistinctness), which inevitably follows when
the pedal is rapidly employed in quickly moving chords.  In many of the
Schumann pieces this is one of the most notable elements of the tonal
beauty, and it is the underlying condition of the successful
performance of nearly or quite all of the great Liszt transcriptions.

Thus, in the course of the thirty years or more over which his activity
as composer extended, Liszt not only inaugurated new principles of
playing, but brought them to perfection himself, and illustrated them
in a thousand ways in his voluminous works; and, through the charm of
his personality and his pleasure in contact with young and promising
genius, became the master and the forming influence of all the concert
pianists who came upon the stage previous to his death.

No periods can be safely marked in the creative career of Liszt, at
least not in so far as relates to the pianoforte.  In his "Studies for
Transcendent Execution," which appear to have been first written about
1836, advanced principles of playing are illustrated as fully as any
that meet us later; and in the first of his serious transcriptions of
orchestral works for piano,--the "Fantastic Symphony" of Berlioz,--he
set himself as carefully to reproduce upon the piano the orchestral
work as he did in his famous transcriptions of the Beethoven symphonies
and the later things of Wagner.  But, while creative periods can not be
affirmed with certainty, there are differences of style.  In some of
his works he indulges in a variety of piano-playing additions having no
essential, or indeed suitable, relation to the musical matter which he
purports to be illustrating.  In others, on the contrary, he is
essentially simple, loyal, and scrupulous to the last degree.  The
latter is true of his transcriptions of some of the Schubert songs,
especially such as "My Sweet Repose," "The Wanderer," "Hark!  Hark! the
Lark," "The Erl King," "The Ave Maria," "Greeting to Spring," etc.  In
many of his operatic fantasies, on the contrary, he puts in running
work, effect-cadenzas, and interpolations of various sorts.  This is
illustrated, perhaps better than elsewhere, in his enormously difficult
fantasia upon melodies from Bellini's "Sonnambula," which for several
years was one of his own concert pieces.  In this there is a very
difficult part where two melodies are going together, and a long and
difficult trill.  Other examples of this kind of writing are found in
his "Trovatore" fantasias, his "Rigoletto," and the like.

After the production of "Lohengrin," Liszt seems to have entered upon a
more serious view of his art than he had previously held, and his works
later are generally more confined to musical considerations, and free
from display as such.  Nevertheless, the "Rigoletto" fantasia can not
have been written prior to 1851, for it was in this year that the opera
was first produced.

In cataloguing the Liszt works according to the difficulty they present
to the piano player, it must first be noted that such has been the
advance during the fifty years since the early ones were produced, that
compositions which at their first appearance seemed stupendous to
ordinary pianists have now, thanks to education and the general advance
of art, become practicable to players of little beyond ordinary
capacity.  In fact, there is a whole world of pieces by Liszt which are
more practicable to young players than most of the serious compositions
of Chopin.  The latter composer demands, above everything else,
refinement and delicate finish; Liszt demands musical idea and effect,
and, while refinement adds greatly to the charm of the works, it is not
absolutely a _sine qua non_.  In other words, Liszt always wrote with
an eye to the stage, and with a certain largeness and ample scope of
treatment, in which breadth and genuine musical intention, combined
with a certain freedom upon the keyboard, are the main conditions of
success.  From a modern standpoint, the most difficult of all the Liszt
works are, probably, his arrangement of the overture to Wagner's
"Tannhaeuser,"--which he himself considered by far the most difficult
piece ever written,--the "Don Juan" fantasia, and perhaps also the
"Sonnambula."

It is, of course, extremely difficult to illustrate powers so varied
and ample as those of Liszt in any single program, unless we were to
confine ourselves to compositions of the most extreme difficulty, since
it is in these that he has shown most fully what he considers possible
upon the pianoforte.  The following list, however, will afford a good
idea of his style, without making upon the player any demands which can
not be met by the common run of superior amateurs.  At the same time,
in consequence of the variety of composers represented, the program
presents quite a variety.


  PROGRAM.

  "A Dream of Love."  No. 3.
  "Waldesrauschen."
  "Consolation."  No. 5.
  Polonaise in E major.
  Five Transcriptions from the songs of Schubert.
      "The Wanderer."
      "Greeting to Spring."
      "My Sweet Repose."
      "Hark!  Hark! the Lark."
      "The Erl King."
  Four Transcriptions from Wagner and Paganini.
      March and Chorus from "Tannhaeuser."
      Romance of the Evening Star.  "Tannhaeuser."
      Spinning Song from "The Flying Dutchman."
      "La Campanella."  (Paganini.)
  Concerto in E-flat.  With second piano.  (Optional.)


The first group of these pieces contains four numbers entirely original
with Liszt.  The first one, "A Dream of Love," is No. 3 in a series of
nocturne-like compositions which are very melodious, picturesque, and
full of sentiment.  At the same time, toward the end of this third
number there is one of those brilliant passages the opportunity for
which Liszt could never forego.  The second piece on the list, "Forest
Murmurs," is a little on the line of the "Forest Murmurs" in Wagner's
"Siegfried," except that Liszt operates mainly in the upper range of
the piano, whereas Wagner busies himself for a long time with the lower
ranges of pitch.  When this piece is done with sufficient delicacy, and
at the same time with adequate brilliancy and fervor, it produces a
most astonishing and gratifying effect.  The next selection is one of a
set of six called "Consolations."  These, again, are nocturne-like in
character, and the one here selected is so simple that no explanation
is necessary.  The Polonaise in E major is one of the most brilliant
and satisfactory of the original pieces of Liszt for the piano.  The
semi-martial chivalry of this style of composition is extremely well
reproduced, and while there is a long passage in A minor which requires
to be played rather discreetly to prevent its becoming tiresome, there
is some lovely cadenza work in the last part in a style thoroughly
original with Liszt.

If the player prefers one of the Hungarian rhapsodies, it might be
substituted for the Polonaise in E in this group.  The Hungarian
rhapsodies are written some of them on original melodies in Hungarian
style, but most of them probably on well-known Hungarian Czardas.  It
is difficult to speak with certainty on this subject, as Liszt has left
no indications as to which are original and which are quoted.  To refer
to a very different composition in the same school, it may be mentioned
that the famous Hungarian dances of Brahms are composed upon melodies
given him by Remenyi, when both were young.  These melodies were not
traditional Hungarian themes, but were improvised by Remenyi himself.

The next group of pieces consists entirely of transcriptions from
Schubert's songs.  They are very varied in musical spirit and in manner
of treatment, but, with the exception of the long-continued succession
of octaves in "The Erl King,"--for which Schubert is responsible rather
than Liszt,--they are not very difficult for the player, and the
resources of the piano are used with the utmost discretion for
producing a musical effect.

In the third group of pieces we have several selections of the Wagner
transcriptions, beginning with the very brilliant march from
"Tannhaeuser," which, however, should not be ended at the first climax,
but the intermezzo should be played, and so to the end.  The "Romance
of the Evening Star" is one of those delightful melodies which it is
always a pleasure to hear.  These selections conclude with the very
brilliant study after Paganini, "La Campanella."  In case this should
not prove practicable for the player, a Liszt rhapsody might be
substituted or the Tarantelle from "Venice and Naples."  The program
may be regarded as complete at this point, but if it happens to be
convenient to give one or more movements of the Concerto in E-flat, a
still different idea of Liszt's manner of writing will have been
gained.  The Concerto in E-flat is very brilliant, but, excepting the
third movement, is not very difficult.  There are few piano pieces in
the repertory which produce so much effect in proportion to the labor
of performing them as this.  It would be possible to omit the third
movement and play the first, second, and fourth.




CHAPTER XI.

BACH, BEETHOVEN, CHOPIN, SCHUMANN, LISZT.

The fullness with which the characteristics of the different composers
have been treated in the preceding chapters of this course leaves
little to be said in this final summing up, since the only element of
the present program which we have not already had in combination with
the others is that of Liszt, itself fully treated in the previous
chapter.

We have now arrived at a point where a completely developed recital
program, according to modern ideas, can be presented, and this upon a
great variety of grades of difficulty.  As an illustration, three
programs are given.  The first contains nothing of greater difficulty
than the fifth grade, and is, therefore, within the reach of pianists
of very moderate abilities.  The second is of a more difficult
character, involving technic up to the eighth or ninth grade, and
requiring more experience and brilliant capacity.  The third program is
a fully developed recital, such as an artist might play.  In so far as
regards the mechanical difficulties of the last program, they are not
beyond the reach of the better class of pianists, as we find them
almost anywhere; but from an artistic point of view the interpretations
require a good deal of musical maturity.


  PROGRAM I.  (Easy.)

  Bach,
        Prelude and Fugue in D major.  Clavier, No. 5.
        Saraband in E minor.
        Loure in G major.  (Heinze.)
  Beethoven,
        Sonata in G major, opus 14, No. 2.
  Chopin,
        Impromptu in A-flat, opus 29.
        Nocturne in B major, opus 15.
  Schumann,
        Forest Scenes: "Entrance," "Wayside Inn," "Homeward."
        Nachtstueck in F, opus 23, No. 4.
  Wagner-Liszt,
        Spinning Song, from "The Flying Dutchman."

  PROGRAM II.  (Moderate.)

  Bach,
        Prelude and Fugue in C-sharp major.  Clavier, No. 3.
  Beethoven,
        Sonata in A-flat major, opus 26.
  Schumann,
        Fancy Pieces, opus 12: "In the Evening," "Soaring," "Why?"
            "Whims," "End of the Song."
  Chopin,
        Prelude in D-flat; Scherzo in B-flat minor.
  Liszt,
        "A Dream of Love" (No. 3); Eighth Hungarian Rhapsody.

  PROGRAM III.  (Difficult.)

  Bach-Liszt,
        Fantasia and Fugue in G minor.  (Organ.)
  Beethoven,
        Sonata in C minor, opus 111.
  Chopin,
        Fantasia Impromptu in C-sharp minor, opus 66.
        Studies, opus 10, Nos. 3, 5, and 12.
        Nocturne in G major, opus 37.
  Schumann,
        "Kreisleriana," opus 16, Nos. 1 and 2.
  Liszt,
        "Eclogue," "Au Bord D'Un Source."
        "The Erl King."  (Schubert.)


In all these programs, except the second, the order observed is that of
Bach, Beethoven, Chopin, Schumann, and Liszt.  When forming a program
to be played before those not accustomed to classic music, it is quite
practicable to make a combination on a different plan, beginning with a
combination of three pieces by Bach, Chopin, and Schumann or Liszt, or
Bach, Schumann, and Chopin.  These could be followed by a serious
Beethoven work, such as one of the larger sonatas; and this again by a
few small pieces, in order to relieve the overtaxed attention; the
whole concluding with a Hungarian rhapsody or some other brilliant
piece.  The advantage of this arrangement is that the audience does not
have to wait so long before arriving at music which pleases.

In the ordinary arrangement--as that in the programs above--the program
follows a systematic development from the beginning to the end, in the
direction of greater freedom of expression and more brilliancy and
adaptability to the pianoforte; so the music becomes more and more
pleasing all the way through, and the only trouble is a fear lest the
early pieces may prove too severe to those who are not accustomed to
listening to music of this kind.  In the case of musical clubs, and
other places where the study of art is the principal motive, this fear
is not entitled to any weight, since when it is designed to present
programs of serious works, requiring to be understood and to be heard
several times before their full meaning is apparent to the listener, a
certain amount of preliminary analysis or study ought to be done,
either by members of the club separately or by the club together in a
sort of preliminary rehearsal by a competent person, who will both play
the works in fragments and comment upon their peculiarities.  As an
illustration of a program arranged on the plan last mentioned, the
following is presented:


1.  Bach, Prelude and Fugue in C-sharp major, Clavier No. 3.  Chopin,
    Fantasia Impromptu in C-sharp minor, Valse in A-flat, opus 42.

2.  Beethoven, "Sonata Appassionata," opus 57.

3.  Grieg, "Butterflies."  Wm. Mason, "Reverie Poetique," "The Silver
    Spring."

4.  Schumann, "Traumes Wirren," "End of the Song," opus 12.  Liszt,
    Second Hungarian Rhapsody.


This could be played in two numbers, pausing after the sonata; or,
better, in four, pausing after the Chopin valse, the sonata, and the
Mason "Silver Spring."  Each number is pleasing by itself.

A certain amount of care has been taken in the easy program to
illustrate different phases of all the writers; accordingly, the Bach
illustration begins with the Prelude and Fugue in D major, which is a
very pleasing one, followed by the short Saraband in E minor, and this
again by the Loure in G major.  The saraband is of a very serious and
melodious turn, and is about as near a sustained lyric melody as Bach
ever got upon the piano.  In writing for the violin he reaches a higher
flight in several cases.

In the most difficult program of all, we open with the Bach-Liszt
Fantasia and Fugue in G minor, which, having originally been composed
for the organ with a difficult pedal part, becomes very much more
difficult when put upon the piano for two hands alone.  This is a very
remarkable work indeed, the fantasia being full of chromatic changes
and very expressive and thoroughly modern modulations and sequences.
It is almost as modern a work as the "Chromatic Fantasia."  The fugue
is remarkable for having a very long subject, which is almost a gavotte
in its rhythm; and the splendid subject is developed with charming
freedom.  It is one of the greatest favorites of all the Bach fugues,
and when arranged for orchestra--as has been done by Abert--it is one
of the most pleasing numbers in the entire orchestral repertory, never
failing of delighting an audience.  The Beethoven sonata in this
program (opus 111, in C minor) is the last one which that great master
wrote.  Opinions of artists differ in regard to this sonata; some, like
the present writer, holding it to be, on the whole, the most expressive
of all the sonatas, or nearly so; others regarding the last movement as
practically a failure.  The peculiarities of the work which have given
rise to these differences of opinion are substantially the following:
It begins with a slow introduction, which is full of meditative and
dreamy harmonic changes of a very delicate and suggestive character.
Then enters the allegro, with a very strong subject, such as would
naturally be used for a fugue.  The entire first movement is developed
out of this subject in a very strong and almost fugue-like manner.  In
fact, fugal passages occur repeatedly in the course of this
development.  The effect of the whole is very impassioned and
irresistible.  It is a very similar vein to that of the allegro
movement of the "Sonate Pathetique," a work which Beethoven composed
about twenty-five years earlier.

Up to this point it will be seen that the work differs from the usual
sonata treatment in not possessing a lyric second subject.  The element
of song-like repose is entirely wanting in this first movement; it is
suggested in the slow introduction, but in the allegro itself we have
nothing of it.

The second movement consists of an Arietta, which is in two
strains--one in C major, the other in A minor.  These two strains are
treated with variations through a very long and highly developed
unfolding, the necessary relief of key being secured by the alternating
tonalities of C and A minor.  In my opinion, what Beethoven sought to
do was to end this sonata in a more serious and poetic vein than
sonatas usually close in.  The general character of the sonata form,
with a slow movement in the middle, necessarily amounts to an
anti-climax.  The sonata finale is almost always either a
sonata-piece--in which case it is of a very impassioned character, such
as we find illustrated in the first sonata and in the "Moonlight
Sonata"; or a rondo--an easy-going movement, the principal subject
often returning, examples of which we find in the "Pastoral Sonata,"
the opus 2 in C major, opus 7 in E-flat, and a great variety of others.
While the regular finale admits of a serious and effective ending, it
precludes the peculiarly elevated and poetic sentiment of the adagio
movement.  I think Beethoven undertook in the present instance to
develop the sonata to the necessary complexity for climax and at the
same time to end with the poetic and sentimental spirit.  When these
variations are played in this mood, they produce a very beautiful and
excellent effect, but the close of the sonata is very difficult to
treat satisfactorily.

In the Liszt selections at the close of the last program are two pieces
very seldom played--an eclogue and "At the Fountain."  Both these
require delicate playing rather than extremely brilliant, and both are
rather difficult, without making a show proportionate to the difficulty
of performing them.  They are, however, very musical and pleasing.  The
whole ends with "The Erl King" of Schubert.



CHAPTER XII.

CONCERNING THE TYPICAL MUSICAL FORMS.

By form in music is meant the general plan in accordance with which the
ideas composing the piece are arranged; that is to say, if the piece be
a short melody of one period, there will be one phrase which is
repeated at least twice, and two other phrases which are not exactly
alike.  In an ordinary simple melody the first phrase has the general
character of proposing a subject or of stating a proposition, and the
second phrase has the general character of answering that subject, or,
in musical parlance, it forms a counter-theme, but as a rule does not
fully complete itself on the original key.  The third phrase is very
often quite the same as the first; thus the original proposition is
repeated and emphasized, and the fourth phrase completely answers it
and ends upon the principal key.  A period of this type is known as a
"lyric" form, and this is the general type of all simple melodies.

There is a period of quite a different type, sometimes called
"thematic," in which, in place of a single idea extending throughout
the first phrase, we have a short idea, or motive, which is repeated or
modified in one way or another a sufficient number of times to fill up
the rhythm proper to the first phrase of the simple period--viz., two
measures.  Occasionally, the development of this motive is carried
through the first two phrases of the piece, or four measures; after
which it is answered by a counter-theme or new material, bringing the
whole period to an end on its own or some other key.  This type of
construction is very common in Schumann's works, and striking examples
of it are found in the first period of the Novelette in E major, the
first "Kreisleriana," the first period of the "Aufsschwung," and in
many other places.  Up to this point we might make a scheme of the
period forms as follows: Letting _a_ represent the first subject
unchanged, _a'_ the first subject slightly modified and _b_ the
answering material, and _b'_ the answering material of the
counter-theme somewhat modified, the lyric period would present the
following schedule:

    _a_ plus _b_    _a_ plus _b'_;

and the thematic this:

    _a_ plus _a'_   _b_ plus _b'_;

or, more generally:

    _a_ plus _b_.

The _a_ and _b_ in this latter case each extend to four measures.

In case a form is to be developed to two periods, new material is often
introduced at the beginning of the second period.  Designating this new
material by _c_ and _c'_, the schedule of the two-measure period would
be as follows:

     First period: _a_ plus _b_      _a_ plus _b'_.
    Second period: _c_ plus _c'_     _a_ plus _b'_.


Thus represented in algebraic formulae, it is easy to see that
repetition of the materials designated _a_, or _a_ and _b_ together, is
the source of unity in the period, and the third element introduced,
here designated as _c_, has its only use in serving as variety.  The
normal dimensions for the two-period form just scheduled would be
sixteen measures; but if the motive were two measures, then the period
form resulting would be sixteen measures, and the two-period form
thirty-two measures.  Many examples will be found in the instrumental
works of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, and also in Schumann.

This simple form above given serves also as a type of the organization
of the larger forms.  For example, one of the most numerously
represented forms in music is the rondo, which derives its name from
the reappearance of the principal subject at intervals, after the
manner of a round.  Supposing such a principal subject to be a one- or
two-period song form like those described above, this entire form would
be designated as A; after A, a small amount of passage work might be
introduced, and then would enter a second form, B, which within itself,
however, would be modeled quite like the two-period form described
above.  After this second form the first form would then be repeated,
and after this a coda would be added.  Designating the entire first
form or principal subject of a rondo by A, and the second subject or
second song form by B, the rondo then will have this schedule:

    A plus B plus A plus Coda.

This is the form of the great majority of polkas and waltzes, except
that the song forms standing for A and B respectively are very often of
three periods instead of two.  This form also lies at the foundation of
the great majority of salon pieces for the piano.

The only difference between the rondo form and the form last
described--the proper designation of which is "song form with trio"--is
that the rondo introduces passage work between the subject and the
second subject.  Should it be desired to develop the rondo to a greater
length, the second subject can be repeated after the repetition of the
first, and the first subject brought in still again.  A third subject
can be introduced, and in the longest rondo form the schedule is like
this, C standing for the third subject:

    A-B-A-C-A-B-A-Coda.

A form of this sort might extend to a very considerable length, as
happens in the case of Chopin's Rondo in E-flat major, opus 18, which
reaches to ten or twelve pages and occupies about ten minutes to
perform.

The essential principle of musical form--form in music--is quite
analogous to form in literature.  As in a poem or article the first
consideration is Unity, or the preponderance of a leading idea, and the
second Variety, or the occurrence of interesting illustrative matter,
and the third Symmetry, or the just relation between the different
parts in order that the leading idea may not be obscured by the
prolixity of the subordinate ideas, so the same principles prevail in
music.  Unity also is attained by peculiarly similar means in both
cases.  As in the article the leading idea is repeated a number of
times in order to impress it upon the hearer, but frequently in
different language, so in music the principal idea is repeated more
times than any other in the course of the piece; and in the small
forms, or rather in the molecular construction of a piece of music, the
repetitions are in a great variety of speech, exactly as they are in a
well-made article.  The same idea can be presented in different
aspects, and different words may express it.  In music this takes place
through the appearance of the motive in different chords from those in
which it first appeared, giving rise to variations in the melodic
intervals and the like.

Symmetry in music is much more exactly observed than in literary
composition, even in verse, since music itself is a matter of time and
vibration, and the proportionate and mathematical relation of parts
belongs to the very essence of the art.  Every musical form, therefore,
whether large or small, consists essentially of one leading idea and of
two or more subordinate ideas, brought in with whatever cleverness of
treatment the composer may find convenient, and the whole turned over
and diversified according to his fancy.

In certain aspects the musical forms bear a good deal of resemblance to
the quasi-geometric figures called arabesques, in which a certain line
or form is many times repeated; or to the arrangement of crystals which
the frost forms upon the glass of the window, when the simple
crystalline form of water is repeated in a great diversity of ways, and
larger figures and curious symmetries and suggestions are brought out.
In music of a serious construction the leading motives are diversified
in a great variety of ways by being made to appear in different chords
and intervals from the original form, and by being carried into other
keys, whereby the impression upon the ear is very materially modified,
at the same time without destroying the unity of the idea.

Musical forms in general may be divided into elementary and complete.
The elementary forms are those which are used as structural elements in
the larger or complete forms.  Thus, a motive repeated becomes a
phrase; a phrase repeated or answered by counter-theme becomes a
section; a section repeated becomes a period; the period repeated or
modified becomes a two-period form or a period group, which may extend
to a considerable number of periods.  Out of these elementary forms the
large forms are constructed.  Beginning with the song form as the
principal subject, the rondo goes on with a second song form as second
subject, and so on to any extent desirable, according to the plan given
above.  In analyzing a large piece of music to find these leading
subjects, the student should begin by first finding the great divisions
in the piece, such as, for instance, those where an entirely new melody
comes in a change of key, and the like.  Having found the larger points
of joining, he should then proceed to find the dividing lines in the
smaller parts, which, in music, is rendered somewhat more difficult in
consequence of the entire absence of punctuation bringing out relations
of this kind.  Not only are the marks wanting, but the bars confuse the
eye and make it more difficult to find the real point where the ideas
begin and end.  The student, however, accustomed to memorizing his
music, and consequently to thinking about it, will soon be able to find
it by his intuition, in the same way that the reader knows when the
sentence has been completed by the sense and not necessarily by the
period which is placed after the last word.

There are a few leading types of form to which all others more or less
conform.  The first of these, and perhaps, on the whole, the most
important, are those which are called unitary forms.  A unitary form is
a musical form with only one leading melodic idea, out of which the
entire piece is developed.  This can only be done in one or the other
of three ways.  Taking the simplest way first, it will be to develop
this leading idea into a song form according to the pattern given
above, in the beginning of this discussion.  This, being sufficiently
obvious on the face of it, requires no further attention here.  Forms
of this kind belong essentially to popular music, although they are not
uncommon by way of relief in the more elevated art music.

There are two types of unitary form, however, which enter into and
color all instrumental music to a degree, making it indispensable that
the pupil thoroughly understand them.  The first of these is the fugue.
In the fugue a melodic subject of two measures or four, rarely more, is
taken by a single voice and is answered by another voice in the
dominant, and this again by the third voice in the original key, and so
on according to the number of voices performing the fugue.  The voice
which has completed the subject goes on with the counter-subject or the
counterpoint while the second voice is singing the subject.  When all
the voices have had their turn at the phrase there is an interlude of
modulating material, after which the subject comes again and is
answered one or more times in the properly related keys, for which the
artificer of fugues has his rules already prepared, following the
principles laid down by Bach.  After this second appearance of the
theme in these new keys, another interlude, and then an additional
strophe in still a different key and with finer treatment; and thus,
according to the fancy of the composer and his skill, the piece is
extended to one, two, or even six or eight pages.  But during the whole
of it the principal subject has reappeared at very short intervals and
in a great variety of keys, while the interlude matter has always been
of a lighter and less significant character.  In order to arrive at an
appreciation of fugues, the student perhaps can not do better than to
begin with some of the two-part inventions of Bach, which, while not
following the fugue form strictly, approximate it very nearly.  The
first invention and the eighth are perhaps the best for this purpose.
After these, an easy fugue in the "Well-tempered Clavier," such as the
one in D major or that in C minor; more difficult examples are those in
C-sharp major and in G major.  In the development of fugues the old
masters made use of a great variety of artifices, including all the
devices of double counterpoint at the tenth and twelfth, canon and
inversion, the latter applied not alone to the relation of the voices
but also to the melodic material constituting a voice.  "The fugue,"
Cherubini says, "contains everything which a good composer ought to
know," and it is, in fact, the underlying element in all serious
moments of modern music except those which are purely lyric.  The fugue
underlies the elaboration in the middle of a sonata-piece, and, in
fact, is the original source, as said before, of nearly all the serious
moments in the higher departments of art.

The second serious unitary form is the theme and variation.  In this
case the theme is itself a complete song form of perhaps two or three
periods, and each variation is precisely of the same number of
measures, and follows the same harmonic structure in many cases.

There are, however, in modern use, two types of the variation form.
One of these, called formal variations, leaves the harmony entirely the
same in all the variations, except, perhaps, to change the melody from
major to minor of the same key and back again.  In the best examples
the harmony remains entirely unchanged, but the melody is diversified
rhythmically in various ways.  Good examples of this type of variations
are to be found in the works of Mozart and in the second movement of
Beethoven's Sonata in G major, opus 14, and in the second movement of
the "Sonata Appassionata" of Beethoven.

The character variation pursues a different course.  At times the key
is changed and the harmony changes very much.  In order to see how this
can be accomplished without destroying the identity of the musical
idea, it should be remembered that a musical idea consists essentially
of three elements: it has a rhythm, a melodic figure, and a harmonic
foundation.  If the melodic figure is retained, and the harmonic
figure, the rhythm can be diversified indefinitely, and, in fact, if
any two of these elements are retained the third can be modified very
much.  In the latest practice of variation writing, two of these
elements are changed at the same time, leaving only one element fixed,
and in some instances it is difficult to find exactly where any of the
original element of the theme remains.  Beethoven began the development
of character variation in his Sonata, opus 26, the first movement of
which is in this form.  He also did more or less in this direction in
his famous "Thirty-two Variations."  The variations of Schumann in the
"Etudes Symphoniques" pass even beyond the bounds here defined.  While
remaining fast upon the original harmonic foundation, measure for
measure, entirely new melodies come in and wholly different rhythms, so
that in many instances only a few notes of the original theme are
retained in any one variation.  The student desiring to explore the
most advanced variation writing will find examples ready to his hand in
Brahms' variation on a theme of Haendel and the two books of variations
on a theme of Paganini.  These may be considered as at present the
_ultima thule_ of variation-making art.  The principle of the variation
lies at the foundation of very much that meets us in the higher
departments of music, even when the variation form is not heard of.
All modifications or amplifications of a theme belong essentially to
the variation type, and it is liberally applied to all long
compositions where the same material is used a number of times.

When a piece of music consists of two fully developed melodic ideas, it
is said to be binary in form, and these are all either song forms with
trio or small rondo forms.  Nearly all of the slow movements of
Beethoven in the sonatas are binary forms, the dimensions of which may
vary extremely.  The student desiring to investigate this part of the
subject more thoroughly is referred to the "Primer of Musical Forms,"
by W. S. B. Mathews (Arthur P. Schmidt & Co., Boston), where the
principles are more fully unfolded.

There is one form in modern music which is the type of so large a
proportion of extended instrumental movements that the student will do
well to master its peculiarities at the earliest possible moment.  This
is the form sometimes called the sonata form or sonata-piece.  The term
sonata was originally used in two senses: in its larger sense it
indicates an extended musical composition with three or four movements,
all which taken together form the sonata.  By the term sonata-piece,
however, is meant the particular movement of the sonata which gives the
name to the whole piece.  This, as a rule, is the first movement, but
sometimes it is the closing movement, and in some instances there are
three of these movements in the same sonata, so arranged with reference
to one another as to form the necessary contrasts.  The sonata-piece is
the form which contains within itself very much of the essence of all
the smaller forms.  It generally consists of three large chapters,
beginning with the principal subject, which may be longer or shorter,
according to the fancy of the composer, and may end on its own
principal key or on the dominant, and may be followed by passage work
or not, to any extent the composer chooses; then comes a second
subject.  According to Beethoven's almost invariable practice, the
first subject of a sonata form is thematic in its character, and in
developing this theme many of the principles of variation work are
applied.  The second subject is almost invariably a lyric melody,
sometimes very charming, and always in a different key from that of the
first subject, usually in the dominant; or, if the first subject is a
minor, this will be in the relative major.  Then follows a concluding
paragraph of anywhere from six to thirty measures, and a double bar
with a repeat sign.  This forms the first chapter of the sonata-piece.
After the double bar comes the second chapter, which is an elaboration
or free fantasia on the material of the first part.  At the end of this
free fantasia, which may be longer or shorter at the fancy of the
composer, comes the recapitulation, or the repetition of the entire
first part, the only change being that the second subject is now in the
principal key.  In the elaboration of the sonata all sorts of musical
fancies are liable to appear--queer juxtapositions of motives from the
different parts of the first and second subjects, inversions,
variations, and so on.

The sonata-piece is the type, not alone of the principal movement in
symphonies and chamber quartets and trios, but it is also the type of
all serious overtures, and therefore it has been well designated by
German theorists as the Principal Form of modern music.

Whether longer or shorter, whether serious or lively, all musical forms
have the same conditions to satisfy--viz., those of unity, or the
preponderance of a single idea; symmetry, or just proportion of parts;
and variety, the proper relief and introduction of new material.  If
the principal idea is repeated too much, monotony ensues; if there are
too many accessory ideas, in place of variety we have looseness and
want of unity.  And in carrying out these principles in compositions of
different lengths and in different styles, the composer has practically
unlimited freedom.




PART II.


MODERN MASTERS

AND

AMERICAN COMPOSERS




AUTHOR'S NOTE.

According to the original design, this work was completed with the ten
chapters in which the great masterworks of the leading composers of the
period from 1750 to 1850 were compared and their peculiarities and
individualities emphasized.

In response to a wide-spread demand, however, it is deemed advisable to
add a few programs of later masters, and a few of the leading American
composers, who, although not yet to be mentioned in the same connection
as those forming the subject of the original ten chapters, are,
nevertheless, of more immediate interest to a large circle of students,
and in demand for the use of musical clubs, lecture recitals, and the
like.  The selection of these later composers has been a matter of no
small difficulty, but the names decided upon for the present are Grieg,
Brahms, Rubinstein, Tschaikowsky, and a miscellaneous list of the later
romantic German composers.  The American names included are those of
Dr. William Mason, L. Moreau Gottschalk, E. A. MacDowell, Mrs. H. H. A.
Beach, Arthur Foote, Ethelbert Nevin, and Wilson G. Smith, with
scattering compositions from a few others of the more notable composers
of the present time.

Concerning these supplementary programs, it is also to be said that
only one name belongs to the high category of great immortals embraced
in the first ten chapters--namely, that of Johannes Brahms.  Grieg,
however, is certainly a composer of rare poetry and originality; and
the same is to be said of Rubinstein and Tschaikowsky--even with
greater emphasis of the last mentioned.  Still, the student will be
wise to remember that in the works of these latest composers there is
much which, as yet, is imperfectly understood, and its ultimate place
in the pantheon of art unascertained.  That all these have shown great
originality is unmistakable; yet no one of them has written pianoforte
music uniting elegance and pianoforte tact with complete originality
and success.  If any exception is to be made at this point, it should
be in the case of Brahms, who has shown, in orchestral and vocal
writing, constructive and poetic powers of the very highest order.
This fact, taken in connection with his unquestioned mastery of the
pianoforte and the epoch-marking originality of his technic and effects
upon this instrument, should make us pause before considering anything
of his as standing beyond the line of the beautiful.  Schumann was
condemned for many years after his death, yet at the present time no
master stands higher as a pianoforte writer pure and simple.  It is
more than likely that Brahms will later stand as the maker of an epoch
in piano playing not less significant than that established by the
works of Liszt, Chopin, and Schumann.

One of our American masters also, Mr. Edward Alexander MacDowell, is
held by many to belong to the very highest rank of living composers
(1898).  Comparisons of this kind have no proper place in a work like
the present.  The question which these chapters are intended to assist
in solving is not as to the highest, the broadest, the most pleasing,
but the characteristic individuality of certain composers, of ability
so high that they have gained the ears of their own generation and have
been found of lasting interest.

"_What_ have these men done?" And "What is the new note which they have
sounded in the pantheon of art?"  These are the two questions which
this little essay is meant to discuss.

Moreover, we may remember that it is one of the laws of gravitation
that it increases in proportion to the "square of the proximity," as
they say in social science.  Composers near to us, and the outgrowth of
our own conditions of life and our national heredity, can hardly escape
bringing to expression in their works something of the American
character and turn of thought.  This inner something may well give
their works a transient interest for us which better works wanting
these national traits might fail to awaken.  The programs in these
supplementary chapters, therefore, should be taken up after those of
the first ten have been fully mastered.

If a word of regret is needed that so little of American matter has
been included, the explanation must be that the scope of this work and
the present resources of the writer do not afford him the means of
treating American music in the broad and comprehensive way possible to
epochs in art the works of which are fully finished and catalogued.  In
the nature of the case the treatment of American writers herein is
tentative and incomplete.  Later on, additions will be made, as
occasion may arise.




MODERN MASTERS AND AMERICAN COMPOSERS.



CHAPTER I.

NATIONALITY IN MUSIC

The outflow of musical production has become so wide during the last
fifty years, and so many composers have distinguished themselves in
every part of the world, that it is a matter of no small difficulty to
make a selection of names sufficiently representative to illustrate the
many-sided individualities of this movement.  Dividing the entire list
into countries which have produced the composers, or in which they have
principally expressed themselves, we have at least four great European
provinces or musical centers, viz., Germany (including also
Austro-Hungary), Russia, France, and the Scandinavian countries,
including Sweden, Norway, and Denmark.  To this list of characteristic
nationalities in music must be added our own, the American.

As soon as we pass beyond the short roll of the great masters in
instrumental music of the first class, we immediately come upon a large
circle of composers of such cleverness that they have just missed
becoming enrolled in the higher list, and perhaps some of them will,
later on, be included among the immortals.  The operation of this slow
promotion is something like that of the French Academy, where, when one
member dies, a new one is elected to take his place.  In this way, with
forty immortals constantly on duty, as one may say (although as a
matter of fact they are rarely elected to that honor until their
productive activity has practically ceased), the nation has a long roll
of distinguished and honored authors, composers, artists, and the like.

In all this music since Liszt there are curious resemblances and
equally curious differences.  To speak first of the resemblances, it is
an interesting circumstance that by far the greater number of the
composers have been educated, at least in part, at the Conservatory of
Leipsic, which, ever since it was founded by Mendelssohn, has held a
wholly unique pre-eminence among the music schools of the world--a
pre-eminence which in many respects it has not deserved, especially
upon the technical side of musical instruction; and most emphatically
with reference to the pianoforte, where for at least ten years after
the death of Schumann nothing of Chopin, Schumann, or Liszt was
admitted or permitted to be taught to the students.  Then a very
grudging reception was given to the works of Chopin, while Schumann had
to wait some time longer; and it is only within a very recent period
that the peculiar value of Liszt as a writer for the piano-forte has
been recognized at all.  On the other hand, it is evident that any
school able to attract to itself so large a percentage of the highly
gifted musicians of the different countries, who have afterward shown
themselves to possess creative talent of a high order, must have had
about it a quality at least unusual and commanding.  Almost all the
composers who will be taken up have been educated in Germany, or by
teachers who were themselves educated in Germany.  Almost the only
exceptions to this rule are probably the American, Gottschalk, and the
Frenchman, Saint-Saens.  Accordingly, the marks of nationality and of
individuality in the music of the different composers are rarely
sufficient to prevent the works of any composer from being current in
any other country, and, from the mere sound of the works, in a great
majority of cases it would be difficult to tell whether they are German
or of some other nationality, so strongly does the German influence
pervade and underlie nearly the whole of this production.

The opportunity for expressing nationality in music, or, to say it
differently, the possibility of national coloring in music, is somewhat
narrow.  It is only in the case of the nations which are distinctly
unmusical that it is entirely easy to recall their peculiarities, and
the features by means of which this is usually done amount to parody.
For example, when it is a question of something Turkish, much is made
of the tambourine, the cymbals, and the fife.  In something Persian or
Arabic, the triangle cuts quite a figure; but when it is a question
between composers of the civilized countries of Europe, music has
become a cosmopolitan language among them all, and only a small number
of national traits are to be found distinguishing the production of one
country from that of another.  It would be an interesting study to
trace these marks of nationality, but it would take us too far.
Suffice it to say that in general, taking German music as representing
the purest type of instrumental music, in which the musical idea as
such has full sway, the Russians differ from this mainly in their own
uncontrollable energy and a certain fondness for a semi-barbaric
display of over-coloration.  The pigments with which they work and the
manner of treating their ideas are not materially different from that
of the German composers of the purest type.  It is only a question of
exaggerating certain features--to judge them from the German
standpoint.  This is true, in a general way, of the entire list of
Russian composers, all of whom have been influenced a good deal from
Leipsic, although Russia has had for many years a very strong music
school of its own at St. Petersburg, established by Rubinstein in 1862.
It was at this school that Tschaikowsky and Glazounow were educated.
In the Austro-Hungary empire there are two nationalities which have
left quite an impress upon their music productions.  They are the
Bohemians and the Hungarians.  The Hungarian, representing the extreme
of the emphasis and caprice; the Bohemian, showing a great deal of
impetuosity;--which, however, they lose in their productions in
proportion as they become polished and finished writers.  Bohemianism,
in German music, has more the character of provincialism than of a
national mark.

In France there has been a national school this long time in which all
the young composers are educated; a school which has turned out men
like Berlioz, Gounod, Bizet, Delibes, Massenet, and a great and honored
roll of composers and artists.  French music differs from German
primarily in taking itself less seriously.  Everything tends to be
shorter; there is a more fanciful and capricious use of passing tones
and by-tones of every sort, and its general complexion is that of
daintiness and sensuous sweetness, rather than of deep thought.  The
French school is therefore well adapted for imparting refinement to the
style of a performer.

The writers of the Scandinavian peninsula have certain peculiarities in
their melody which impart to their work a trait of local color.  This
one finds in the writings of Grieg, Svendsen, and to some extent in
those of Gade.  A similar coloring was hit upon much earlier by
Mendelssohn in the beginning of the "Hebrides" overture.

America can not be said, as yet, to have attained a national school.
We had one genius who might be called self-instructed--viz., Louis
Moreau Gottschalk.  All of our composers since have been German
educated, or educated under teachers who themselves were German taught,
and as yet our music is little more than a slightly modified German
production, although our composers are beginning to show as much
originality and force as the better class of the writers of any country.

Selecting only those names the most prominent in the several countries,
and more particularly the composers who have distinguished themselves
in pianoforte music, the following seem, on the whole, the most worthy
of our attention:

In Germany--Brahms, Dvorak, Raff, D'Albert, Nicode, Moszkowski, Jensen,
Reinecke, Paderewski, and Scharwenka.

In Russia--Rubinstein, Henselt, Tschaikowsky, Balakirew, Glazounow, and
Karganoff.

In France--Stephen Heller, Saint-Saens, Pierne, Faure, Widor, Guyrand,
and Benoit.

In Scandinavia--Grieg, Gade, Svendsen, Kjerulf, and Meyer-Helmund.

In America--Gottschalk, Mason, Wollenhaupt, Foote, Chadwick, MacDowell,
and others.




CHAPTER II.

BRAHMS.


JOHANNES BRAHMS.

  Born at Hamburg, May 7, 1833.
  Died at Vienna, April 3, 1897.

In Johannes Brahms we have a musical master of the first order.  His
quality as master was shown in his marvelous technic, in which respect
no recent composer is to be mentioned as his superior, if any can be
named, since Bach, as his equal.  This technic was at first personal,
at the pianoforte, upon which he was a virtuoso of phenomenal rank; but
this renown, great as it is in well-informed circles, sinks into
insignificance beside his marvelous ability at marshaling musical
periods, elaborating together the most dissimilar and apparently
incompatible subjects, and his powers of varying a given theme and of
ever unfolding from it something new.  These wonderful gifts--for such
they were, rather than laboriously acquired attainments--Brahms showed
at the first moment when the light of musical history shines upon him.
It was in 1853, when the Hungarian violinist, Edouard Remenyi, found
him at Hamburg and engaged him as accompanist, and having ascertained
his astonishing talents, brought him, a young man of twenty, to Liszt
at Weimar, with his first trio and certain other compositions in
manuscript.  The new talent made a prodigious effect upon Liszt, who
needed not that any one should certify to him whether a composer had
genius or merely talent.  And that Brahms on his own part made the
regrettable mistake of falling asleep while Liszt in turn was playing
for him his newly completed sonata for pianoforte, is an incident which
was important only for the moment.  The Liszt circle took up the Brahms
cult in earnest, played the trio at the chamber concerts, and the
members, when they departed to their homes, generally carried with them
their admiration of this new personality which had appeared in music.

William Mason, the New York teacher and pianist, was at Weimar at the
time, and when he came back to New York and, with the young Theodore
Thomas, opened the celebrated series of chamber concerts,--modeled, as
the prospectus said, "after those of Mr. Liszt at Weimar,"--the first
program included the Brahms Trio in B-flat.  From that time until now,
for nearly forty years, Mr. Thomas has paid his tribute to the genius
of Brahms, introducing the new works as fast as they have appeared, and
repeating the older ones many times.

Johannes Brahms was born at Hamburg, May 7, 1833, the son of a fine
musician who was player upon the double bass in the orchestra there.
The boy was always intended for a musician, and his instruction was
taken in hand with so much success that at the age of fourteen he
played in public pieces by Bach and Beethoven, and a set of original
variations.  At the age of twenty he was a master, and it was in this
year that he accompanied Remenyi, made the acquaintance of Joachim and
Liszt, and had a rarely appreciative notice from a master no less than
Robert Schumann himself, who, in his "New Journal of Music," said:

"He has come--a youth at whose cradle graces and heroes kept watch.
Sitting at the piano, he began to unveil wonderful regions.  We were
drawn into more and more magical circles by his playing, full of
genius, which made of the piano an orchestra of lamenting and jubilant
voices.  There were sonatas, or rather veiled symphonies; songs whose
poetry might be understood without words; piano pieces both of a
demonaic nature and of the most graceful form; sonatas for piano and
violin; string quartets, each so different from every other that they
seemed to flow from many different springs.  Whenever he bends his
magic wand, there, when the powers of the orchestra and chorus lend him
their aid, further glimpses of the magic world will be revealed to us.
May the highest genius strengthen him!  Meanwhile the spirit of modesty
dwells within him.  His comrades greet him at his first entrance into
the world of art, where wounds may perhaps await him, but bay and
laurel also; we welcome him as a valiant warrior."

The next few years were spent by Brahms in directing orchestra and
chorus at Detmold and elsewhere, and in Switzerland, which always had
great attraction for him.  In 1859 he played in Leipsic his first great
pianoforte concerto; most of the criticisms thereon were, however, such
as now excite mirth.  In the later years of his life he played in
Leipsic again, conducted several of his works, and was greeted with the
reverence and enthusiasm due the greatest living representative of the
art of music.  In 1862 Brahms located in Vienna, where he lived until
his death.  Mr. Louis Kestelborn, in "Famous Composers and their
Works," says:  "About thirty years ago the writer first saw Brahms in
his Swiss home; at that time he was of a rather delicate, slim-looking
figure, with a beardless face of ideal expression.  Since then he has
changed in appearance, until now he looks the very image of health,
being stout and muscular, the noble, manly face surrounded by a full
gray beard.  The writer well remembers singing under his direction,
watching him conduct orchestra rehearsals, hearing him play alone or
with orchestra, listening to an after-dinner speech or private
conversation, observing him when attentively listening to other works,
and seeing the modest smile with which he accepted, or rather declined,
expressions of admiration."

The Serenade, Opus 11, in D major, was written before 1859.  It
consists of six pieces, in form analogous to a suite.  The first is
marked allegro molto.  It is in the key of D, the melody opening for
horn.  This is followed by a counter-theme of clarinets, after which
all the instruments take part.  Much is made of a pleasing motive in
thirds by the clarinets.  There is a charming elaboration containing
bold and free modulations, touching such keys as D-flat, B-flat, D
minor, etc.

The second movement, scherzo, allegro non troppo, is in the key of D
minor and in the style of a Beethoven scherzo, which, again, is a
legitimate outgrowth of certain movements of Bach.  It opens with an
idea for violins and bassoons, and goes on in a very buoyant and
vigorous manner, with abundant syncopations, modulations, and
unexpected incidents.  It is beautifully developed.  Then it gives
place to a trio in B-flat, in which the violins start with a syncopated
rhythm, and later all the orchestral persons take their turn in the
development.  After this is finished the scherzo is recapitulated.

The adagio opens with a melody for bassoons and basses, which later
leads to a very legato and lovely melody for violins, treated at times
with very elaborate figuration, especially at the return of the
principal theme.

The first menuetto begins with a melody for clarinets, which is
developed into a short form.  Then follows the second menuetto, which
many would have called a trio, excepting that it really is a complete
little minuet, the leading idea of which is given by the second
violins; after this the first menuetto returns.

Then follows another scherzo, in D major, the subject being given out
by the horns, accompanied by the 'cellos.

In the trio the same combination takes precedence, but the 'cello
figures are twice as fast.

The work concludes with a rondo, the principal subject of which is very
sprightly in character, given out by the clarinets and bassoons,
accompanied by the lower strings.  This movement is carried out with
great spirit.  The work as a whole is of singularly genial character.

It happened to the writer to enter the rehearsal once during one of the
movements.  He was expecting something by Tschaikowsky or Richard
Strauss.  As he listened, the simplicity and naivete of the ideas
suggested Mozart; but presently there was an earnestness foreign to
Mozart, and Beethoven was recalled.  Just then the counterpoint took a
turn which was plainly not Beethoven, but surely the work of some late
master, and the question was, Who could have done a thing of this kind
so delightfully, with such reserve?  All at once the author's name
occurred.  "Surely," he said, "it is Brahms"; and it was.  It is the
beauty of an unpretending work of this character by so great a master
that the hearer is able to follow it with so much enjoyment and from
purely musical motives, without making himself unhappy in the effort to
realize a story or some great and mysterious power.  It is genius in
its moments of pure enjoyment.

The Symphony in E minor was first published in 1885, and immediately
was pronounced by advanced musicians the most significant of Brahms,
because showing the composer's nature more completely and, so to say,
more spontaneously.  This opinion, says Dr. Kretschmar, is based upon
the elevation of the work and the fact that in it Brahms for the first
time fully displays his many-sided individuality and genius in the
province of symphony.  "The singer of the great German requiem stands
before us."  Like its predecessors, it is developed out of a small
number of fundamental ideas, but with a degree of complexity beneath
its apparent simplicity which makes it a rich field for musical
analysis.

The first movement is marked allegro non assai (quick, but not too
quick).  In spirit it is noble, forceful, yet tender and extremely
musical.  The opening melody is itself made up thematically out of the
first little molecule of two tones, or out of the first four tones, if
you please.  This is carried through sixteen measures in order to bring
it to completion; it is immediately resumed with an added element of
rhythmic motion and varieties of harmony, and carried through along to
the second idea.

The instruments concerned in the first enunciation of the theme are
mainly the strings, the horns having long holding tones, and the
wood-wind coming in with accompanying chords upon the off beat.
Presently a second or transitional theme enters, of a jolly free
character, which brings us almost immediately to a beautiful second
theme for the 'cellos, the sustained and song-like character of which
well contrasts with the broken character of the leading idea.

The elaboration now follows the jolly little counter-theme in
connection with the leading theme, and while the continued treatment of
the working out seems simple, it is in fact extremely rich, and well
managed for intensifying the elegiac character of the opening subject.
Abundance of melodic life meets us in every one of the orchestral
voices, and the richness of detail is like that of one of the old
cathedrals, where the mighty mass of the whole is no less significant
to the distant observer than the patient care with which all the
smaller spaces have been elaborated is grateful to the close student.
A curious circumstance of this movement is the apparent resumption of
the principal theme prematurely in its own key, the development
immediately taking a new turn, and when finally the principal theme
returns, it is at first in a foreign key, almost at once, however,
giving place to the original harmonies.

A movement of this character is not to be judged or studied from a
technical standpoint, but from that of enjoyable hearing.  It is a
musical discourse, in which the first thing to feel is the very patent
fact that the author is trying to say something to us; and the second
to make out something of what this significance may mean in its general
and larger aspects; and, only later than this, what it is in its
details.

In two respects this work seems to the student different from the
symphonic work of Beethoven on the one hand, and from the earnest
orchestral work of later masters on the other.  It is thoroughly modern
in its thematic handling.  Everything grows out of a very few central
roots; yet out of these vital germs, as in the stories of Eastern
magicians, a mighty tree forms itself before our very eyes.  Or, to
change the figure, while the actual melodic germ is very small, its
development into the leading subject takes it over a considerable range
of rhythm and harmony, and brings it to us with almost a song-like
character.  Then, when we come to a second subject, it is not so
completely contrasted as in Beethoven; or, rather, it still partakes of
the modern spirit, being, if very legato, nevertheless very appealing
and earnest in its harmonic treatment.  This is one point where
Beethoven always did differently, for his second subjects are almost
invariably simple and lyric, with something very like a folk-song turn
of melody.  Brahms remains upon the elevated plane of musical
earnestness which he assumes at starting, and throughout the entire
work carries us ever to greater heights.

Again, from the side of tone-color Brahms differs from later writers in
not giving himself much to mere lusciousness of tone contrast, but
confines himself to carrying out his ideas with those portions of the
orchestra best suited in turn, and with more reference to cumulative
impression from the treatment than to mere richness and contrast of
color.  The contrasts do still meet us here, but they are never
glaring.  It is even a question whether the colors are so strongly
contrasted as commonly in Beethoven.  But it is not a question whether
the music is strong, meaningful, and musicianly.  These qualities are
patent to even a casual hearing.  Equally recognizable is that inner
something which has been called the ethical element; a something in the
general spirit of treatment, or behind it, which we intuitively feel as
consistent with our highest thoughts, noblest moods, and best
resolutions.  This is distinguished from the merely sensuous, as
represented sometimes in Berlioz, Goldmark, Gounod, and the like; and
the fantastic, inconsequent, and irresponsible, as represented, for
instance, in Richard Strauss' "Till Eulenspiegel."

The second movement, andante moderate, although very strange in certain
of its peculiarities, is nevertheless very beautiful, and at the same
time novel.  The subject is given out first by the horn alone;
afterward it is taken up by the oboes and flutes, while the strings
have a secondary place and complete the harmony.

Kretschmar says that it reminds one of a story of the olden time, an
impression due to the archaic tonality, the first version of the theme
being in the Gregorian Phrygian mode--a key of E in which all the notes
are naturals.  On its repetition it is given a different turn, the
scale having a major seventh, but minor third and sixth.

Kretschmar says: "In the middle of this movement, where the triplets
begin, the music forsakes this neutral tone and shows a friendly spirit
and breaks out into heart-felt lamentations."  In other words, a
subordinate subject is introduced which Mr. Apthorp characterizes (in
the Boston Symphony Orchestra programs) as "a grave, solemn melody,
harmonized and scored in the richest coloring."

A third melodic idea still remains to be mentioned.  It is the melody
for 'cello, which is delicately accompanied by the higher strings.
Later the first subject returns in a variety of treatment, always
cumulative in its character, and frequently with strange
transformations.  The impression of the whole is, after all, that
already mentioned; it is a story of the olden times, into which a
modern thread has been woven, and through which the modern heart still
thrills and vibrates none the less powerfully for the strange-sounding
accents of the ancient tonality.

The third movement, allegro giocoso (giocoso primarily means jokingly),
opens with full orchestra.  This movement takes the place of a scherzo.
It is earnest, vigorous, and free; at times, as Mr. Apthorp says,
"almost fierce"; and for straightforward directness stands in manly
contrast to the movements preceding.

The fourth movement, again, is marked allegro energico epassionato
(quick, energetically, and passionately).  It opens with eight measures
for all the brass.  The melody lies in the upper voice.

Upon this as cantus firmus Brahms has developed what is known as a
passacaglia; originally a rather slow and stately dance, but in musical
use denoting a movement developed over a ground bass, or single
harmonic foundation, the final result partaking somewhat of the nature
of variations; but more of a sort of cumulative playing with musical
elements, finally reaching a great degree of complexity, which, if well
done, should also be a complexity of idea and a fullness and richness
of expression.  It was in this spirit that Bach handled the form in his
great C minor Passacaglia for organ, now transcribed for orchestra, and
played occasionally, if I remember, by Mr. Thomas; and it is in this
spirit that Brahms works here.  Occasionally the spirit changes to
something tender, meditative; but this is only to gain strength.
Immediately it resumes, and is carried ever and ever to higher pitches
of force and meaning.  Melody after melody appears in prominent places,
but under every one lies the harmonic foundation of the fundamental
subject.  There are thirty-two of these variations in all.

The criticism which has been made upon Brahms, that a movement of this
kind has no proper place in symphony, is "not competent," as lawyers
say; for, setting aside the demonstrated fact that Brahms knew better
what could be done in symphony than any of his critics, there is plenty
of precedent for doing almost anything one cares to try in the fourth
movement of a symphony.  The old practice had a rondo for the final
movement of the sonata.  Beethoven rightly felt the insignificance of
this form and its half trivial spirit, and in many directions he sought
to get out of it, and to end his sonatas with a climax of the spiritual
interest.  The same desire is shown in his symphonies and chamber
music.  Brahms has here given us a manly, vigorous, strongly developed
piece.  At least, it closes the symphony without loss of
vitality--whether with increasing elevation of spiritual meaning is for
each hearer to determine according to the measure of his capacity and
receptive ness.  Inspiration is not a question of light being ready,
but of clear glass to shine through.

For virtuoso pianists an entirely new world remains to be conquered in
the works of Brahms.  Beginning with those of his earliest period,
there is even then a marvelous novelty in the combinations and, above
all, a peculiarly rich and melodic quality of thought which rarely
forsakes him, even in the passages where at first sight it seems
impossible to make anything of the music beyond an extremely trying
exercise.  The melodiousness of Brahms and the complexity of the forms
in which beautiful conceptions express themselves is even surpassed by
the endless variety of new forms and effects which these works reveal.
Passages which to the casual player seem dry and forbidding, when
properly interpreted, and played gently and melodiously as Brahms
demanded, reveal themselves full of an inner warmth and ideality such
as no recent master has surpassed or equaled.

From the piano-playing side these new effects rest upon the utmost
equality and suppleness of the fingers, a much wider extension of the
hand than any previous composer demanded (save possibly Schumann in the
"Kreisleriana" and the "Phantasie"), and a melodic quality in all the
voices.  When to these are added the necessary discrimination of touch
and the clear definition of the contrasting voices, together with a
sensitive and changeful use of the pedal, the new worlds open.

Beginning with the most advanced of these technical unfoldings, let us
take the variations upon a theme from Paganini, of which there are two
books.  At first view the variations in the first book seem to address
themselves exclusively to technical objects, the first variation
containing a succession of sixths in the right hand which is extremely
trying, the second variation having the same succession for the left
hand.  In the third variation a very capricious figure is taken as
pattern, and the piano is covered in a new way.  In the fourth
variation there is a long capricious figure and trills high up in the
treble with the weak fingers of the right hand.  These trills are
afterward transferred to the bass, where the thumb and second finger
have them, the design being apparently technical.  In the fifth
variation a very characteristic trick of Brahms' music is brought out
in strong light.  It is his way of carrying on together a cantus firmus
in two's and a counterpoint in three's.  All his writing is full of
this expedient, one design of which is to mystify the rhythm and to
impart to the music a more flowing and ideal character, and at the same
time to concentrate the attention of the player upon the large meter,
with which these conflicting two's and three's never interfere.  In the
sixth variation a syncopated effect.  In the seventh, very brilliant
octave effects.  In the eighth a sort of caprice.  In the ninth, an
extremely brilliant octave effect.  In the tenth, the excitement quiets
a little, and the variation begins _sotto voce_.  In the eleventh, we
enter the major key, and a very delightful and beautiful effect is here
produced.  The twelfth, again, begins to contain greater difficulties,
and our old friend of the two's and three's greets us.  The thirteenth,
a very brilliant octave variation, which in the fourteenth is carried
to a still higher point, and leads immediately to a finale, which
concludes the first book.

In the second book technical discussion of this theme is resumed with
some running thirds in the bass, which are very troublesome; and in the
course of this second book a variety of highly ingenious technical
effects are unfolded, almost any one of which affords practice for a
very good player for quite a long time.  In fact, from a technical
point of view, a moderately accomplished pianist might spend perhaps a
year in mastering these variations, and at the end of the time would be
unable to play them with any artistic effect, unless exceptionally
gifted.  At the same time, in spite of the technical complication and
the apparent absorption in technical treatment of the instrument which
these variations show, they each and every one have a legitimate
musical object, and when played with a sufficiently masterly
technic--as, for instance, by Joseffy, Godowsky, or Rosenthal--they are
among the most interesting examples of the evolution of piano playing.

Similar qualities also show themselves in the earliest set of
variations upon a theme of Schumann's, and in the beautiful variations
upon an original theme in D major, opus 21; but perhaps even better
than anywhere else in the variations upon a theme of Haendel, opus 22,
where the beautiful, the musically fresh and pleasing, and the
technically unforeseen meet and intermingle with one another.

The Haendel variations begin somewhat modestly, and as the theme is in
the major mode and the harmonies limited almost entirely to tonic and
dominant, Brahms was almost compelled to be simple and melodious at
times.  He contents himself in the earlier variations with rhythmic
complications, which are very ingenious and delightful, particularly in
the second variation, where a chromatic movement in two's is
accompanied in the soprano by a triplet formation.  It is doubtful
whether any pianoforte work of recent times affords such a brilliant
illustration of how much can be done in art by a fortunate combination
of constructive ability of the most masterly character with high
ideality as Brahms has given in these variations upon the Haendel theme.
They are, at the same time, musical, melodious, rhythmically
interesting.  The student will do well if he desires a lesson in
musical evolution to refer to the variations in their original form as
written by Haendel.  They can be found in the Haendel "Lessons for the
Harpsichord," edited by Kohler, in the Peters edition.  Haendel gives
but five variations, and these are all of very moderate difficulty.
Nevertheless, while they were written for the use of amateurs, they
contain nearly all of the Haendel art of variation-making, as the reader
can easily satisfy himself by comparing their treatment with that in
the famous "Harmonious Blacksmith" variations in E major.

A very remarkable, and at present almost unknown, chapter of the Brahms
cult is afforded by his four Ballads, opus 10.  These are short,--only
about four pages each,--and when properly interpreted are very noble
and beautiful.  The first, in D minor, has an opening theme of a very
serious and almost antique character, like an old ballad.  After one
page of this a second subject comes, allegro, in D major, very much
more dramatic and broken.  This lasts about a page; the principal theme
is resumed again, with certain variations of treatment, and the whole
concludes at the end of the third page.  The second ballad is of a
softer and more tender character in its principal subject, and very
beautiful it is, too; but the second subject, in B minor, is very
emphatic in rhythm, and is followed by a middle piece in B major, in
6/4 time, which is rather difficult to play satisfactorily to one's
self.  Then the second subject returns, and finally the first, in the
key of B major, changing afterward to minor, and thus the end.  The
third ballad is marked intermezzo, and has the character of a scherzo.
It is rather difficult.  The fourth ballad, again, is a purely lyric
composition, and is precisely what its name implies--a story, a melody
with a past.  The middle piece of this ballad is in F-sharp major, the
original key of the whole being B major, and there is a very pretty and
reposeful melodic effect.  Nevertheless, the tonality of the piece
throughout is extremely vague, no key being adhered to for any length
of time, but modulations occurring with a free hand.  This ballad is
carried out to the extent of eight pages, and is the longest of the lot.

A careful study of these ballads will show them to be works of the
deepest poetry, which, while never appealing to the player in search of
the grateful and effective, nevertheless richly reward the most
intimate acquaintance, and show themselves full of ideality and musical
suggestiveness.  That they are devoid of all kinds of passage work and
pianoforte effects, as such, is merely another way of saying that they
are entirely and exclusively loyal to the ideal and the poetic; and
these elements in them must eventually give them long life.

A lighter side of the Brahms cult is shown in the Waltzes, opus 39.
There are sixteen of these, all short, and very poetic and not at all
forbidding in their manner of writing.  One or two of them are quite
difficult; as, for instance, No. 6.  Most of them, however, are within
the reach of players of medium grade.

The later works of Brahms have already begun to find currency in the
more advanced musical circles in Europe, but for some time after their
first publication their value was persistently denied, and they are as
yet entirely unknown to the amateur.  The following works have been
selected as on the whole representing the later development of Brahms
to the greatest advantage.

The first intermezzo in opus 119 is in B minor, adagio.  A very ideal
and poetic movement, requiring, however, to be played with great
delicacy and a deep and musical tone, which rarely rises to forte.  The
other intermezzi of this book I do not much care for.  In the opus 116,
the fourth number, entitled Intermezzo, is also a very beautiful adagio
in E major, and it is one of the most poetic and delightful short
pieces for the piano of any recent master.  Both these pieces are of
quite moderate difficulty.  Of a somewhat more dramatic and diversified
character is the second intermezzo in the opus 116.  This is in A
minor, with a somewhat capricious middle piece.  The great beauty of
these short, slow movements of Brahms is the moderation with which they
are treated, and, at the same time, the masterly manner in which the
interest is kept up to the end.  The most fortunate illustration of
Brahms' treatment of the piano in the dramatic and highly moved
direction is afforded, perhaps, by the second of the rhapsodies, opus
79.  These are in no respect to be mentioned in connection with the
rhapsodies by Liszt, which, as is well known, are somewhat _ad
captandum_ show pieces founded upon popular airs.  The Brahms rhapsody
is a poetic rhapsody, perhaps such as the rhapsodists of Greece used to
deliver; and in this particular case the music is very dramatic and
strongly marked, and at the same time the treatment of the piano is
free and the effect brilliant.  It is, however, considerably more
difficult than any of the pieces mentioned above except the Paganini
variations.

This program might well be diversified by a few songs of Brahms; and
for this purpose selections may as well be made from the first book of
songs by this writer as from any other, as they are among his
best-known works.

The first volume of selected songs of Brahms contains six.  The first
one,--

  "O sink, O sink thy grief, my child,
  To the bottom of the deep, deep sea,"--

is founded upon a poem by Robert Reinick.  In the edition which I
notice (Schirmer) there are three texts--German, English, and French.
This song is of a very serious and impassioned character, the melody
somewhat slow and deliberate.  The accompaniment, as so often happens
in the songs of Brahms, is purposely developed out of a different
rhythmic figure from that of the song itself.  In this instance the
melody runs in pulses and half pulses, whereas the accompaniment runs
in triplets; that is to say, the chords in the right hand run in
triplets, while the bass preserves the rhythm of the song itself.  The
entire rhythmic sense is sustained, or nearly sustained, by half-pulse
motion, running at the same time with a continually sustained triplet
motion, three to a pulse.

The musical handling of this song presents several peculiarities, the
most notable of which is the entrance of the bass upon a dissonance,
which at the same time is an advance imitation (to speak Hibernically)
of the leading motive of the melody.  The effect of this combination
with the rhythmic figure already noticed gives the song a much more
impassioned character than it would otherwise have.

It would be difficult to say why Brahms has so long remained unpopular
with singers, considering how well he uses the voice.  In the second
line, "A stone, alas, in the sea will sink; my grief returns to me,"
the lower part of the accompaniment is at the same pitch and identical
with the melody itself, but the voice breaks through at the emphatic
climax of the phrase, "grief."  This is taken upon high G-flat, and is
supported with full harmony by both hands, giving the effect of a much
stronger harmonic climax, and also affording the singer the needed
assistance in maintaining the high pitch.

The second song in the series is a very beautiful one, "To a Violet."
This is on a poem by Holty, beginning:

  "Hide, O flow'ret, within thy blue recesses,
  Hide these pale dews of sorrow."


The entire effect of the song and the accompaniment is extremely tender
and delicate, one of the important features in the artistic effect
being the arpeggios of the accompaniment, which is throughout in
sixteenth-note motion, whereas the melody, in 6/8 time, runs in dotted
quarters and eighths.

Another very famous piece, which comes in this volume, is, "Like a
Blossoming Lilac My Love Is Fair," here written in the fearfully
uninviting key of D-sharp minor.  It is poetic and lyric in the
extreme, and a more charming selection can not be found.

The next song is "The Old Love," on a poem by Candidus.  This is a
moderate movement:

  "The dusky swallow flieth toward her northern home,
  The songsters build and flutter beneath the leafy dome;
  The morn is warm and cloudy, the sky bedimmed with rains,
  My heart awakes from slumber to old forgotten pains."


Then comes "To a Nightingale," and, last of all, "In Summer Fields."

In closing this somewhat extended discussion of the works of Brahms the
writer desires to emphasize the importance of this music and its
inherent beauty.  In consequence of the entire absence of show passages
in the Brahms works, and his uniform adherence to lofty and poetic
ideals, together with his fondness for deep and somewhat mystical and
meditative effects, his nature has been misunderstood by the greater
part of the musical world.  It has been charged against him that his
music is purely mechanical in its construction, and that he took
delight in putting together forbidding and repelling figures without
regard for the convenience of players or the pleasure of the hearers.
The tone of the previous discussion is perhaps sufficiently clear to
define the position of the present writer in regard to this notion.
Nevertheless, it is perhaps well to say something a little more
definite, and this I will do presently.

It is to be observed, further, that the Brahms symphonies have at
length made their way, and are heard now with pleasure in all parts of
the world where enlightened audiences listen to orchestral music.  Even
the Fourth, which in some respects is less attractive at first sight
than the others, awakened very great popular applause when it was last
played by the Chicago Orchestra, and the Second Symphony is universally
recognized throughout the world as a very beautiful masterpiece.
However, Brahms has written about 100 songs which have more or less
entered into the current of concert appearance, and there are not two
opinions concerning their general melodiousness, rare musical quality,
and exquisitely poetical effect.  But they require beautiful and true
voices, finished art of the singer, and, from the accompanist, a real
mastery of the instrument.  That these qualities are, unfortunately,
not always provided by our musical education is one of the reasons why
the public at large has made the acquaintance as yet of only a limited
number of these songs, among which those in the list above are the best
known.

In the judgment of the present writer it is as certain as anything in
the future can be that the works of Brahms are destined to enter into
the pantheon of the classical in musical art; and are entitled to that
distinction by the purity and beauty of their style no less than by the
intense originality of the ideas themselves and of their treatment.
Musical students, therefore, are earnestly recommended not to permit
themselves to be discouraged by the difficulties which their first
acquaintance with Brahms will reveal.  It is, first, to play the
pieces; and, second, to play them in a musical way; then, if the
instrument itself is of a musical tone, with a good singing quality,
the beauties of the works will more and more appear, and the study will
become a delight and an inspiration no less than a great technical
education.


  PROGRAM.

  Symphony in E minor.  Four hands.  (Schirmer.)
  Waltzes, opus 39.
  Variations upon a Theme by Haendel.  Opus 21.
  Four Ballads.  Opus 10.
  Intermezzo, No. 1, opus 119.
  Intermezzo, No. 4, opus 116.
  Rhapsody, No. 2, opus 79.
  Serenade in D major.  Four hands.
  Songs ad libitum.


If it is possible to command the services of capable instrumentalists,
very attractive modifications of the foregoing program can easily be
made.




CHAPTER III.

GRIEG.


EDVARD GRIEG.

  Born 1843, at Bergen, Norway.

Edvard Hagerup Grieg was born June 15, 1843, at Bergen, Norway.  His
musical talent asserted itself early, and fortunately his parents were
able to provide him with the best of conditions for its development.
The famous violinist Ole Bull was a friend of the family and encouraged
him to devote himself to the musical profession.  In 1858 Grieg went to
Leipsic to study under Moscheles, Hauptmann, Wenzel, and Reinecke.  He
graduated in 1862, receiving praise for one or two small compositions
which were played at the final rehearsal, but he was not considered as
marked for certain distinction.

Soon after he went to Copenhagen and studied with Gade.  Here he met a
compatriot, Nordraak, with whom he struck up a warm friendship.  The
latter, so it is said, imbued Grieg with the idea of giving form and
expression to the national spirit and life, and from that time on he
devoted himself assiduously to national music, literature, and
folk-lore.

Later he married Miss Nina Hagerup, a popular Norwegian singer, who has
helped to make his songs well known in all Europe.

The next few years were spent in travel and study, and later in hard,
successful work among his own countrymen.  The latter are genuinely
proud of him, and he has a firm hold on the affections of the people of
his native city, where he now resides.  His country home, which is his
favorite retreat, is almost ideally located, with a commanding view of
the fjord and surrounded by forest and heights.


  PROGRAM.

  Suite.  "From Holberg's Time."  Opus 40.
      Praeludium.
      Sarabande.
      Gavotte.
      Air.
      Rigaudon.
  Songs for Alto Voice.
      Sunset.
      Cradle Song.
      The Poet's Last Song.
  Eight Lyric Pieces.  Opus 12.
      Arietta, Walzer, Wachterlied, Elfentanz, Volksweise, Norwegisch,
          Albumblatt, Vaterlaendisches Lied.
  Songs for Soprano.
      "Good Morning."
      "Thanks for Thy Hand."
  Suite, Peer Gynt, Opus 46, 1.
      "Morning Mood" (Morgenstimmung).
      "The Death of Ase."
      "Anitra's Dance."
      "In the Halls of the Mountain King."
      "On the Mountains."  Opus 19, No. 1.

NOTE.--In case a good violinist is available, I recommend modifying the
above by omitting the "Holberg" suite and taking the "Peer Gynt" to
begin with; then close with the Sonata for Piano and Violin, Opus 8.


In many respects Edvard Grieg is one of the most interesting composers
of the present time.  While it is by no means certain that his works
will find a place in the classics of the tone poetry of the world, he
is entitled, at least, to this much credit--of having, in the first
place, found a wider acceptance outside of his native Norway than has
fallen to the lot of any Scandinavian composer before him.  He has also
made a more marked impression, and has brought into the music of the
world what might be called, in literary parlance, "a characteristic
note."  It would be very curious and interesting, if it were
convenient, to trace the gradual evolution of this talent, as shown in
the successive works which have come from his pen.  But for the present
it must suffice to speak of a few of them in a more particular manner.

Grieg has written in almost every department of music: chamber music,
orchestra suites, overtures, compositions for string quartet, and
sonatas for piano and violin, a sonata for piano, concerto for piano,
and a very considerable variety of poetic and interesting compositions
for piano alone; in addition to these, many songs, some of which have
attained a wide currency.  In all these works certain characteristic
peculiarities of Norwegian music continually make themselves felt, so
that there is nothing of Grieg's which could be mistaken for the work
of any good German composer.  Whether we should regard these national
peculiarities in his music as provincialisms, considered from the
world's standpoint, or as a fortunate appeal to the ears of his own
countrymen and generation, who shall decide?

Grieg belongs to the modern romantic school, conspicuously, in having
derived the suggestion or inspiration of many of his pieces from poetic
suggestion.  One of the most famous and best known of this kind is the
first "Peer Gynt" suite.  Peer Gynt is a ne'er-do-weel in Ibsen's poem.
He had a variety of adventures in the course of his unprofitable life,
a few of which are alluded to in the suite here under consideration.
For example, it begins with a prelude in 6/8 time--a movement somewhat
pastoral in character, designated "Morgenstimmung," or, in English,
"The Morning Mood."  In this piece the flavor of Norwegian folk-song is
only very faintly perceptible, if at all, and is perhaps more to be
imagined from the somewhat unusual succession of chords than from
anything very characteristic in the melody.  The second piece of this
suite, "The Death of Ase," is practically a funeral march of a sad and
grief-laden character.  Ase is the poor mother of Peer Gynt, who was
left alone in her cottage on the mountains while her ne'er-do-weel son
was off on his travels.  At length death overtook her, desolate and
alone, on the bleak mountain side.  This is the story of the march.
The third piece in this suite is entitled "Anitra's Dance." Anitra, in
Ibsen's story, was a fascinating minx of the desert, who, when Peer
Gynt was masquerading as the prophet, encountered him upon his travels
and beguiled from him one gift after another until finally she took
from him his rings, spare apparel, and finally his horse, and capered
off with them like the winds of the morning, while the pseudo-prophet
pursued his sandy and inglorious way on foot.  In this music of Grieg
we have simply the sparkling lightness of Anitra, the unaccustomed
charm which induced her victim to yield so easily to her the things he
most valued.  To come down from the realm of poetry to the barren
facts, it is simply a sort of quick waltz or mazurka, and the
connection of Mr. Ibsen's Anitra with it is purely imaginary.

The fourth of these tone pictures is entitled "In the Hall of the
Mountain King."  It relates to an episode in Peer Gynt's life when, in
exploring the mountain, he came upon one of the original owners of the
country, quite in the manner that happened later to Rip Van Winkle in
the Catskills of New York.  The gnome took him into the cavern in the
mountain where his people had their home, and it is the queer and
uncanny music of these humorous and prankish people that Grieg has
brought out in this closing movement of the suite.  It is a rapid,
dance-like movement which, in the orchestral arrangement, is extremely
grotesque in the tone coloring; even on the piano, when sufficiently
well done, much of this quality appertains to it.

More closely examined, this suite of Grieg's has a certain resemblance
to a sonata.  The first movement is somewhat elaborately worked out,
the second movement a slow one, the third in the manner of a scherzo,
and the fourth a sort of grotesque finale.  The order of the keys,
however, is different from what would be considered correct in a
sonata.  The first piece is in the key of E major, the funeral march in
B minor, Anitra's dance in A minor, and the finale in B minor
again--the whole very pleasing and poetic.

In the collection of pieces called "Aus dem Volksleben," or "Sketches
of Norwegian Life," the national coloring is still more marked.  This
work contains three pieces, the first entitled "On the Mountain," the
second a "Norwegian Bridal Procession," and the third "Carnival."  "On
the Mountain," after an opening of a soft chord or open fifth in A
minor, commences with a bass melody in unison, as if played by basses
and 'cellos.  The rhythm is that of a strongly-marked peasant dance, as
is shown by the emphatic half-note at the end of the phrase, as if here
the peasant put down his foot solidly.  In the sixth measure of this
melody another Norwegian peculiarity appears in the minor seventh of
the key.  This melody, after having been delivered in unison by the
basses, is taken up by the sopranos and continued with accompaniment.
Later on a soft and rather sweet middle piece in A major comes in,
after which the first idea returns with a coda.

The "Norwegian Bridal Procession" is extremely well known.  It is a
very pretty light march which, when well done, is capable of very
charming effect.  The "Carnival" is a very sprightly presto, full of
hurry and excitement, with occasional moments of softer suggestion, the
whole making very considerable demands upon the skill of the player.
In the coda the whole work is brought together again as one, since the
leading motives of all the parts here occur and intermingle one with
the other.

One of the most strongly worked out of the lighter works of Grieg is
the "Holberg" suite, the name being derived from that of the famous
Danish-Norwegian poet, who lived about the time of Bach.  This opens
with a "Praeludium," followed by a "Sarabande" and "Gavotte"; the whole
ends with a "Rigaudon."  This work has very much more the character of
a modern sonata than some that bear the name, but, avoiding the name
sonata, it is able to go its own way in any form of originality which
pleased the composer.  The prelude is a musical idea worked out with
great bravura, and when well done it makes an excellent effect.  There
is no particular story suggested in it, any more than in the first
prelude of Bach.  The second movement, the Sarabande, has a great deal
of the peculiar pathos of Grieg.  It should be played as if it were
being done by a string quartet, as legato and sympathetically as
possible.  The Gavotte, again, is a charming example of modern antique,
short and pleasing.  The fourth movement, an "air," is beautifully
done, and the last, the Rigaudon, in G major, a very pleasing and
sprightly dance effect.  This work has less of the distinctly Norwegian
character perhaps than many of the earlier ones of Grieg, and it is
more seriously worked out in some respects, and therefore extremely
satisfactory.

In some of the earlier and smaller works of Grieg the national traits
appear, while in others nothing of this sort is to be observed.  For
example, in the collection entitled "Lyric Pieces for the Piano," Opus
12, there are a charming arietta, a pretty little waltz, a very serious
fanciful piece called "Wachterlied," or the song of the watchers in
Shakspere's "Macbeth," an elfin dance, a curious peasant mazurka, a
quick Norwegian dance, an album-leaf, and a song of the Fatherland.
Here are eight little pieces, all comprised within the compass of eight
pages.  In point of difficulty no one exceeds the fourth grade, yet
they are little poems that the greatest artist could play with pleasure.

Perhaps, on the whole, the songs of Grieg show his remarkable talent in
its most favorable light, and for this purpose those in the first Grieg
Album of Schirmer are as good as any.  Accordingly, it is from this
that the selections of the illustrative programs are taken.  For low
voice, "Sunset" and the "Cradle Song" are both very delightful, the
latter particularly so.  The former might be sung by baritone, but the
latter requires an alto.  Yet another song for low voice, which would
indeed be better for a baritone than alto, is "The Poet's Last Song," a
noble lyric of elevated sentiment.  For high voice, "Good Morning" and
"Thanks for Thy Hand" are both unusually fine songs.

No doubt other examples equally good are to be found in other works of
Grieg, of which the house of G. Schirmer publishes four volumes, which,
being in the Schirmer Edition, are sold at moderate prices.  From
these, should it be more convenient, other selections could be made.




CHAPTER IV.

RUBINSTEIN AND TSCHAIKOWSKY.


ANTON RUBINSTEIN.

For the purposes of the musical amateur and pianist, the two most
important of the well-established Russian composers are Rubinstein and
Tschaikowsky.  It is by no means easy to make up a satisfactory
half-program from either composer, and this without in any way
disparaging their remarkable genius, which had personal qualities of a
very marked character and a richness of musical inspiration in certain
directions rarely surpassed.  But in both these masters there is an
element which is peculiarly Russian; a fondness for force as such, and
for stormy passion.  Moreover, both composers have in their nature
intense contradictions, which render it extremely difficult to compile
a short list of pieces in any way satisfactorily representing their
individualities.

Anton Rubinstein, as is well known, was one of the most distinguished
piano virtuosi who hay appeared since Liszt.  He was born, November 28,
1830, at a place called Wechwotynez, and died at Peterhof, near St.
Petersburg, November 20, 1894.  Soon after his birth his parents
settled in Moscow, where his father had a pencil factory.  Rubinstein's
mother was very musical, and from her he received his earliest
instruction, up to his seventh year, when he became a pupil of a local
musician named Villoing, who was his only teacher.  In 1840 he appeared
in Paris, whither his teacher had preceded him, and his talent was
fully recognized by the highest authorities, Liszt among others.  In
compliance with a suggestion of Liszt, he went to Germany to complete
his studies, but first undertook a concert tour through Holland,
England, Scandinavia, and Germany.  In 1844 Rubinstein's parents
removed to Berlin in order to give Anton and his younger brother
Nicolas a musical education, and the boys became pupils of Dehn, the
celebrated contrapuntist.  When Anton was about sixteen years old his
father's illness recalled the mother to St. Petersburg, and the young
musician was left to provide for himself as best he could by giving
lessons and by concert engagements, which were very few.  In his
autobiography he has narrated the dreadful straits to which he was
reduced, nearly dying of starvation, and laying the foundation of
gastric trouble which lasted him all his life long.  In 1848 he settled
again at St. Petersburg, where he was so fortunate as to win the
patronage of the Grand Duchess Helene.  Here he wrote several operas,
of which "Dimitri Donskoi" was produced in 1852, and has been performed
many times since.  In 1863 he founded the Conservatory of St.
Petersburg, and remained its director five years.  Meanwhile his fame
had become very much established as a pianist, through his concert
tours in various parts of Europe, and in 1872-1873 he visited America
and made a very successful concert tour, a part of which was in
association with Theodore Thomas' orchestra.  The season in America
netted him something less than $60,000, but the tour was a great burden
to him in many ways, and after returning to St. Petersburg he
resolutely declined most munificent offers to return again to America.
He received many favors from the Imperial family of Russia, having been
made Imperial Russian Councillor of State and a Knight of the Russian
Order of Merit; but after 1890 he declined all public offices, and
resided for some years in Dresden.

As a pianist Rubinstein was one of the most remarkable that the history
of the instrument has known.  He had a beautiful touch, enormous power,
and great delicacy.  Being of an emotional nature, he sometimes played
like an angel, but at other times quite the reverse.  It is notorious
of him that in the warmth of public performance, false notes were
always liable to occur.  Yet in spite of them the playing was so
essentially musical and genial that it used to be said that the public
would rather hear Rubinstein play false notes than hear Buelow play none
but right ones.

Rubinstein composed in every department of music.  Besides several
operas written for the regular theater, he originated a sort of
biblical drama, which was, in fact, an oratorio designed to be staged
and acted; in other words, a biblical opera.  Of Israelitish race, the
stories of the Old Testament appealed to him with intense force, and
his "Tower of Babel," "The Maccabees," "Sulamith," "Paradise Lost,"
and, later, "Christus," were very important and interesting works.

He wrote six symphonies, one of which, the famous "Ocean Symphony," was
lengthened out from time to time by supplementary movements, so that,
at last accounts, it has seven movements, all of which are sometimes
played.  He wrote a large amount of chamber music and a great many
piano pieces of every sort.  As a composer for the piano he was
extremely unequal.  In the vast volume of his works will be found an
immense amount of noisy, stormy, unsatisfactory music.  Yet many of
these works, which as wholes are repugnant to almost every person of
good taste, contain beautiful ideas which with a different treatment
might have given rise to extremely beautiful productions.  He is most
successful in his smaller creations, such as the Barcarolle, one or two
numbers of the series of portraits called Kamennoi-Ostrow, and that
famous Staccato Study.  He wrote a large number of songs, some of
which, upon Russian subjects, are in queer minor scales.  Many of them
are extremely beautiful.


PETER ILITSCH TSCHAIKOVSKY.

Peter Ilitsch Tschaikowsky, all things considered, was the most
important and artistically satisfactory composer of the Russian school.
He was born December 25, 1840, and died November 5, 1893, at St.
Petersburg.  He studied law and entered the Government service, but,
showing a marked inclination for music, at the advice of Rubinstein he
entered the conservatory as a pupil when he was already eighteen or
nineteen years of age.  Such was his success in his new field that
within a few years he was made professor of harmony in the school, a
position which he retained for eleven years.  From that time he devoted
himself entirely to composition.  In his earliest tendencies he was
extremely Italian, with a fondness for sweet and sensuous melodies with
simple harmonies.  Later on he developed a more virile vein, and
Riemann well says of him that he "was a highly gifted, true musician,
but at the same time a good Russian; hence are found in his works
thoughts of almost maidenly delicacy and sentiment and of the most
refined construction; yet, side by side with them, others of
semi-Asiatic roughness and brutality."

Owing to his having resided at times in Switzerland, Italy, etc., his
works were quite soon recognized and played, and the University of
Cambridge in 1893 conferred on him the honorary degree of Doctor of
Music.

Tschaikowsky was the composer of eleven operas, the first having been
produced in 1869 and the last in 1893.  All of these, as I understand,
were performed, and several of them are standard favorites in the
Russian repertory, the most important, perhaps, being "Eugen Onegin,"
which was also produced at Hamburg in 1892.  He wrote six symphonies,
of which the last, the so-called "Pathetique," was completed shortly
before his death.  The Fifth Symphony is a more popular and commanding
musical work than any other of its class written since Beethoven.
According to the idea of Mr. Theodore Thomas, it is too emotional and
dramatic for a symphony; but it is extremely powerful and beautiful
music, and the world has recognized it and takes pleasure in paying it
honor.  Among the most satisfactory of the Tschaikowsky compositions
are the songs, which are among the most impassioned and beautiful of
recent years; the melodies are flowing and thoroughly vocal, while the
harmonies have that singular originality and heart-searching fervor of
which Tschaikowsky was the greatest exponent.  Many of his orchestral
works have been cut for the Aeolian, and persons possessing that
convenient instrument can easily explore the treasures of them.

His piano compositions present a very curious contradiction; while the
composer produced in one instance a concerto for piano and orchestra,
in B-flat minor, which contains extremely strongly marked and
productive themes worked out exquisitely for the piano and for the
orchestra, his works for piano solo are generally not altogether
satisfactory.  Possibly this may be due to innovations of style and
technic which later will become easy to the players; but at present an
easy piece by Tschaikowsky requires more or less preparation.  The
following program, on the whole, seems to represent his peculiarities
with some success:


PROGRAM FROM RUBINSTEIN AND TSCHAIKOWSKY.

  Rubinstein:
      Tarantelle in B minor.
      "Kamennoi-Ostrow," No. 22.
      Valse Caprice, in E-flat.
      Barcarolle in G major.
      "La Melancholic."
      "Polka Boheme."
      Melodie in F.
      Staccato Study in C major.

  Tschaikowsky:
      Scherzo from Opus 2.
      Barcarolle in G minor.  Opus 37.  No. 6.
      Song without Words.  In F major.  Opus 12.
      "Weihnachten" Waltz.  Opus 37, No. 1.
      Songs (_ad lib._).
      Polonaise from "Eugen Onegin," arranged by Liszt.  Or
      Waltz from "Eugen Onegin," arranged by Pabst.


Excellent four-hand arrangements are to be had of all the orchestral
works by Rubinstein and Tschaikowsky.  Address the publishers of this
work for particulars.




CHAPTER V.

THE LATER ROMANTICISTS.

Among the numerous composers of Germany in recent times, of whom there
are a very large number worthy of special notice, there are four who,
by reason of their personal qualities and the general directions in
which they have expressed their talent, demand special attention.
Their names are Adolf Jensen, Xaver Scharwenka, Moritz Moszkowski, and
I. J. Paderewski.  As will be noticed from the names, three of these
artists are Polish in nationality and stock.

Adolf Jensen (born at Koenigsburg, January 12, 1837; died January 23,
1879) was mainly a self-taught composer, inasmuch as he had only two
years' instruction.  Nevertheless, at the age of twenty he was
sufficiently advanced to be appointed conductor of the orchestra at
Posen.  Afterward he lived in Russia, and at Copenhagen, and was
finally back as teacher in the school of Tausig, in Berlin.  Very soon
afterward, however, he contracted a pulmonary disease, which was the
cause of his death.

Jensen was a very prolific composer in many departments, but especially
brilliant as a song writer and as a composer of romantic pieces for the
pianoforte.  As a song writer, Riemann considers him the legitimate
successor of Schumann; and among the hundreds of songs which he
produced are many of very great beauty.  His piano pieces are elegantly
written,--somewhat Schumannesque in point of style, although not nearly
so rugged and much more fluent,--and the pieces on the program below
give a sufficiently fair idea of the general features of his style in
this department.  The selection of songs may, perhaps, be left to the
convenience and taste of the singers, since it is impossible to
designate any two or three songs of his which so fully illustrate his
capacity as to be held up as models of all the rest.

The second upon the list is Xaver Scharwenka, born at Samper, January
6, 1850.  He was educated at the Kullak School, in Berlin, and at the
age of eighteen was appointed teacher in Kullak's Academy.  His first
concert appearance was made at the age of nineteen in the
Sing-Akademie, with great success, and his reputation as a
distinguished and accomplished player was almost immediately
established, and was strengthened by numerous appearances for years.
In 1881 he opened in Berlin the Scharwenka Conservatory, which is still
in existence, his older brother, Philip, upholding there the family
name.

Scharwenka made a very marked impression on the musical world by his
earlier compositions, an impression which perhaps has not been fully
reinforced by some of his later works, which seem, somehow, to be
wanting in those qualities of spontaneity and innate grace of style
which distinguished the earlier pieces.  The best work from his pen,
undoubtedly, is the first concerto for piano, which is one of the
cleverest works in this department of recent years.  He is the author
of a large amount of chamber music and pieces of different sorts.  The
most popular of all his compositions is the well-known "Polish Dances."
One of the most meritorious is the theme and variations on the program
below.

I. J. Paderewski, the famous piano virtuoso, is so well known that
particulars are, perhaps, not necessary in his case.  He was born
November 6, 1859, at Polodien.  He has written a considerable number of
pieces for the piano and for chamber instruments, and a little for
orchestra.  His music is melodious and sentimental, occasionally
brilliant.  Opinions differ very much in regard to the essential
originality of his melody, numerous resemblances existing between his
successful pieces and others which have been popular some time earlier.
At any rate, he is an interesting personality, with a certain natural
grace and style which entitle him to consideration.  The most highly
esteemed of his compositions are the three upon the list below,
although no one of the pieces of his which attained American popularity
is here included.

The most distinguished of this entire group is Moritz Moszkowski, the
well-known composer and pianist, who was born August 23, 1854, at
Breslau, the son of a Polish father.  He had his early musical training
at Breslau and Dresden, and later at Berlin, where for many years he
has been established as a teacher.  He early attracted attention as a
pianist, and very soon also began to be distinguished as a composer.
He has produced a large number of piano pieces of various sorts, many
compositions for orchestra, songs, etc.  His music is melodious and
artistic, although, as a rule, of no great depth.  Among the more
attractive of his works are the pieces on the present list.  His
fascinating little Serenata in D major for piano will be remembered, as
well as a number of more _ad captandum_ pieces which he has turned out
at different times.


  PROGRAM.

  Scharwenka:
      Theme and Variations.
      Staccato Etude, E-flat.
      Valse Caprice.
  Paderewski:
      Nocturne in B-flat.
      Burlesque.
      Suite a l'Antique.
  Jensen:
      Eroticon, No. 3, No. 7.
      Berceuse.
  Moszkowski:
      Polonaise, D major.
      G-flat Study.
      Barcarolle, G major.
      Moment Musicale, in C-sharp minor.




CHAPTER VI.

GOTTSCHALK AND MASON.

Owing to the composite character of our American civilization, in which
so many different nationalities are mingled, several of which maintain
as long as possible their own language and customs, there is a certain
crudity in the national life and a want of ripeness which as yet has
prevented the development of what properly can be called an American
school of musical composition.  Almost all our composers have been
educated in Germany, many of them at Leipsic, and their compositions do
not differ in a striking degree from those of good German composers.
Minor traits of individuality and differences of imaginative scope are
noticeable and afford marks of distinction; but, essentially
considered, there has been very little music composed in this country
which is at the same time good and so characteristically American that
it could not have been produced under any other circumstances.
Nevertheless, there have been at least two American composers who are
characteristically American and who could not have been produced under
any different circumstances; and a number of others in whom the
American traits are well defined.

The two American composers of original and characteristic genius are
the late Louis Moreau Gottschalk and the famous march king, John Philip
Sousa.  As the compositions of Mr. Sousa have shown themselves able to
take care of themselves, and as his popularity needs no assistance from
this quarter, I will consider his case first, and say that in this son
of an Italian father and a German mother, born and raised in the city
of Washington, D. C., we have a thoroughly characteristic American, in
whom different heredities mingle in a curious way and give rise to a
certain originality of temperament and style.

While Mr. Sousa, from his earlier career, and probably by force of his
temperament, has naturally taken the position of a popular composer, he
has done so almost entirely in consequence of the inherently popular
character of the music he has turned out, which, for striking rhythm
and melodic piquancy, has taken the ear not alone of the United States
but of the whole world, his marches being widely played in all foreign
countries, where they are received with the liveliest demonstrations of
approval.  In fact, very much the same kind of mild excitement that a
_chic_ American girl awakens in a foreign reception, the band music of
Sousa affords to the travel-worn palates of European bandmasters.  It
stirs them up and gives them a new sensation.  It is a mistake,
therefore, to speak of this artist in terms implying an unwillingness
to classify him among serious composers.  He is entitled to a very
honorable place among those who have loved their fellow-men so well
that they have made them feel good.


LOUIS MOREAU GOTTSCHALK.

In the year 1829 our two first American pianists were born: Louis
Moreau Gottschalk in New Orleans, and William Mason in Boston.  The
heredity, environment, and training of these two men were as different
as it is possible to imagine.  Gottschalk was the son of a German who
came to New Orleans by way of England, and in this country married a
French woman.  New Orleans at that time was practically a French city,
and the French language was very largely spoken in the family life.
The boy, Louis Moreau Gottschalk, showed talent for music at the
earliest possible age, and made a number of public appearances of a
very interesting and creditable kind, and at the age of thirteen, when
he was sent to Paris to go on with his education, he had already
established quite a little reputation.  In Paris he was educated under
the late Charles Halle and Stamaty, and in 1844, at the age of fifteen,
he produced his first two works, called ballads, "Ossian" and "The
Dance of the Shades."  His concert career in Europe began in 1846, when
he was seventeen years of age, and he gave a series of concerts at the
Italian Opera in Paris in which he was associated with the celebrated
Hector Berlioz.

He made a genuine furor as pianist, and Berlioz, in charmingly turned
phrases, speaks of him as follows:

"Gottschalk is one of the very small number who possess all the
different elements of a consummate pianist--all the faculties which
surround him with an irresistible prestige and give him a sovereign
power.  He is an accomplished musician--he knows just how far fancy may
be indulged in expression.  He knows the limits beyond which any
liberties taken with the rhythm produce only confusion and discord, and
upon these limits he never encroaches.  There is an exquisite grace in
his manner of phrasing sweet melodies and throwing off light touches
from the higher keys.  The boldness and brilliancy and originality of
his play at once dazzle and astonish, and the infantile naivete of his
smiling caprices, the charming simplicity with which he renders simple
things, seem to belong to another individuality distinct from that
which marks his thundering energy.  Thus the success of M. Gottschalk
before an audience of musical cultivation is immense."

His first American tour was made in 1853-54.  Then ensued a time of
travel in the West Indies, but in 1862 he was back in New York again,
and his American tours lasted until 1869, when he went to South
America, where he died at the comparatively early age of forty.

There is a disposition at the present time to undervalue the work of
Gottschalk.  He was a melodist pure and simple, and his distinction
from an American standpoint consists in his having given a new note to
his music by availing himself of the rhythms and characteristic
cadences of negro, creole, and Spanish nationalities in the southern
United States and Central America.  At the present time of the
pianistic day, when very little attracts attention unless it is very
difficult, it seems incredible that works so simple in their nature as
those of Gottschalk could have attracted the attention they did; but
there is more in this simplicity than at first sight appears, even if
we admit that from a critical standpoint the introductions and endings
are entirely too long for the matter they contain.  Gottschalk himself
had a way of doing them which made them seem extremely significant, and
when he came to the melody itself it was played with such a delicacy
and such a masterly touch that it seized the attention and concentrated
the interest to a remarkable degree.  Harmonically considered, almost
all his works are within rather narrow limits, but as compared with the
French composers of the day when his works made so much furor in Paris,
Gottschalk has nothing to apologize for, since his music has a charm
and a distinction of originality superior to almost all of that time or
the present.

Many of the things with which Gottschalk made a great effect in his
concert tours would not have been composed if he had lived thirty or
forty years later.  I mean now his four-hand arrangements of the
overtures to "William Tell" and "Oberon."  These are extremely
brilliant and sensational arrangements, and are well worthy the
attention of boarding-schools and clubs desiring something out of the
ordinary way.  It was his custom, in his concerts, to play the upper
part himself while the best available local performer played the other
part.  This gave most of the melody and all of the brilliant work to
the masterly fingers of the pianist himself.

The poetic thread or suggestion underlying many of his pieces is very
slight.  Nevertheless, it is not without value.  Take, for instance,
the beautiful "Marche de Nuit," a piece which opens with six lines of
introduction, amounting practically to an excellent study of crescendo,
the idea being to show the effect of the march-music in the extreme
distance and its gradual approach.  At length we come to the march
itself, and it is a pleasant and agreeable melody, and the difficulty
of the whole is no more than is now well within the powers of a pupil
in the early fifth grade.  The famous "Last Hope" is well known to all,
and is one of the most persistent melodies which any American composer
has produced in instrumental music.  The introduction and the coda are
both much too long, and can only be saved by a certain distinction in
the manner of performing them.  Mr. Wolfsohn said that such was the
charm of Gottschalk's personality and touch that everything he played
impressed itself and you remembered it a very long time.  Dr. Mason
tells me that in these pianissimo runs in _alt_, which abound in so
many of his works, Gottschalk's fingers were like little steel hammers,
the tone being perfectly clear and like a bell, but not pianissimo in
the true sense of the term.

It seems puerile now that in his concerts Gottschalk could have made an
effect with his famous piece "The Banjo," which is a very realistic
transcription of a negro banjo performance, the banjo effect on the
piano, in his case, I think, having been accomplished by the touch,
whereas many others find themselves obliged to lay a sheet of music on
the strings in order to impart to the vibrations the peculiar twang of
the original.

Another and more favorable example of his talent is in the beautiful
"Slumber Song," which can be had for voice or for piano alone.  There
is another class of pieces by Gottschalk which seem very peculiar at
the present time.  They are the rather loud and somewhat difficult
concert fantasies called the "Bamboula," or "Negro Dance," and
"Jerusalem," the latter being made upon certain melodies in Verdi's "I
Lombardi."  Another piece of his which made a great effect in his
concerts and was a general favorite of students was the "Aeolian
Murmurs," a pleasant melody with a lot of fine pianissimo work to
represent the murmurs.  Speaking of the misleading effect of the
Gottschalk performances, I will mention that the well-known piece, "The
Dying Poet," was played by him many and many a time in public, to the
great pleasure of the audience; yet before we gather up stones to throw
at the American concert audiences of the early '60's, let us not forget
that within the past few years audiences have shown themselves equally
vulnerable to the charm of Paderewski's "Minuet," a work in no respect
superior to the slightest of our American pianist.  In this case, as in
the former, it is a question of the personality and appealing nature of
the performer.


WILLIAM MASON.

The other American pianist born in the year 1829 had a totally
different heredity, environment, and education.  William Mason also
showed his talent at an early age, and was seriously taught the piano
under the direction of his father, the late very distinguished and
eminent Dr. Lowell Mason, who at that time and for about twenty years
later exerted a most commanding influence in Boston and the country at
large.  Mason's advance was so rapid that by the time he was thirteen
or fourteen, or a little later, he appeared in public with orchestra in
Boston, playing the Mendelssohn G minor concerto, and I think he had
played the Weber "Concertstueck."  In the season of 1846 and 1847 he
played the piano part in the chamber concerts given by the Harvard
Musical Association.  In 1849 he went to Leipsic and became a pupil in
theory of the distinguished Moritz Hauptmann.  Upon Hauptmann's death
he went to Prague for a year with Dreyschock, and then to Liszt at
Weimar.  This was in 1851, or thereabouts, and here he remained some
time.  Returning to America in 1854 he removed to New York, and took
the commanding position which he has almost ever since occupied as
teacher and as concert pianist.  While there are traces of American
training in the musical compositions of Dr. Mason, these traces are
very few, the general character of his work being distinctly German.
His musical talent was strong upon the harmonic side, but upon the
melodic side his imagination was not so free.  He has produced several
volumes of compositions, probably about one hundred in all, almost
every one being elegantly written and well made, and many of them of a
classical elegance of style.  His reputation as a composer has suffered
from his limiting his work always to the field of the salon, and
especially to the piano.  I believe he has never composed an original
song, although he has arranged several which have been very useful
indeed.  It is as a composer for the piano that we have to speak of him.

The most sensational of the Mason pieces is his famous "Silver Spring,"
which was composed shortly after the late Scandinavian pianist,
Haberbier, had visited Weimar and had played many brilliant effects of
running work upon the piano, in which the hands were used
"inter-locking," as it is called; that is, the left hand taking now and
then one or two notes of the run.  This method of dividing up a run has
the effect of imparting a certain amount of arm element to the touch,
whereby the tone becomes considerably heavier and more brilliant.  It
was thought at Weimar at that time that piano playing would very likely
take this direction in future, and that the day of running work in the
fingers of one hand alone had practically passed.  Accordingly, Mason
experimented in these new effects which Haberbier had suggested, and
worked out this piece, "The Silver Spring."  As he told me, he first
had to find out an accompaniment figure which pleased him, and then to
discover in which chords it would go most easily, because the location
of the black keys with reference to the white plays a very important
part when the hand has to fall in its place in rapid motion.  When he
had ascertained these points, he then had to consider what key would
afford the greatest number of chords of this character, and so at last
he came to the key of A and the chords he has in "The Silver Spring."
When he had arrived at this point it was necessary to provide a melody,
and, as the melody had to fit the accompaniment, the melody was made
last, and in this way he arrived at the seeming "impromptu" of "The
Silver Spring."  This is his own story to me many years ago, and it may
have had a humorous exaggeration in it, not to be taken too seriously.
I mention it because somewhere about the same time when Mason told it
to me I had been talking with Dudley Buck one day, and we were speaking
of Mason with very great admiration, especially for the elegance of his
style as illustrated in some of his then recently composed works, such
as his "Cradle Song," his two impromptus, "At Evening" and "In the
Morning," his "Romance Etude" and the like, and Buck said, "If Mason
ever had an inspiration it was in that beautiful melody in 'The Silver
Spring.'  I have arranged a church tune from it and my choir sings it
with never failing delight.  It will not do to undervalue Mason's gift
for melody when he has produced a piece like that."

With reference to the trend of piano playing in the direction of this
interlocking work, there were several years when it looked as if the
Haberbier suggestions would bear no fruit, but latterly in the
Tschaikowsky concerto, to some extent, and in the Schytte concerto in
C-sharp minor, to a very great extent, the interlocking principle is
employed.

One of the first of Mason's pieces which attained anything like
persistent popularity was the "Danse Rustique," which, by the way, is
one of the best finger studies for piano students in the fourth grade
of which I have any knowledge.  It is one of those pieces which can
always be learned even by a pupil who is not very smart, provided he
will practise it carefully and earnestly enough.  It is a piece which
can not be played well without very careful practice, and which, when
well played, produces a good effect.  Hence it has a remarkable
pedagogic value if the teacher knows when to put it in and how to
handle it when it is once there.  While this piece makes no very
important figure in the esthetic world, it is by no means a composition
to be treated with disrespect.  There is a great deal of energy in it
and the second subject is very pleasing indeed, and the modulating work
in the middle of the piece, where the elaboration would naturally stand
in a serious work, is of considerable range and ingenuity, and
thoroughly characteristic of the author.

One who wishes to know Mason should study some of the lighter aspects
of his productions; and first of these, since it is more nearly related
to what I have just now been mentioning, is the "Romance Etude" in G
minor.  This is a pretty melody, often in thirds, in G minor, lying in
the convenient soprano range of the piano.  Long runs cross this
melody, in Thalbergian manner, from one end of the keyboard to the
other, and at times the scale business gives place to charming
arpeggios, figures which transfer themselves from one hand to the
other.  The scale is a curious minor scale with a sharp fourth, and is
therefore anything but inviting to the fingers at first.  The effect of
the whole, when well played, is very charming, although it is more the
effect of a study than of a poem.

Still lighter in their characteristics are his charming and half-jocose
variations on the old French air, "Ah vous dirais-je maman," better
known in school circles of my time as "Haste thee, winter, haste away."
There is a very playful effect in these variations, and in the title
Mason calls them "Variations Grotesques"; but when he sent a copy to
Liszt, that amiable critic replied that the word "grotesque" had no
place in piano playing--that they should properly be called jocose, or
something of that sort.

Thoroughly interesting in every way is the remarkable series of duets
for teacher and pupil.  Here are eight little nursery melodies which at
the time these variations were composed were among the best known in
this field, and the pupil, supposed to be a small child, plays them
generally with one hand alone, or with both hands in octaves, very
rarely in parts.  The teacher, meanwhile, adds the harmonies, and
wonderfully interesting and highly diversified harmonies they are.  And
in the same line with these are two other pieces which were originally
written for the Mason and Hoadley Method for beginners: a march in
which the pupil plays under the five fingers entirely, while the
teacher adds the most strange and diversified harmonies, and a waltz in
which the pupil still has nothing more than five-finger positions to
deal with.  I consider these pieces superior to anything of this kind
that I have ever seen in point of cleverness and harmonic wit.

It would be a mistake, however, to dismiss the work of Dr. Mason with
these half-jocose illustrations of his genius.  He has a very elegantly
written "Berceuse" which if very well done produces a lovely effect.  A
trifle more flexibility in the melody would have been an advantage, but
it is a beautifully made piece and well worthy attention.  He has also
a ballad of very considerable dramatic force, and I have always been
fond of his "Reverie Poetique," which is very much in the style of
Henselt.  A melody without a great range, but running in two parts upon
rather diversified harmonies, constitutes the first part of this piece,
and it is afterward developed or varied in double notes, which are
principally sixths, in a very lovely manner.  The only drawback, aside
from the difficulty of playing it well, is the length to which it is
spun out.  Undoubtedly it is a little monotonous, owing to the same
motive coming over so many times.  On the other hand, however, it
pretends at the start to be nothing more than a poetic "reverie," and
it has the character of a reverie--something which dwells and muses and
perhaps never arrives.  I mentioned, before, two reveries called "In
the Morning" and "At Evening."  The first of these is a very clever
study, and both are well worth studying.

The works of both these composers have a distinct and pronounced
pedagogic value, but in wholly different directions, and both appeal
principally to American pianists.  The Gottschalk pieces now are mainly
used in the earlier stages of instruction for forming good melody
habits.  They appeal to the poetic sensibility of the players who as
yet are hardly ready for Chopin or any of the more elaborate composers.
Dr. Mason's works, especially those I have here mentioned, appeal upon
the opposite side to the harmonic sense, and to the sense of working
out a theme with good consistency and persistency.  While the
Gottschalk pieces improve the style of melody and the sparkle of the
playing, the Mason pieces conduce to system and regularity in study and
to a serious and careful treatment of the left-hand part as well as the
right, and they have in them some of that quality which belongs to
nearly all the works of Bach, when undertaken by students: they promote
seriousness and musical feeling.

Hence I propose the following program as on the whole affording a good
idea of the works of these composers:

  PROGRAM.

  Gottschalk-Weber:
      Overture to "Oberon."  Four hands.
  Mason:
      Amitie pour Amitie.  (Available for four hands if preferred.)
      Air and Variations Grotesques.  "Ah Vous Dirais-je Maman."
      Spring Dawn Mazurka.
      Reverie Poetique.
  Gottschalk:
      Marche de Nuit.
      The Banjo.  (Negro Sketch.)
      Song, "Slumber On."
  Mason:
      Eight Duets for Teacher and Pupil.  (Ditson Co.)  Four hands.
      March and Waltz for Teacher and Pupil.  Four hands.
  Gottschalk:
      Aeolian Murmurs.
      The Last Hope.
  Mason:
      The Tocctina.
      Reverie, "Au Matin."
      "The Silver Spring."
  Gottschalk-Rossini:
      The Overture to "William Tell."  Four hands.




CHAPTER VII.

MACDOWELL.


EDWARD ALEXANDER MACDOWELL.

By general consent of music lovers and connoisseurs, Mr. Edward
Alexander MacDowell, or Prof. MacDowell as he should now be called, is
the most finished and accomplished writer for the pianoforte that we
have.  Mr. MacDowell was born in New York on the 18th of December,
1861, and after having some instruction from his mother, who was a good
musician, he received lessons for a while from Teresa Carreno.  In 1877
he went to Paris and became a pupil of Marmontel and Savard.  Later on
he went to Frankfort-on-the-Main, where he studied composition with the
late Joachim Raff and piano playing with Carl Heymann.  In this manner
five years of European student-life passed, and in 1888 he was made
piano teacher at the Darmstadt Conservatory; he remained there only one
year, in 1882 going to Weisbaden, where his position was a very
distinguished one.  In 1888 he returned to America and located in
Boston, where he immediately succeeded to an extremely fine clientele.
In Boston Mr. MacDowell naturally found very congenial surroundings.
He lived on West Cedar Street, a few doors from Arthur Foote, well down
on the slopes of Beacon Hill, a short distance from the Common and not
very far from Charles Street.  The aristocratic desirability of this
particular location in Boston is measured by its remoteness from street
cars and all means of public transit.  This, however, is a mere detail.
In 1896 Mr. MacDowell was appointed professor of music at Columbia
University, after negotiations extending over several months.

It is impossible to read over the list of Mr. MacDowell's published
works without realizing at once that here we have a composer of no
small fertility of idea and great seriousness and ambition of purpose.
The list from which I take the following particulars is, no doubt,
incomplete, since it reaches only to opus 50, which work was published
in 1895.  But the list contains four symphonic poems for orchestra, the
First Suite, scored for orchestra, and the Second, or "Indian"
Suite,--in all, six large works for orchestra.  There are two concertos
for pianoforte and orchestra, both of which have been played very
successfully, the first one many times over by Mme. Carreno and by Mr.
MacDowell himself.  There is a romance for 'cello and orchestra; two
numbers of four-hand pieces, originally so composed; twelve books of
songs; and quite a long list of pieces for the pianoforte.

To take the more important of the latter, there are, first, twelve
studies, opus 39, which are of various lengths, from two to six pages
each; in part fancy pieces for the piano, and in part intended to serve
as exercises in different styles of playing.  Then there are twelve
virtuoso studies, opus 46, much more difficult than the preceding and
very interesting and marked in their characteristics.  There are six
Idylles, opus 28, and quite a number of other small pieces for piano,
of no great ambition, but all poetic and seriously done.  The most
popular of the purely pianoforte pieces, perhaps, is the "Witches'
Dance," which has the advantage of being a most excellent finger study.
The only drawback to this piece is the rather commonplace character of
the melody which serves as middle piece.  This, however, is somewhat
concealed by the cleverness of the treatment.

Of all the piano works, the three upon which Mr. MacDowell's reputation
in the higher musical circles will rest are his First Suite and his two
sonatas, the one called "Tragic," the other "Heroic."  The First Suite
dates from the time when he was with Raff at Frankfort, and it was
published in Germany by Breitkopf and Hartel.  It is perhaps modeled
somewhat on a suite by Raff.  The first movement, praeludium, is quite
in the old style at first.  Presently, a flowing melody in the bass
begins against a pianissimo, arpeggiated accompaniment in the right
hand, with a very charming and thoroughly pianistic effect, and the
praeludium is carried through on this motive.  The second movement,
presto, is practically a scherzo with a strong flavor of fugue at the
beginning.  It is very fully developed, extending to eight pages.  Then
follows the slow movement, andantino and allegretto, bearing a motto,
"_Per arnica silentia lunae_" (Virgil); and "by the friendly silence of
the moon" the sweet cantilena goes on, now for soprano, now for tenor.
The middle piece is of a more dramatic character perhaps.  This is
followed by an intermezzo, like a quick minuet, which is very
successful; and this in turn by a rhapsody, which bears a motto from
Dante's "Inferno," "Those who enter here leave hope behind"--surely not
a very inviting suggestion to the student who takes it for the first
time.  Fortunately the period when hope forsakes the reader is short,
being really of only one page, after which a sort of mitigated grief
ensues, and in another page this movement ends.  Then follows the
finale--a fugue in E major, well made and effective but by no means
easy to play.  At the end of the fugue there is a coda of a stormy
character.

This suite, as a whole, is a very brilliant piano piece, and also
difficult to play; but it is musical and well done and therefore worth
playing.

The latest of his large works in a serious form is the second sonata,
called the "Eroica."  This is designated by the composer as a "flower
from the realm of King Arthur," and it is dedicated to Dr. William
Mason.  Beginning very seriously and slowly, it almost immediately
rises to intense vigor, which, after a while, gives place to a second
subject--a song-melody in the folk-tone; and out of these two
ingredients--or three, more properly (the motive of the first page, the
second page, and the song-form already noticed)--the movement is
carried to completion.  It is very difficult to play, but when well
done is effective and serious.  The second movement is a very playful
scherzo, which is designated as elf-like--as light and swift as
possible.  The third movement is designated "tenderly, longingly, yet
with passion"; the hero is now in love, very much so; his being is
stirred to its utmost core; his rhythm is shaken up so that two's and
three's intermingle in the most inviting confusion; and his harmonic
foundations are also subjected to fast and loose experiences very
trying to the outsider who would represent all this inner commotion.
Nevertheless the movement, when well done, is very lovely.  The finale
is designated "fiercely and very fast"--a very strong and tumultuous
movement.

Throughout his career as a composer Mr. MacDowell has placed great
importance upon the advantage a composer gains from a poetic standpoint
or conception.  He has often maintained that one could write better
music if inspired by poetry than when he merely gives rein to his
musical fancy, as such; and that, in fact, the only salvation for the
modern composer, and his only protection from falling into mere
rhapsody, is in having a poetic story in mind to which the music should
conform.  Accordingly, in all these large works of Mr. MacDowell's,
especially in the two sonatas, and perhaps even more so in the second
than in the first, the transitions of mood in the music are very
noticeable indeed, and the work needs to be played with a great deal of
taste as well as mastership in order to prevent it from having a
certain fragmentary effect.  This, in the production of a composer so
masterly in musical treatment as Mr. MacDowell, is rather curious, and
I have never been able fully to account for it.  The disposition to
lean on poetic suggestion is very evident in the books of studies
already mentioned.  For instance, in the opus 46 there are such titles
as "Wild Chase," "Elfin Dance," "March Wind"; and in the former book
the "Dance of the Gnomes," "The Shadow Dance," "In the Forest"; in the
opus 37, "By the Light of the Moon," "In the Hammock," "Dance
Andalusian "; in the opus 32,--entitled "Four Little Poems,"--"The
Eagle," "The Brook," "Moonshine," "Winter"; then, again, in the latest
of Mr. MacDowell's works which I have seen--the "Woodland Sketches,"
opus 51--there are ten little pieces, with such titles as "To a Wild
Rose," "Will o' the Wisp," "At an old Trysting Place," "In Autumn,"
"From an Indian Lodge," "To a Water Lily," "From 'Uncle Remus,'" "A
Deserted Farm," "By a Meadow Brook," "Told at Sunset."  These titles
may or may not have been in the mind of the composer at the moment of
producing the work.  It is quite possible that a significant musical
idea, upon being developed, suggested the name, and that the fanciful
name was taken for the sake of the student.  These "Woodland Sketches"
in particular are very simple pieces indeed, rarely presenting
difficulties beyond the fourth grade, and all of them musical.

Mr. MacDowell has also shared the opinion of many writers that
something new is to be reached by the modern composer from the
suggestion of characteristic folk-songs, and in his "Indian" Suite he
has made use of themes derived from the North American Indians or
suggested by some of their melodies.  The "Indian" Suite is undoubtedly
a very beautiful and poetic work for orchestra.  I can not say that I
find it better by reason of its barbarous themes, but the treatment of
those themes has in it nothing that is barbarous, but, on the contrary,
everything that is highly finished and polished, with a keen sense of
the comely and well sounding.

On the whole, therefore, considering the mastery with which he has
worked out his different pieces, and the characteristic and modern
manner in which his poetical suggestions are realized upon the piano,
we are obliged to take Mr. MacDowell very seriously, and to rank him
among the first of writers at the present time.  As he is still a young
man, and has accepted the professorship of music at Columbia primarily
for the purpose of having more leisure for composition, other and
greater works ought to follow from his pen.  I have been informed that
he has in hand, or already finished, a symphony for full orchestra, and
no doubt his portfolio contains a multitude of other pieces which as
yet he is not ready to give to the world.  Many of the songs which he
has published are upon his own verses, and some of them are very
beautiful.  In fact, you will rarely find eight songs together so
pleasing and well worth knowing in every way as the "Eight Songs" by
Mr. MacDowell, opus 47.

At the same time, there is a certain amount of make-believe in these
fantastic titles for piano pieces, which, after all, can be nothing
else than more or less legitimate developments of certain musical
motives, as such; and can be satisfactory only in proportion as the
ideas are legitimately unfolded and adequately treated, and contrasted
with other material.  Even the marks of expression are arbitrary, a
very amusing illustration of which I am able to give from my own
experience.  It happened some months ago that an out-of-town pupil,
connected with a musical club, brought me a program of MacDowell's
works which she had to play at one of the club meetings, and in the
list was the difficult chord study entitled "March Wind."  This was
marked pianissimo.  It is rather a difficult thing to bring down to
smoothness, and I spent a great deal of time in getting it played
softly, in order to represent the distance of the wind and the rise and
fall of the intensity.  A few days later Mr. MacDowell played a recital
in Chicago, and among the other selections was this same "March Wind,"
which he played fortissimo throughout.  When I saw him the next day I
began, in that irreverent manner which critics and composers have with
one another (for Mr. MacDowell was not yet a professor): "You're a fine
fellow!  To mark your own 'March Wind' pianissimo and then play it
fortissimo.  What's the good of my working two hours with a pupil to
get it down fine when you upset everything by playing it in this
tumultuous way?"  To which Mr. MacDowell answered: "Did I mark that
pianissimo?  When I got ready to play it I could n't remember whether
it was pianissimo or fortissimo, and I said, 'March Wind,' 'March
Wind,' that must be very loud and roaring; and so I played it
fortissimo."

But however this may be, it can be said of Mr. MacDowell that he has
illustrated his talents as a composer in a wide variety of styles, and
always in a delicate and finished manner.  He is, therefore, a composer
to be treated seriously, and to be looked up to as a master, with an
expectation of even more beautiful and satisfactory works still to
follow.


  PROGRAM.

  I.  First Suite.  Opus 10.
          Praeludium.
          Presto.
          Andantino and Allegretto.
          Intermezzo.
          Rhapsodie.
          Fugue.
  2.  Woodland Sketches.
          "To a Wild Rose."
          "Will o' the Wisp."
          "At an Old Trysting Place."
          "In Autumn."
          "From an Indian Lodge."
          "To a Water Lily."
          "From 'Uncle Remus'."
          "A Deserted Farm."
          "By a Meadow Brook."
          "Told at Sunset."
  3.  Two Songs from Opus 33.
          "Cradle Hymn."
          "Idyll."
  4.  Selections from Opus 39.
          "Romance."
          "Arabeske."
          "In the Forest."
          "Idylle."
          "Shadow Dance."
          "Witches' Dance."  Opus 17, No. 2.
  5.  Eight Songs.  Opus 47.
          "The Robin Sings in the Apple-tree."
          "Midsummer Lullaby."
          "Folk-song."
          "Confidence."
          "The West Wind Croons in the Cedar Trees."
          "In the Woods."
          "The Sea."
          "Through the Meadow."
  6.  Sonata, "Eroica."  Opus 30.




CHAPTER VIII.

ARTHUR FOOTE AND MRS. H. H. A. BEACH.

There is nothing especial in common between the composers here
mentioned that they should be put together in one program, excepting
the fact that they both live in Boston; nor, on the other hand, is
there anything especially contrasting between them.  For this reason I
think it better to give the selections of the different composers
separately, leaving the superintendent of the concert to arrange the
program of selections in any order most pleasing to him.



ARTHUR FOOTE.

Arthur Foote was born of a good New England family at Salem, Mass.,
March 5, 1853.  He pursued the usual course of a well-bred New England
boy, passing successively through the district school and academy, and
at length graduated at Harvard in 1874.  He had already made
considerable study of music, both upon instruments and in theory, and
under the competent instruction of Mr. Stephen A. Emery had made
considerable progress in composition.

He now entered seriously upon the study of music, with the intention of
making it a life-long profession.  His teachers were Mr. B. J. Lang, in
organ and pianoforte playing, and Prof. J. K. Paine, in composition.
In 1875, after examination, he received from Harvard the degree of A.M.
in music.  Since 1876 he has been engaged as a successful teacher of
the pianoforte in Boston, and since 1878 has been organist of the First
Unitarian Church in Boston.  In daily work, as an interesting and
stimulating instructor in art, Mr. Foote leads an honored life; but he
is better known to the outside world by his compositions, which
indicate talent of a high order.  The range of them and the variety are
alike remarkable.

Among his important compositions are to be mentioned an Impromptu (G
minor); Gavotte (B minor); Mazurka (G minor); Opus 6, consisting of
five pieces; Prelude and Nocturne (F minor and F major); Sarabande (G
major); Petite Valse (for the left hand); Polonaise (D major) and
Gavotte in C minor (Opus 8, No. 1); Eclogue (Opus 8, No. 2); Suite in D
minor (Opus 15), containing Prelude and Fugue, Romance and Capriccio;
Sarabande and Courante of J. S. Bach (transcribed); two Pianoforte
Pedal Studies; Etudes Album, a collection of etudes, selected and
arranged in progressive order; and Additions to Buttshardt Method of
Pianoforte Technic.

I do not find myself very well prepared to make a program of
compositions of Mr. Foote which fully satisfies.  The best I can do
with the material I have is the following, which is offered to those
needing it as a suggestion:


  PROGRAM.

  Five pieces for piano.  Opus 6.
      Prelude and Nocturne.
      Sarabande.
      Petite Valse.  (For left hand alone.)
      Polonaise.
  Three pieces for piano.  No opus number.
      Impromptu in G Minor.
      Gavotte in B Minor.
      Sarabande and Courante from the Violoncello Sonatas of Bach.
          Arranged by Arthur Foote.


The pieces here listed will occupy about forty minutes in performance.
All of this music is seriously intended, all is well done, and all
musical.  Naturally, the best pieces are the last, since the
experienced composer, Mr. Bach, had already laid the foundation, and
his music has had a longer time to ripen and grow a halo.



SONGS BY ARTHUR FOOTE.

In addition to the foregoing program of works by Mr. Arthur Foote,
following is a selection of songs which can be confidently recommended
as attractive and valuable additions to these illustrative programs,
and as well worthy the widest possible currency on their own account:

  "Into the silent land."
  "O my love's like a red, red rose."
  "If you become a nun, dear."
  "A song from the Persian."
  "In Picardie."
  "O swallow, swallow, flying south."
  "On the way to Kew."
  "When icicles hang by the wall."
  "Irish folk-song."
  "I'm wearing awa'."
  "Go, lovely rose."


The first one in the above list is a very lovely quartet for female
voices--originally composed for funeral occasions--upon Longfellow's
translation of the song by Silas.  It is a very beautiful quartet.  The
"Song from the Persian" is a duet for soprano and alto or baritone,
preferably baritone, of an unusual, but on the whole pleasing,
character.  "O my love's like a red, red rose" is very charming,
indeed, but perhaps best of the entire list is the soprano song, "O
swallow, swallow, flying south," which is dedicated to Mme. Lilian
Blauvelt.

Several of these selections are to be had for a low voice or a high
voice, but most of them are for mezzo-soprano or baritone.  There is
one for bass, "When icicles hang by the wall," and one for alto, "I'm
wearing awa'," and of the collection as a whole, I say again, it is an
honor to American art.  They are songs that are extremely well worth
knowing.



MRS. H. H. A. BEACH.

Mrs. H. H. A. Beach, whose maiden name was Amy Marcy Cheney, of Boston,
was the daughter of a well-known singer and pianist.  Her talent for
music showed itself in extreme youth, and at the age of six her real
study began.  Among her teachers were Ernst Perabo, Carl Baerman, and
Julius Hill.  She is a pianist of accomplished powers and a composer of
remarkable talent.  It is told of her that on one occasion she played
the Schumann concerto with the Boston Orchestra at a week's notice, in
place of a soloist who had canceled an engagement at the last moment.
On another occasion she played her own pianoforte concerto with the
orchestra with splendid effect.  Last year her "Gaelic Symphony," in E
minor, was played in Boston and also in Brooklyn by the Boston
Orchestra.  Her instrumentation is said to be excellent and the work a
very strong one.

Among the many clever compositions of Mrs. Beach's the following are
perhaps the most suitable for our use:

Ballad for the pianoforte, dedicated to Mme. Fanny Bloomfield-Zeisler;
a seriously made composition with a beautiful principal melody,
cleverly developed, and a good deal of dramatic power in the working
out of the middle part.  A composition of considerable difficulty for
the player, and also capable of very excellent effect when well done.

There are also four sketches--"In Autumn," "Dreaming," "Phantoms,"
"Fireflies."  "In Autumn," a very sprightly composition in F-sharp
minor, in a good 4/8 rhythm, capable of very charming effect.
"Dreaming," a meditative sustained melody in the key of G-flat, resting
upon a triplet motion in the middle part, with harmonies sensitively
changing at unexpected places, capable of most beautiful effect; also
an excellent study in cantabile.  "Phantoms," a scherzo or
quasi-mazurka, very sprightly and pleasing.  "Fireflies," a very
delightful study in thirds for the right hand, with novel and modern
fingering; therefore extremely well adapted for study.  This, when well
done, must be very beautiful, but it is necessary that the thirds be
played with the utmost lightness and equality.  It is more difficult,
and also more extended than either of the preceding, but extremely well
worth attention.

There are also three interesting pieces not so difficult in their
working out.  First, there is a "Barcarolle" in G minor, opus 28, No.
1; a very attractive rhythm and an extremely attractive harmonic
treatment.  This is a piece to be played with pleasure by any amateur
of taste.  It is only of moderate difficulty, as, for instance, sixth
grade.  Perhaps a little less attractive, but more easy of execution,
is the "Menuet Italien," No. 2 of the same opus as the preceding.  This
is remarkably well worked out, however.  The third piece in the same
opus is a waltz, "Dance of the Flowers," bright, sparkling, evanescent;
clever for the piano, and attractive if well done.

Best of all, perhaps, is a "Romance for Violin and Piano," which is
dedicated to Miss Maud Powell.  This is a very delightful piece, and
would make an admirable conclusion to a program.  It requires good
playing in all the parts.

With reference to these compositions by Mrs. Beach, it deserves to be
said that they are not women's compositions.  The musical spirit is
unquestionable, the technic of developing ideas that of a well-trained
artist, and the writing for the instrument that of an accomplished
pianist.  At the same time, Mrs. Beach makes no effort to be boisterous
and to prove that she is a man by the brute force necessary to play her
works.  Unless I am very much mistaken, her music will have a much
wider currency than it has yet received, because it deserves it.




CHAPTER IX.

MISCELLANEOUS PROGRAM BY AMERICAN COMPOSERS.

For the convenience of clubs and classes desiring programs not so
difficult of performance and not confined to one or two composers, the
following is offered, embracing examples from Messrs. Edgar S. Kelley,
Wilson G. Smith, Homer A. Norris, E. R. Kroeger, Geo. W. Chadwick, and
Mr. William Sherwood.  All of these gentlemen have made thorough
studies of composition and several of them have exercised themselves in
the larger forms, including orchestral and chamber writing.  This is
particularly true of Messrs. Chadwick, Kroeger, and Kelley.

Mr. Edgar Stillman Kelley was born April 14, 1857.  He is a native of
Wisconsin, and was formerly a pupil of Mr. Clarence Eddy, after which
he studied in Stuttgart.  He has produced quite a large number of
orchestral pieces but only a small number for the pianoforte alone.  I
believe that dramatic music is his main delight.  He is also a lecturer
upon musical subjects, bringing to his task a large amount of knowledge
upon the subject and plenty of enthusiasm.

I have here only two examples of his work.  The first is entitled the
"The Flower Seekers," a very pretty and melodious scherzo, having a
motto from Chaucer's "Court of Love":

  "Fourth goeth al the court, both moste and leste,
  To feche the flowers freshe, and branche and blome."


The second is entitled "Confluentia" and the motto upon it: "Here is
the conflux of the Rhine and the Mosel.  This led the Romans to call
the city 'Confluentia.'  These streams--which rise in regions so
remote--are here united until they pass into the eternal sea
beyond."--_Hans van Brechnowski_ (David Rockwell).

It is a piece in nocturne style with a melodious voice coming in all
sorts of forms, a little in the style of the well-known Schumann
"Warum."

Mr. Wilson G. Smith is a native of Ohio, educated under Otto Singer in
Cincinnati, and at Berlin.  He is a pianist and composer and has
published a very large number of pieces (something like 150) among
which it is quite possible more attractive selections could be found
than those upon the present program; still, these are the best I know
of his.  His work is light, melodious, and pleasant to play.  The list
from Mr. Smith comprises several very pleasant pieces.  The "Valse
Menuet," opus 43, No. 1; the "Reverie at the Piano," a sort of song
without words; the second, "Polka Caprice," which is very bright and
pleasant; and the "Marche Fantastique," opus 73, which is more
brilliant and diversified in its style than the others.

Mr. Ernest Kroeger is a native of St. Louis and received his education
there.  He has written a large number of pieces for the piano (eighty
or more), many songs, and quite a list of chamber and orchestral
compositions.

I have here three Sonnets.  The first one is in G minor, a sort of
cheerful nocturne, with nice melody and good musicianship.  There is a
vein of melancholy about it.  The next one, allegretto in B minor, is
very charming, and the last one is the strongest of all, I think.  If a
stronger representation of Mr. Kroeger's art is desired, his first
suite for the piano can be taken.

Mr. Emil Liebling is better known as a teacher and pianist than as a
composer, but it has been his good fortune to win high commendation for
the few works he has published.  He made his studies in composition
under the late Heinrich Dorn, the same who was the master of Schumann
in composition--though this may be no more than a coincidence.  Mr.
Liebling, although born in Berlin, has resided in the United States for
nearly thirty years.  He is essentially American.  The two Romances
represent the most serious side of his work, in addition to which I
have put on that very popular little scherzo, "Spring Song," and a very
pleasing parlor waltz.

Mr. William Sherwood, the distinguished pianist, is not generally known
as a composer, but in any other country than this his strong tendency
toward composition would have found encouragement, and he would have
been well known and probably as distinguished in this department as he
is now in playing.  I have placed Mr. Sherwood's compositions last
because they are the strongest of any in the list, and also the most
difficult; when well played they are very effective and deserve to be
better known than has hitherto been the case.

The songs upon this program represent two other composers.  At the head
of the list are placed some highly impassioned compositions by Mr. Geo.
W. Chadwick, of Boston.  Mr. Chadwick is one of the most accomplished
American composers.  From this set of songs, called "Told in the
Gates," selections are to be made at the convenience of singers.

The collection, as a whole, is one of the most remarkable of recent
times.  It would be difficult to find twelve equally stirring songs in
the whole repertory.  The key-note is set by the very first song,
"Sweetheart, Thy Lips are Touched with Flame," and in examining it one
hardly knows what to admire most, the symphonic skill of the
accompaniment, the placing of the emphasis for voice, or the intimate
feeling for musical expression, which enables the composer to arrive at
such thrilling effects.  At the same time it is not a song for a timid
singer or a timid player.  The second one, "Sings the Nightingale to
the Rose," is of a more quiet and reposeful character, well written.
The third, "The Rose Leans over the Pool," a delightful scherzando, in
which playful spirit and skilful use of material combine to produce its
effect.  The fourth, "Love's Like a Summer Rose," is a very charming
song indeed for more ordinary occasions; well within the resources of
ordinary singers, but with an effect very unusual.  The next, "As the
Waves without Number," a baritone song with a very elaborate
accompaniment and the usual masterly opportunity for the singer.  "Dear
Love, when in Thy Arms I Lie," a slow and very expressive melody, with
a delightful bit of obligato in the first measures, where a 'cello
would produce a charming effect; modeled a little after a song of
Schumann's, "Poet's Love":

  "Was I not Thine when Allah Spoke the Word
  Which Formed from Earth the Sky?"


A colossal song for baritone, having in it tenderness and most intense
passion.

"In Mead where Roses Bloom," adapted for mezzo-soprano.

"Sister Fairest, why Art Thou Sighing?" a gem adapted for the female
voice.

"O Let Night Speak of Me," dedicated to Max Heinrich.

"I Said to the Wind of the South," dedicated to Miss Edmunds.  A song
for mezzo-soprano, beautifully done.

It is difficult to speak of these songs in any kind of adequate terms,
because they represent what very rarely happens nowadays: a very
perfect union of music and poetry.  The poetry for its own part being
singularly impressive and provocative of song; and the music, in turn,
sympathetic, masterly, and equal to the occasion; considered,
therefore, from an ideal point of view, as to the poetic expression of
musical moods or as the musical expression of poetic moods, both alike
retaining the deepest and strongest sentiments, nothing lately has
pleased so well.  All the poems are by Arlo Bates.  It is a collection
of songs which every American lover of music ought to possess.

The other songs I take from a set by Mr. Homer A. Norris, a young but
very talented and promising composer.  The first is called "Twilight,"
and a lovely piece it is.


  PROGRAM.

  Edgar S. Kelley:
      "The Flower Seekers."
      "Confluentia."
  Wilson G. Smith:
      Valse-Menuet, Opus 43, No. 1.
      "Reverie at the Piano."
      Second Polka Caprice.
      Marche Fantastique.
  Homer A. Norris, song:
      "Twilight."
  E. R. Kroeger:
      Second, Third, and Fourth Sonnets.
  Emil Liebling:
      Romance Dramatique.
      "Spring Song,"
      Madeleine Waltz.
  Geo. W. Chadwick, songs:
      According to the taste and convenience of the singers.
  Wm. H. Sherwood:
      Romance Appassionata, Opus 8.
      Gypsy Dance, Opus 10.
      Mazurka, Opus 6.
      Scherzo Caprice, Opus 9.











End of Project Gutenberg's The Masters and their Music, by W. S. B. Mathews

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MASTERS AND THEIR MUSIC ***

***** This file should be named 25213.txt or 25213.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/2/1/25213/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
