Project Gutenberg's Child's Story of the Bible, by Mary A. Lathbury

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Child's Story of the Bible

Author: Mary A. Lathbury

Release Date: May 3, 2008 [EBook #25309]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD'S STORY OF THE BIBLE ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Illustration: Cover art]






[Frontispiece: Moses and Zipporah at the well]






CHILD'S

Story of the Bible


BY

MARY A. LATHBURY



WITH INTRODUCTION BY

BISHOP JOHN H. VINCENT



ILLUSTRATED


WITH NUMEROUS FULL-PAGE COLORED PLATES,

AND PHOTO-ENGRAVINGS



BOSTON

DEWOLFE, & FISKE Co.




COPYRIGHT, 1898

By DEWOLFE, FISKE & CO.




PREFACE.


To Mothers.

I have been asked to prepare this little aid for your use in the
Home--that first and greatest of schools.  The school was founded by
the Maker of men, and He called mothers to be its earliest and most
important teachers.  He prepared a text-book for it which we call His
Word, illustrating it richly and fully from life and Nature, and
filling it with His Spirit.  Wherever it is known, as the children
become the members of the Church, the citizens of the State, the people
of the World, the Book goes with them, forming the Church, the State,
the World.  It is not only equal to the need, but contains infinite
riches that wait to be unveiled.

That no busy mother may say, "I cannot take time to gather from the
Bible the simple lessons that my children need," this book of little
stories--together making one--has been written.  I have tried to
preserve the pure outlines of the sacred record from the vivid
description and the suggestive supposition that are sometimes
introduced to add charm to the story, and in all quoted speech I have
used the exact words of the authorized version of the Scriptures, so
that the earliest impression made upon the memory of the child might be
one that should remain.

The stories are not a substitute for the Word--only little approaches
to it through which young feet may be guided by her who holds a place
next to the great Teacher in His work with little children.

M.A.L.




INTRODUCTION.

When the children gather at mother's knee, and the tiniest finds a
place in mother's arms, and all clamor for a "story," "a story, mamma,"
how lovely is the picture--the living picture--that circle makes!
Love, longing, wisdom, expectancy, faith, shining eyes, lips that move
involuntarily, keeping time to the sweet movements of mother's lips!
Blessed group!  Happy mother!

When the stories mother tells are light and meaningless, full of rhyme
and rollick, even their eyes are bright and faces radiant, and her own
sweet face and voice give charm and weight and significance to the
delicious nonsense she rehearses.

Why not give to this receptive and eager audience stories full of
deepest meaning, facts, parables, myths charged with truth? Why not
people little memories with heroes, saints, kings, prophets, apostles?
Why not give stories to story-loving youngsters that will turn into
immortal pictures and be transformed some day into living factors in
the making of character?  And why not give them as comparison the babe
of Bethlehem, the boy of Nazareth, the lad of twelve years in the
schools of the Temple, the man of gentle love, the preacher of
righteousness, the worker of heavenly wonders, the Son of Man, the Son
of God, the Prince of Peace?

The Book of books is the children's Book.  It is a story book. And the
stories are "true stories."  And the lessons to be drawn from them are
numberless, and will come up out of the treasure-house of memory when
mother's eyes are closed and her voice silent.

It is a great thing to put mother and the Book together in Baby's
thought; in the big boy's memory; in the grown-up man's heart and life.

This book is mother's book; to aid her in doing the best and most
lasting work a mother can do to sow seed and set out vines the branches
of which shall reach into the world of spirits, and from which she and
her children may long afterwards pluck fruit together in the eternal
kingdom.

JOHN H. VINCENT.

CHAUTAUQUA, 1898.




CONTENTS.


THE OLD TESTAMENT


CHAPTER.

       I.  The Beginning of Things
      II.  The Great Flood
     III.  Abraham--the Father of the Faithful
      IV.  Isaac, the Shepherd Prince
       V.  Jacob, a Prince of God
      VI.  Joseph, the Castaway
     VII.  Joseph, a Servant, a Prisoner and a Saint
    VIII.  Joseph, the Savior of His People
      IX.  The Cradle that was Rocked by a River
       X.  Moses in Midian
      XI.  The Rod that Troubled Egypt
     XII.  Following the Cloud
    XIII.  In the Borders of Canaan
     XIV.  A Nation that was Born in a Day
      XV.  Samson, the Strong
     XVI.  Ruth
    XVII.  Samuel--the Child of the Temple
   XVIII.  The Making of a King
     XIX.  The Shepherd Boy of Bethlehem
      XX.  The Power of a Pebble
     XXI.  Faithful unto Death
    XXII.  David, the Outcast
   XXIII.  Every Inch a King
    XXIV.  David's Sin
     XXV.  David's Sorrow
    XXVI.  The Building of the Golden House
   XXVII.  Elijah, the Great Heart of Israel
  XXVIII.  The Little Chamber on the Wall
    XXIX.  A Little Maid of Israel
     XXX.  The Two Boy Kings
    XXXI.  The Four Captive Children
   XXXII.  The Master of the Magicians
  XXXIII.  The Story of Jonah
   XXXIV.  Esther, the Queen



THE NEW TESTAMENT.


CHAPTER.

       I.  The Angels of the Advent
      II.  Following the Star
     III.  The Flight into Egypt
      IV.  The Boy of Nazareth
       V.  The Young Carpenter
      VI.  The Voice in the Wilderness
     VII.  Jesus in the Desert
    VIII.  The First Disciples
      IX.  The First Miracle
       X.  In His Father's House
      XI.  A Talk about the Breath of God
     XII.  A Talk about the Water of Life
    XIII.  Jesus in the Synagogue
     XIV.  Among the Fishermen
      XV.  The Healing Hand of Jesus
     XVI.  Following Jesus
    XVII.  Friends of Jesus
   XVIII.  The Lord of Life
     XIX.  Mary of Magdala
      XX.  Stories Told by the Lake
     XXI.  Stilling the Storm
    XXII.  Called Back
   XXIII.  Two by Two
    XXIV.  Walking the Waves--The Two Kingdoms
     XXV.  A Journey with Jesus
    XXVI.  The Christian Sabbath--Peter's Confession of Faith
   XXVII.  "And We Beheld His Glory"--A Father's Faith
  XXVIII.  The Lord and the Little Ones--Leaving Galilee
    XXIX.  At the House of Martha--The Good Shepherd
     XXX.  The Lesson Stories of Jesus
    XXXI.  The Voice that Waked the Dead--The Children of the Kingdom
   XXXII.  The Young Man that Jesus Loved
  XXXIII.  The Last Journey to Jerusalem
   XXXIV.  The Prince of Peace
    XXXV.  The Children in the Temple
   XXXVI.  The Last Day in the Temple
  XXXVII.  The Last Words in the Temple
 XXXVIII.  An Evening on the Mount of Olives
   XXXIX.  The Holy Supper
      XL.  The Night of the Betrayal
     XLI.  Despised and Rejected of Men
    XLII.  The King of Heaven at the Bar of Pilate
   XLIII.  Love and Death
    XLIV.  Love and Life
     XLV.  The Evening of Easter
    XLVI.  The Lord's Last Days with His Disciples
   XLVII.  "He Ascended into Heaven"
  XLVIII.  The Promise of the Father


AN AFTERWORD




ILLUSTRATIONS


THE OLD TESTAMENT


Moses and Zipporah at the well (color plate)  . . . . . . _Frontispiece_

Driven from Eden

The great flood

Dove returns to ark with an olive leaf (color plate)

The three strangers

Hagar in the desert

On Mount Moriah

Isaac blessing Jacob

Meeting of Jacob and Esau

Jacob and Rachael

Jacob sold to the Ishmaelites (color plate)

Joseph makes himself known to his brothers

Pharaoh's daughter finding Moses (color plate)

The rod that troubled Egypt

Destruction of Pharoah's army

Moses descending from the Mount

The return of the spies

Crossing the Jordan

The young Samson

The death of Samson

Ruth and Naomi

Samuel speaking to the Lord (color plate)

The young shepherd boy (color plate)

David cutting off Goliath's head (color plate)

The spear struck the wall (color plate)

The garment of Saul

The death of Absalom

David mourning for Absalom

The Queen of Sheba before Solomon

Ravens bringing food to Elijah (color plate)

Elijah and the Angel

Elijah and the chariot of fire

Elijah raises the widow's son

In the fiery furnace

The handwriting on the wall

Daniel in the den of lions (color plate)

Jonah thrown on the dry land

Haman denounced by the Queen



THE NEW TESTAMENT


The Holy Child in the manger (color plate)

Following the star

The flight into Egypt

The Boy Jesus in the temple (color plate)

John the Baptist at the Jordan

The marriage at Cana

Jesus by the well (color plate)

Jesus in the synagogue

Jesus among the fishermen (color plate)

Jesus healing the sick

Sermon on the Mount

Jesus teaching by the sea

Jesus sleeping during the storm (color plate)

Jesus curing the little maid (color plate)

Feeding the five thousand

Jesus in the wheat fields

The little ones (color plate)

The good Samaritan

Jesus in the house at Bethany

The return of the prodigal

The Pharisee and the publican

Jesus entering Jerusalem (color plate)

Showing the penny

The two mites

The Passover supper (color plate)

Gethsemane

Jesus betrayed by Judas

The sin of Peter

Jesus crowned with thorns

Jesus before Pilate (color plate)

Jesus bearing the cross

The descent from the cross

The angel of the resurrection

The walk to Emmaus

The ascension




CHILD'S STORY OF THE BIBLE


CHAPTER I.

THE BEGINNING OF THINGS.

Away back in the beginning of things God made the sky and the earth we
live upon.  At first it was all dark, and the earth had no form, but
God was building a home for us, and his work went on through six long
days, until it was finished as we see it now.

On the first day God said, "Let there be light," and the black night
turned to gray, and light came.  God called the light Day, and the
darkness Night, and the evening and the morning made the first day.

Then God divided the waters, so that there were clouds above and seas
below, and He called the clouds heaven.  It was the second day.

Then the seas were gathered together by themselves, and the dry land
rose above them, and God saw that it was good.  Then He called to the
grass, and the plants, and the trees to come out of the ground, and
they came bearing their seeds, and He called the third day good.

Then God called to the two great lights, the sun and the moon, to shine
clear in the sky, which had been first dark, and then gray, and they
rose and set to make day and night, and seasons and years, and the
stars came also, and it was the fourth day.

Then God called for all kinds of fishes that swim in the seas, and
rivers, and for all kinds of birds that fly in the air, and they came,
and it was the fifth day.

And then God called for the animals to live on the green earth, and the
cattle and the great beasts, and the creeping things came, and God
called them all good.

After this he made the first of the great family of Man.  He made them
after His own likeness.  He made their bodies from the earth, but their
souls He breathed into them, so that Man is a spirit, living in an
earthly body, and can understand about God and love Him.  He blessed
them and told them to become many, and to rule over all the earth, with
its beasts and birds, and fishes, and it was the sixth day.

The Man's name was Adam, and the woman, who was made from a piece of
Adam's body nearest to his heart, was named Eve.

Then God's world was finished, and on the seventh day there was rest.
God was pleased with all that was made, and He made the seventh day
holy, by setting it apart from all the others.  We keep the Sabbath, or
the Lord's day still, in which his children may rest and worship.

Adam and Eve were very happy, for they had never done anything wrong.
God gave them a beautiful wide garden, called Eden, full of flowers and
all kinds of fruit, and with a river flowing through it, and told Adam
to take care of the garden, and He sent all the animals and birds to
Adam to be named.  God told him also that he might eat the fruit of all
the trees of the garden except one--the tree of knowledge of good and
evil--but if he ate of the fruit of that tree he should surely die, and
Adam and Eve loved God, and had no wish to disobey Him, for He was
their Father.

But there was a creeping serpent in the garden, and the evil spirit
that puts wrong thoughts in our hearts spoke to Eve through the serpent.

"You shall not die," he said, "but you shall be wise like God if you
will eat of this fruit," and Eve ate of the fruit, and gave it to her
husband.  Then they knew that they had sinned, and when they heard the
voice of God in the garden calling them, they hid among the trees, for
they were unhappy and afraid.  When the Lord had asked Adam if he had
eaten of the fruit that was forbidden, Adam laid the sin upon Eve, who
gave it to him, and Eve said that the serpent had tempted her to eat of
the fruit.  God knew that they must suffer for their sin, so He sent
them out of the garden to make a garden for themselves, and to work,
and suffer pain, as all who came after them have done to this day; but
He gave them a great promise, that among their children's children One
should be born who would be stronger than sin, and a Savior from it.

After this two little children were sent to comfort Adam and Eve--first
Cain, and then Abel.  When they grew up Cain was a farmer, but Abel was
a shepherd.

They had been taught to worship God by bringing the best of all they
had to Him, and so Cain brought fruit and grain to lay upon his altar,
but Abel brought a lamb.

[Illustration: Driven from Eden]

God looked into their hearts and saw that Abel wished to do right, but
Cain's heart was full of sin.  Cain was angry because the Lord was
pleased with the worship of Abel, and while they talked in the field
Cain killed his brother.  When the Lord said to Cain, "Where is thy
brother?" he answered, "I know not.  Am I my brother's keeper?"  And
the Lord sent him away from home, to wander from place to place over
the earth, and find no rest, but He promised that no one should hurt
Cain, or kill him as he had killed his brother, so he went away into
another land to live.

Adam lived many years after this and had other children, but at last he
died, when his children's children were beginning to spread over the
land.




CHAPTER II.

THE GREAT FLOOD.

As the people of the earth grew to be many more and spread over the
plains and hills, they also grew very wicked.  They forgot God, and all
the thoughts of their hearts were evil.  Only Noah still worshipped God
and tried to do right.

The people had destroyed themselves, and so God said to Noah:

"The end of all flesh is come; make thee an ark of gopher wood."

He told Noah to make it of three stories, with a window in the top, and
a door in the side.  It was to be a great floating house, more than
four hundred feet long and full of rooms, and it was to be covered with
tar within and without, so that the water should not creep in.

"I bring a flood of waters upon the earth," said the Lord, "and
everything that is in the earth shall die."

This was to be the house of Noah, with his wife, and his three sons and
their wives, during the great flood.

Does the house seem large for eight people?  God had told Noah to make
room for a little family of every kind of bird and beast that lived,
and to gather food of all kinds for himself and for them.

[Illustration: The great flood]

So Noah did all that the Lord had told him to do, and seven days before
the great storm he heard the Lord calling:

"Come thou and all thy house into the ark," and that very day, Noah
with his wife and his sons, Shem, Ham, and Japtheth, and their wives,
went into their great black house, and through the window in the top
came flying the little families of birds and insects, from the tiny
bees and humming birds, to the great eagles, and through the door on
the side came the families of animals, two by two, from the little mice
to the tall giraffes, and the elephants, and when all had come the Lord
shut them in.

It rained forty days and forty nights, and the waters rose higher and
higher, covering the hills, and creeping up the mountains, so that
every living thing died except Noah, and all that were with him in the
ark.

But after ten months the tops of the mountains were seen, and Noah sent
out a raven and a dove.  The raven flew to and fro, but the dove came
back into the ark, because she found no place to rest her foot.

After seven days Noah sent her out again, and she returned with an
olive leaf in her bill, and then Noah knew that the waters were going
away.

[Illustration: Dove returns with an olive leaf.]

After seven days again he sent out his good little dove, and she did
not come back.  So Noah was sure that the earth was getting dry, and
that God would soon tell him to go out of the ark.

And so he did.  Think how glad the sheep and cows were to find fresh
grass, and the birds to fly to the green trees.

What a silent world it must have been, for there were none but Noah and
his family in all the earth.  Noah did not forget how God had saved
them, and he made an altar of stone, and offered beasts and birds as a
sacrifice.  When he looked up to the sky there was a beautiful rainbow.
It was God's promise that there should be no more floods upon the
earth.  He still sends the rainbow to show us that He is taking care of
this world, and will always do so.

Perhaps the people who lived after this--for Noah's children's children
increased very fast--did not believe God's promise, for they began to
build a great tower, or temple, on the plain of Shinar; or perhaps they
had grown proud and wicked, and wanted a temple for the worship of
idols; but the Lord changed their speech, so that they could not
understand each other, and they were scattered over other countries;
and so each country began to have a language of its own.




CHAPTER III.

ABRAHAM--THE FATHER OF THE FAITHFUL.

The people who lived four thousand years ago were very much like
children who easily forget.  They told their children about the great
flood, but nearly all forgot to tell them of the good God who is the
Father of us all, whom we should always love and obey.  Yet there is
always one, if not more, who remembers God, and keeps his name alive in
the world.

Abram had tried to do right, though there was no Bible in the world
then, and no one better than himself to help him but God, and one day
He called Abram, and told him to go away from his father's house into
another country.

"A land that I will show thee," said the Lord, "and I will make of thee
a great nation."

He also made Abram a wonderful promise,--

"In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed."

He meant that sometime the Savior should be born among Abram's
children's children, and that He should be the Savior of all the
nations of the earth.

Abram did just what God told him to do.  He took Sarai, his wife, and
Lot, his nephew, and some servants, and cows, and sheep, and camels,
and asses, and went into the land of Canaan.  When they rested at night
Abram and Lot set some sticks in the ground, and covered them with
skins for a tent, and near by they made an altar, where Abram offered a
sacrifice, for that was the only way they could worship God when the
earth was young.

Abram went down into Egypt when there was a lack of food in Canaan, but
he came back to Bethel, where he made the altar before, and worshipped
God there.

He was very rich, for his cattle and sheep had grown into great herds
and flocks, though he had sold many in Egypt for silver, and gold, and
food.  Abram and Lot moved often, for their flocks and herds soon ate
up the grass.  Then they rolled up the tents, and loaded the camels and
asses, and went where the grass was thick and fresh.

They could easily live in tents, for the country was warm.  But Abram's
herdsmen and Lot's herdsmen sometimes quarreled.  And so Abram spoke
kindly to Lot, and told him to take his servants, and flocks, and
herds, and go where the pastures were good, and he would go the other
way.  So they parted, and Lot went to the low plains of the Jordan, but
Abram went to the high plains of Mamre, in Hebron, and there he built
another altar to the Lord, who had given him all that country--to him
and to his children forever.

There were warlike people in Canaan, and once when they had carried off
Lot from Sodom, Abram took his servants and herdsmen and went out to
fight.  He had more than three hundred men, and they took Lot away from
the enemy, and brought him back to Sodom.  It was here that Abram met a
wonderful man, who was both a king and a priest.  His name was
Melchisedek, and he brought Abram bread and wine, and blessed him there.

After this, God spoke to Abram one evening, and promised that he should
have a son, and then while Abram stood outside his tent, with the great
sky thick with stars above him, God promised him that his children's
children should grow to be as countless as the stars.  That was hard to
believe, but Abram believed God always and everywhere.

Still no child came to Abram and Sarai, and Abram was almost a hundred
years old, but God spoke to him again, and told him that he should be
the father of many nations.

He told Abram that a little boy would be born to them, and his name
would be Isaac, and God changed Abram's name to Abraham, which means
"Father of many people," and Sarai's to Sarah, which means "Princess."

Abraham was sitting in his tent one hot day, when three men stood by
him.  They were strangers, and Abraham asked them to rest beneath the
tree, and bathe their feet, while he brought them food.  So Sarah made
cakes, and a tender calf was cooked, and these with butter, and milk,
were set before the men.  But they were not men of this world; they
were angels, and they had come to tell Abraham and Sarah once more that
their little child was sure to come.  Then the angels went away, but
one of them, who must have been the Lord Himself in an angel's form,
stopped to tell Abraham that He was going to destroy Sodom and
Gomorrah, because the people who lived there were so very wicked, and
Abraham prayed Him to spare them if even ten good men could be found in
them, for he remembered that Lot lived in Sodom.  But the Lord never
forgets.  The two angels went to Sodom and stayed with Lot until
morning, when they took him and all his family outside the city, and
then the Lord said to him, "Escape for thy life--look not behind thee,
neither stay thou in all the plain."

[Illustration: The three strangers]

And the Lord hid them in the little town of Zoar, while a great rain of
fire fell upon the wicked cities of the plain, until they became a heap
of ashes.  Only Lot's wife looked back to see the burning cities, and
she became a pillar of salt.

The next morning when Abraham looked from Hebron down toward the cities
of the plain, a great smoke was rising from them like the smoke of a
furnace.

At last the Lord's promise to Abraham and Sarah came true.  A little
son was born to them, and they called him Isaac.  They were very happy,
for though Abraham was a hundred years old, no child had ever been sent
them.

When he was about a year old they made a great feast for him, and all
brought gifts and good wishes, yet the little lad Ishmael, the son of
Hagar, Sarah's servant, mocked at Isaac.  Sarah was angry, and told her
husband that Hagar and her boy must be sent away.  So he sent them out
with only a bottle of water and a loaf of bread; for God had told
Abraham to do as Sarah wished him to do, and He would take care of
little Ishmael, and make him the father of another nation.

When the water was gone, and the sun grew very hot, poor Hagar laid her
child under a bush to die, for she was very lonely and sorrowful.
While she hid her eyes and wept, saying,

"Let me not see the death of the child," she heard a voice out of
heaven telling her not to be afraid.

[Illustration: Hagar in the desert]

"Arise, lift up the lad," said the voice, "for I will make him a great
nation."

And God opened her eyes to see a well of water near.  Then she filled
the empty bottle, and gave the boy a drink, and God took good care of
them ever after, though they lived in a wilderness.

Ishmael grew up to be an archer, and became the father of the Arabs,
who still live in tents as Ishmael did.

But the Lord let a strange trial come to the little lad Isaac, also.
His father loved and obeyed God, but there were heathen people around
them, who worshipped idols, and sometimes killed their own children as
a sacrifice to these idols.  Abraham brought the best of his lambs and
cattle to offer to the Lord; but one day the Lord told Abraham to take
his only son Isaac and offer him upon a mountain called Moriah as a
burnt sacrifice to God.  Abraham had always obeyed God, and believed
his word, and now, though he could not understand, he rose up early in
the morning and took his young son, with two servants, and an ass
loaded with wood, to the place of which God had told him.

They were three days on the journey, but at last they came to the high
place, where the city of Jerusalem was afterward built, and to the very
rock upon which the temple was built long afterward, with its great
altar and Holy of Holies.

[Illustration: On Mount Moriah]

Abraham had left the young men at the foot of the mount, and went with
Isaac to the great rock on the top of the mount.

"My father," said Isaac, "where is the lamb for a burnt offering?"

"My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt offering," said
his father, still obeying God, and believing His word, that Isaac
should be the father of many nations.

Abraham made an altar of stones, and bound Isaac and laid him upon it,
but when his hand was lifted to offer up the boy, the Lord called to
him from heaven.  "Lay not thine hand upon the lad," said the voice,
"for now I know that thou fearest God, seeing thou hast not withheld
thine only son from me."

Then Abraham turned and saw a ram with its twisted horns caught in the
bushes, and he offered it to the Lord instead of his son.  How glad and
grateful Abraham must have been that morning, when he came down the
mountain, with Isaac walking beside him, to think that he had still
obeyed God when it was hard to do so.

Abraham was an old man when Sarah died.  They had lived together a long
lifetime, and he mourned for her many days.  He bought a field close by
the oak-shaded plain of Mamre in Hebron, and there in a rocky cave he
buried her.  He was called a Prince of God by the Canaanites because he
lived a true, faithful life.

A few years after he also went to God, and his body was laid beside
Sarah's in the cave-tomb.  Ishmael came up from the south country to
mourn with Isaac at the burial of their father, the Friend of God, and
Father of the faithful.




CHAPTER IV.

ISAAC THE SHEPHERD PRINCE.

Before Abraham died, he thought much about his dear son Isaac, to whom
he was going to leave all that he had.  The young man had no mother, no
sister, and soon he would have no father.  So the old man called his
old and faithful servant, and told him to go on a journey into the land
of his fathers, and bring back with him a wife for his son Isaac.

The children of Nahor, Abraham's brother, lived there still, and
Abraham wished for his son Isaac a wife of his own people, who should
be both good and beautiful, and not like the heathen women of Canaan.

So the old servant listened to Abraham and promised to do all that he
commanded.

He loaded ten camels with presents for his master's family away in
Syria, and Abraham said:

"The Lord shall send His angel before thee," and from his tent door he
saw the little caravan of camels and servants, as they set out across
the plain, toward the land beyond the river Jordan.

There was a desert to cross and many dangers to meet, but the old
servant believed in the God his master worshipped, and was not afraid.

When he came to Haran, he stopped outside the town by a well of water.
It was early evening, and the women were coming each with a water-jar
on her shoulder, to draw water.

The old man prayed that the Lord would show him which among these
daughters of the men of the city, was the one who was to be his young
master's wife.

Before his prayer was ended, Rebekah, of the family of Abraham's
brother Nahor, came bearing her pitcher on her shoulder.  She looked
very kind and beautiful, and when she had filled her pitcher, the old
man asked her for a drink of water.  Then she let down the pitcher upon
her hand saying:

"Drink, my lord," and asked if she should also give water to his
camels.  While she was giving him a drink, the man showed her some
golden jewels that he had brought, and when he had asked her name, and
knew that God had sent her to him for his young master, he gave them to
her, and worshipped the Lord who had led him to the house of his
master's brother.

Then Rebekah ran in and told Laban, her brother, and the old servant of
Abraham had a warm welcome at the door of Nahor's house.

"Come in, thou blessed of the Lord," they said.

And after they had cared for the camels and the men, there was a
hurrying of servants to prepare a feast, but the old man would not
taste food until he had given the message of his master.  Then the
father and brother of Rebekah, saw that the Lord had sent for her, and
they said:

"Let her be thy master's son's wife, as the Lord hath spoken."

And the old servant bowed his face to the ground worshipping the Lord
who had led him.

Then there was feasting and giving of costly gifts, and preparing to
take a long journey, for the old servant was in haste to get back to
his master, and Rebekah, who was willing to go, took her maid-servants
and rode away into a far country to be the wife of Isaac.

When Isaac was walking in his field at sunset, thinking and praying to
God, he looked up and saw that the camels were coming, and he hastened
to meet them.  When the old servant told Rebekah that it was his young
master, she alighted from her camel, and covered herself with a long
veil as was the custom of the Syrian women.  When the old servant had
told the story of his journey, he gave Rebekah to Isaac, and he took
her to the tent that had been his mother's, and she became his wife, so
that he was no longer lonely and sad.

Isaac lived to a very great age, and had two sons, Jacob and Esau.  He
was a gentle, quiet man, fond of his family, his flocks, and herds, and
at the place where his father and mother were buried, he lived among
the fields and oak groves of Hebron until he died.




CHAPTER V.

JACOB, A PRINCE OF GOD.

Jacob and Esau were the twin sons of Isaac and Rebekah.

They did not look alike as twins often do, and they were very unlike in
all their ways.  As they grew up, Esau loved the forests and wild
places.  He made bows and arrows, and was a hunter, and brought home
wild birds and deer, for his father was very fond of such food.  Jacob
helped his father with the flocks, and learned how to cook food from
his mother, who loved him more than she loved Esau.

One day Esau came home from hunting tired and hungry, and smelled the
delicious soup of red lentils that Jacob was making.  He begged Jacob
to give him some, and Jacob, who wanted to be eldest, and have the
right to the blessing that fathers gave to the first-born in those
days, said:

"Sell me this day thy birthright," and Esau gave him all his rights as
the first born, for a little food which he might have had as a free
gift.

Jacob wanted to be counted in the great promise that God had given to
Abraham, but Esau despised it.

Afterward, when Isaac was old and his eyes were dim, he called Esau,
and asked him to go out into the fields and shoot a deer, and cook the
venison that he loved, so that he might eat it and bless his first born
before he died.

Rebekah heard it, and told Jacob to bring kids from the flock, which
she cooked and served as venison.  Then she dressed Jacob in the
clothes of Esau, and told him to say that it was Esau who had brought
the venison.  Isaac said:

"The voice is the voice of Jacob," but he put his hands on him, and
believed it was Esau, and blessed him.

When Esau came home and brought venison to his father, Isaac said:

"Who art thou?" and when Esau said, "I am thy son, thy first-born,
Esau," the old man trembled, and told Esau the blessing had been given
to another.

Poor Esau cried out with grief, "Hast thou but one blessing?"  "Bless
me, even me also, O my father."

And so Isaac blessed him, but he could not call back the blessing of
the first-born.  The Lord knew that Jacob would grow to be a good man,
and love the things of God best, and that Esau would always love the
things of this world best, yet it was wrong of Jacob and Rebekah to
deceive, for we may not do evil that good may come.

[Illustration: Isaac blessing Jacob]

After this Esau hated his brother, and said he would kill him.

So Isaac called Jacob, and, blessing him again, sent him away into
Syria to the house of Laban, where Rebekah had lived, and where
Abraham's servant went to find her for his master's son.

One night, when he was not far on his way, he lay down to sleep, with a
stone for his pillow, on a hillside that looked toward his home, and he
dreamed a wonderful dream.  He saw a ladder reaching from earth to
heaven, and a vision of angels who were going up and down upon it.

Above it stood the Lord, who spoke to Jacob, and gave to him the
promise that He had first given to Abraham, and told him that He would
go with him, and bring him again into his own land.

Jacob was afraid when he woke, for he had seen the heavens opened, and
had heard God's voice.  He made an altar of the pillow of stone, and
called it Bethel--the House of God--and then he vowed that the Lord
should be his God, and he added,--

"Of all that thou shalt give me, I will surely give a tenth unto thee."

When Jacob came to Haran, he saw the well from which his mother used to
draw water.  There were three flocks of sheep lying by it, waiting for
all the flocks to gather in the cool of the day to be watered.  Soon
Rachel, the daughter of Laban, came leading her father's flocks, and
one of the shepherds told Jacob whose daughter she was.

So Jacob rolled the stone from the well, and watered the flocks of
Laban, his mother's brother.  Then he kissed Rachel, and told her that
he was Rebekah's son, and she ran and told her father.

There was great joy in Laban's house because Jacob had come, and after
he had stayed a month with them Laban asked him to stay and take care
of his flocks, and he would pay him for his work.

Since the day he had seen Rachel leading her father's flocks he had
chosen her in his heart to be his wife.  So he said that he would work
for Laban seven years, if at the end of that time he would give him
Rachel for his wife.  Laban was quite willing to do so, and the seven
years seemed to Jacob but a few days, for the love he had to Rachel.
But, according to the custom of that country, the younger daughter
could not be given in marriage before the elder, and so Laban gave his
daughter Leah also, and both Leah and Rachel became the wives of Jacob,
for Jacob lived in that far away time and country of the early world
when men were allowed to take more than one wife, and when each man was
both king and priest over his family and tribe, and worshipped God by
offering burnt sacrifices upon an altar.

After twenty years of work with Laban, in which he had earned many
flocks and herds for himself, Jacob took his wives and the little sons
God had sent him, and his flocks and herds, and started on a journey to
his old home.  Isaac was still alive, and Jacob longed to see him.  He
had lived long in Haran for fear of his brother Esau, and now he must
travel through Edom, Esau's country, on his way to his old home.

As he was on his way some of God's angels met him, and he was
strengthened.  Still he feared Esau, and sent some of his men to tell
his brother that he was coming.

The men came back, saying that Esau, with four hundred men, was coming
to meet them.

Poor Jacob!  He remembered the sin of his youth, when he had stolen the
blessing from Esau, and he was afraid, and prayed God to protect him.

He sent his servants again to meet Esau with great presents of flocks,
and herds, and camels, and after placing his wives and little ones in
the safest place, he sent all that he had over the brook Jabbok, and he
stayed on the other side to pray.  It was as if he wrestled with a man
all night, and when the day began to break the man wished to go, but
Jacob said:

"I will not let thee go except thou bless me."

So the man blessed him there, and call his name Israel; "for as a
prince," he said, "hast thou power with God and with men, and hast
prevailed."

Then Jacob knew that the Lord Himself, in the form of a man, had been
with him, and he had seen Him face to face.

And as the sun rose he passed over the brook.  When he looked up he saw
Esau and his men coming, and when he had told his family to follow him,
he went straight before them, for he was no longer afraid to meet his
brother.

Jacob's prayer had been answered, and Esau ran to meet his brother, and
throwing his arms around him, wept on his shoulder.  Then they talked
in a loving and brotherly way, and Esau returned to his home with the
presents Jacob had given him, and Jacob went on his way into Canaan
full of joy and thankfulness.  He stopped a little while in a pleasant
place to rest his flocks and cattle, but he longed to see the place
where he first saw the angels of God, and heard the voice of the Lord
blessing him, so they journeyed on to Beth-el, and there built an altar
and worshipped God.

[Illustration: Meeting of Jacob and Esau]

Again the Lord spoke to Jacob at Beth-el, and called him Israel, and
blessed him.

After they left Beth-el, they came near to Bethlehem, where many
hundred years afterward the Lord Jesus was born, and there another
little son was born to Rachel, and there too God sent for her, and took
her to Himself, and there her grave was made.

[Illustration: Jacob and Rachel]

The little boy was named Benjamin, and was the youngest of Jacob's
twelve sons, who became the fathers of the twelve tribes of Israel, and
the princes of a great nation.

Jacob was almost home.  His great family, with all the flocks and
herds, had been long on the way, for they often spread their tents by
the brooks in the green valleys, that the cattle might rest and find
pasture, but at last the long caravan came slowly over the fields of
Mamre to Hebron, and Isaac, whom the Lord had kept alive to see his son
once more, was there in his tent waiting for him.

But soon after this he died, an hundred and eighty years old, and Esau
came, and the two brothers laid their father in the cave that Abraham
bought when Sarah died, and where he had buried Rebekah, and Jacob
became patriarch in place of his father.




CHAPTER VI.

JOSEPH, THE CASTAWAY.

Of all the sons of Jacob, Joseph and Benjamin were the dearest to him,
because they were the sons of his beloved Rachel, who had died on the
journey from Syria into Canaan.  They were also the youngest of all the
twelve sons.  When Joseph was about seventeen years old, he sometimes
went with his elder brothers to keep his father's flocks in the fields.
He wore a long coat striped with bright colors, which his father had
given him, because he was a kind and obedient son, and could always be
trusted.

Once he told his father of some wicked thing his brothers had done, and
they hated him for it, and could not speak pleasantly to him.

Joseph had many strange and beautiful thoughts when he looked across
the fields to the hills, and up into the starry sky at night.  He also
had some strange dreams that he told to his brothers.  He said that he
dreamed that they were binding sheaves in the field, and that his sheaf
stood up, while the sheaves of his brothers bowed down to it.

Again he dreamed that the sun, and the moon, and eleven stars bowed
down to him.

His father wondered that he should have such thoughts, and reproached
him saying, "Shall I and thy brethren indeed come and bow down
ourselves to thee to the earth?" and his brothers said,

"Shalt thou indeed rule over us?" and they hated him.

When they were many miles from home with the flocks their father sent
Joseph to see if all was well with them.  It was a long journey, and
when they saw the boy coming they did not go to meet him, and speak
kindly to him, but they said,

"Behold this dreamer is cometh.  Let us slay him, and cast him into
some pit, and we will say some evil beast hath devoured him, and we
shall see what will become of his dreams."

But Reuben, the eldest, said,

"Let us not kill him; but cast him into this pit," hoping to take him
out secretly, and send him to his father.

So when Joseph came near, they robbed him of his coat of many colors,
and cruelly cast him into a pit.  After this they sat down to eat their
bread, and looking up they saw a caravan coming.  It was a company of
Ishmaelites carrying costly spices down into Egypt to sell them.

Then Judah said,

"Why should we kill our brother?  Let us sell him to these Ishmaelites."

Then there passed by some Midianite merchants, and who drew Joseph out
of the pit and sold him to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver,
and he was carried down into Egypt.

[Illustration: Joseph sold to the Ishmaelites]

Reuben, when his brothers went back to their flocks, went to the pit to
try to save Joseph, but he was not there, and Reuben cried out,

"The child is not, and I, whither shall I go?"

The brothers who had been so cruel to Joseph brought his coat to their
father, all stained with blood.  They had themselves dipped it in the
blood of a kid to deceive him, and he mourned long, and would not be
comforted, for the beloved child that he believed had been torn in
pieces by evil beasts.




CHAPTER VII.

JOSEPH, A SERVANT, A PRISONER, AND A SAINT.

The king of Egypt, where Joseph was taken by the Ishmaelites, was
called Pharaoh, and he had a captain of the guard named Potiphar, who
bought Joseph for a house servant.  Though he was the son of a Hebrew
prince, Joseph did his work faithfully and wisely as a servant, and was
soon made steward of the house, and was trusted with all that his
master had, and the Lord made all that he did to prosper; but the wife
of Potiphar was a wicked woman, who persuaded her husband that Joseph
was a bad man, and he was sent to prison.

Even there Joseph won the hearts of all, until the keeper of the prison
set him over the other prisoners, and trusted him as Potiphar had done.
It was the Lord in Joseph who helped him to win the love and trust of
those around him.

Pharaoh sent two of his servants to prison because they had displeased
him.

One was his chief cook, and one was the chief butler, who always handed
the wine cup to the king, and Joseph had the care of them.

They each had a dream the same night, and were troubled because they
could not understand them.  Joseph asked them to tell him the dreams,
for God knew what they meant.

So the chief butler told Joseph that he saw a vine having three
branches, and the branches budded and blossomed, and the blossoms
changed into ripe grapes, and he took the grapes and pressed them into
Pharaoh's cup, and handed the cup to the king.

Then Joseph said: "The three branches are three days.  Within three
days the king will take you out of prison, and you shall hand the
king's cup to him as you used to do."

Joseph also asked the butler, to think of him when he was again in the
king's palace, and speak to the king to bring him out of prison,
because he had been stolen from his own land, and he had done nothing
wrong that he should be put in prison.

Then the chief cook told his dream.  He said that he dreamed that he
carried three baskets on his head, one above another.

In the highest one was all kinds of cooked meats for Pharaoh, and the
birds flew down and ate from the basket.

"The three baskets are three days," said Joseph as he said to the
butler, but he told the cook that in three days he would be put to
death, and hanged on a tree, where the birds would eat his flesh.

All this came true, for Pharaoh's birthday came, and he brought out the
chief butler to serve at a birthday feast, but he hanged the chief
cook.  Yet the chief butler forgot Joseph, and did not speak to the
king about him as he might have done.

At the end of two long years, Pharaoh dreamed a dream.  He thought he
stood by the river of Egypt, and saw seven cows looking well kept and
fat, came up out of the river.

Behind them came seven other cows, looking thin and poorly fed, and the
thin and poorly fed cows ate up the well-kept and fat ones.

And Pharoah had a second dream.  He thought he saw seven heads of wheat
growing on one stalk--and they were all full of grain.  After them came
seven thin heads of wheat with no grain in them; and the seven bad
heads of wheat ate up the seven good ones.

In the morning Pharaoh was troubled about these dreams, and called for
his wise men who worked magic for him, and they could tell him nothing.

Then the chief butler standing near the king remembered Joseph, and
told Pharaoh of the young Hebrew who had told the meaning of his dream,
and that of the chief cook, and they had come to pass as he had said,
so Pharaoh sent for Joseph and said to him:

"I have heard that thou canst understand a dream to interpret it."

Joseph answered the king humbly and wisely:

"It is not in me," he said, "God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace."

When the king had told his dream Joseph said:

"The dream is one," and then he showed him that the seven fat cows, and
the seven full heads of wheat meant seven good years in the land of
Egypt, when the harvests would be great; and the seven lean cows, and
the seven empty heads of wheat, meant seven years of famine, when the
east winds should spoil the wheat, so there would be nothing to reap in
time of harvest and the people would want bread.  He told the king that
he had better set a wise man over the land, who would attend to saving
the grain during the seven good years, so that the people would have
bread to eat in the seven years of famine.

The king was greatly pleased with Joseph, and told him that God had
taught him to interpret dreams, and had showed him things to come, and
there could be no wiser man found to be set over the land.

So he made Joseph a ruler over the whole land, and next to the king in
all things.

He put his own ring on his hand, and dressed him in the robes of a
prince, and gave him an Egyptian name and an Egyptian wife, so that
there was no one in all the land of Egypt so great as Joseph, except
the king.

He built storehouses in every city, and stored the grain, until it was
like the sand of the sea, and could not be measured.

In the years of plenty two sons were born to Joseph, Manasseh and
Ephraim, and then the seven years of dearth began to come.  When the
people began to cry to the king for bread, he always said,--

"Go to Joseph; what he says to you do."

And Joseph and his helpers began to open the storehouses, and sell
wheat to the Egyptians, and to the people of all countries, for the
famine was in all lands.




CHAPTER VIII.

JOSEPH--THE SAVIOR OF HIS PEOPLE.

The famine reached even to the fruitful land of Canaan, and Jacob,
though rich in flocks and herds, began to need bread for his great
family.  So he sent his ten sons down into Egypt to buy wheat, keeping
Benjamin, the youngest at home.

When they came before the governor they bowed down to him with their
faces to the ground.  Joseph knew them, though he acted as if he did
not, and remembered his dream of his brother's sheaves bowing down to
his sheaf.  At first, he spoke roughly to them, and called them
"spies."  But they said that they were all one man's sons, and had come
to buy food.

Joseph still spoke roughly to them, not because he was angry, but
because he did not wish them to know him yet.  His heart was full of
love for them, and he was soon going to show them great kindness; but
when they told him that they had left an old father and a young brother
at home, and one was dead, he still acted as if they did not tell the
truth.

He said that to prove themselves true men one of them should go home
and bring the youngest brother, and the others should be kept in prison
until they returned; and he put them all in prison.

After three days, he said one might stay while the others took the
wheat home to their families, but that they must surely come back and
bring the boy with them.

Then Reuben, who had tried to save Joseph from the pit long before,
told his brothers that all this trouble had come upon them for their
wickedness to their brother Joseph, and they said to each other in
their own language:

"We are verily guilty concerning our brother; when he besought us, we
would not hear, therefore is this distress come upon us."

Joseph understood everything they said though they did not know it, for
he had been talking to them through an interpreter, and they thought he
was an Egyptian.  Now his heart was so full that he had to go out of
the room to weep.  But he came back and chose Simeon to stay while the
others went to Canaan to bring back Benjamin.

They took the wheat that they had bought in bags, and went away; but
when they stopped at an inn to rest and feed their asses, one of the
brothers opened his bag, and found the money that he had paid for the
wheat in the top of his bag.  Here was more trouble, and they were
afraid.

When they came home to their father they told him all that had
happened, and as they opened the bags, each one found his money.  Jacob
was deeply troubled; for Joseph was gone, and Simeon was gone, and now
they wanted to take Benjamin.

Reuben who had two sons said: "Slay my two sons if I bring him not to
thee."

But Jacob said Benjamin should not go down to Egypt.  But the wheat was
gone in a short time, and they were likely to starve so great was the
famine, and at last Jacob said they must go to Egypt again for food.

Judah said they would go if Benjamin would go with them, but Jacob
would not listen to this.  He asked them why they told the man that
they had a brother, and they replied, that the Governor had asked them
if their father was yet living and if they had another brother.

"Send the lad with me," said Judah, "if I bring him not unto thee, let
me bear the blame forever."

Then Jacob told them to take him and go, and also to take presents of
honey, and spices, and balm, and nuts, and double the money, so as to
return that which was put in their bags, and he blessed them, and sent
them away.

They went down into Egypt, and stood before Joseph again.  When he saw
Benjamin with them he told the steward of his house to make ready a
fine dinner for them, and bring them to him at noon, and he did so.

Then the brothers were afraid that they were all to be put in prison,
and at the door of Joseph's house began to tell the steward how they
found the money when they opened their bags, and that they had brought
it back doubled; but the steward spoke kindly to them, and said that he
had placed their money, and that they need not fear, for God had given
it back to them.

Then he brought Simeon out, and they made ready to dine with the
Governor at noon, and to give him their presents.

When he came they bowed down to him and presented their gifts, and he
asked them if they were well, and if the old man of whom they spoke was
still alive, and they replied that he was.  When he saw Benjamin, and
knew that he was truly his own brother, the son of Rachel, he said:

"God be gracious unto thee my son," and he went quickly to his own
chamber, lest he should weep before them.

When he came out to them again, and they sat down to dine, he placed
the sons of Jacob by themselves, and the Egyptians of his house by
themselves, and the brothers were placed according to their
ages--Reuben at the head and Benjamin last, and they wondered among
themselves at this.  Joseph also sent portions from his own table to
his brothers, but the portion of Benjamin was five times greater than
that of the others.

The next morning their wheat was measured to them, and the asses were
loaded with it, and they went on their way, but Joseph had told the
steward to put the money of each man in the top of his bag, and in
Benjamin's to put his silver cup.

When they were a little away from the city, the steward overtook them,
and charged them with stealing his lord's silver cup.

The men were so sure that no one of them had stolen the silver cup,
that they said,

"Let him die with whom the cup is found, and the rest of us will be
your slaves."

So everybody's bag was opened from the oldest to the youngest, and the
cup was found in Benjamin's bag.  Then they rent their clothes for
grief, and loaded the asses and went back to the city, and when they
came to Joseph's house, they fell on their faces before him, Joseph
tried to speak sternly and said:

"What deed is this you have done?"

Judah said:

"What shall we say unto my lord, or how shall we clear ourselves?  We
are my lord's servants."

Then said Joseph:

"The man in whose hand the cup is found he shall be my servant, and as
for you, get you up in peace unto your father."

Then Judah came nearer to Joseph, and all his soul came forth into his
voice as he said:

"O, my lord, let thy servant speak a word in my lord's ears!"

Then he told the story of their coming down into Egypt, and of the old
father and young brother whom he had asked them about; of the love of
this father for the little one, for his mother, and his brother now
dead.  He reminded Joseph that he had told them to bring the boy to
him, and that they had said, that if the boy should leave his father,
his father would die; but the governor had said "Except your youngest
brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more."

Then Judah told the story of the father's grief when he found that he
must let Benjamin go down into Egypt, that they might buy a little
food; how he spoke of his two sons, that were the sons of Rachel--that
one had been torn in pieces, and now if mischief should befall the
other, it would bring his gray hairs in sorrow to the grave.  He asked
Joseph what he should do when he returned to his father without the
lad, seeing that his life was bound up in the lad's life, and Judah
begged him, as he had made himself surety for the lad, to take him to
be his slave, but to let Benjamin return to his father with his
brothers.

"For how shall I go up to my father," said Judah, "and the lad be not
with me?"

Then Joseph could bear it no longer.  He told all the Egyptians to go
out of the room, and then weeping so that the Egyptians and the people
in the king's house heard, he made himself known to his brothers.

[Illustration: Joseph makes himself known to his brothers]

"I am Joseph, your brother," he said, "whom you sold into Egypt," and
he begged them to come near to him.

"Be not grieved nor angry with yourselves," he said, for he saw that
they were terrified, "for God sent me before you to save your lives by
a great deliverance.  It was not you that sent me hither, but God, and
he hath made me a ruler throughout all the land of Egypt."

Then he told them to hasten and go to his father and tell him this, and
ask him to come down at once, with all his flocks and herds, and dwell
in Goshen, the best part of Egypt, for years of famine were yet to come.

Then Joseph took little Benjamin in his arms and wept over him, and
kissed him, and kissed all his brothers, and after that his brothers
talked with him.  The king heard the story of Joseph's brothers and was
pleased.  He told Joseph to send wagons for the wives and little ones
of his brothers, and to tell them to bring their father, and all their
cattle and sheep, and come to live in Goshen where they should have the
best of the land for their flocks and herds.

Joseph did as the king commanded, and also gave them food for the
journey, and a suit of clothing to each brother, but to little Benjamin
he gave five suits, and three hundred pieces of silver.  He also loaded
twenty asses with the good things of Egypt as presents to his father,
so he sent them all on their journey saying:

"See that ye fall not out by the way."

When they came to Jacob in Hebron, they told him the wonderful story of
the finding of Joseph, and his heart was faint, for he did not believe
them; but when he had heard all Joseph's messages, and had seen the
gifts, and the wagons, he said:

"It is enough: Joseph my son is yet alive: I will go and see him before
I die."

So they began the long journey to Egypt, for it took a long time to
travel with a great family, and with thousands of cattle and sheep.  At
Beersheba Jacob stopped and worshiped God, where his father had built
an altar years before; and God told him in the night that he need not
fear to go down into Egypt, for He would there make him a great nation,
and that He would bring him back again to his own land.

So Jacob with all his children and their little ones, and all his
flocks and herds came into Egypt.  There were sixty-seven souls, and
when they had counted Joseph and his two sons, there were seventy.

Jacob sent Judah on before to see Joseph and ask the way to Goshen, so
that they might go directly there with the cattle and sheep.  And when
Joseph knew that his father was coming, he went to meet him in Goshen,
and there he wept on his father's neck a long time, and Jacob said:

"Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou art yet
alive."

After this Joseph presented five of his brothers to Pharaoh, and the
king spoke very kindly to them, and gave them the best of the land for
their flocks, and hired some of them to oversee his own shepherds.

Joseph brought his father in also and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.

So the family of Jacob lived in peace, and were cared for by Joseph,
just as the Lord had promised Jacob, when in a dream he saw the angels
of God at Bethel, and heard above them the voice of the Lord blessing
him, and saying:

"Thou shalt spread abroad to the West, and to the East, and to the
North, and to the South, and in thee shall all the families of the
earth be blessed."

Joseph carried all Egypt through the years of famine, and saved seed
for the people to sow their fields in the seventh year so that they
said:

"Thou hast saved our lives."

He afterwards visited his father, and Jacob made him promise that he
would bury him when he died in the tomb of Abraham and Isaac, his
father, in his own land.

When Jacob was near his end, Joseph brought his two little sons,
Ephraim and Manasseh, to his bedside, and the old man gave them his
blessing, laying his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, the youngest,
and his left hand on that of Manasseh the first born, even as Isaac had
given the birthright blessing to him instead of to Esau, and he said:

"The angel which redeemed me from all evil bless the lads."

Then he called all his sons together and told them what should befall
them in the last days.  To each one he spoke as a prophet speaks who
has a vision of things to come, and he blessed them there.  When he
spoke to Judah, he told him that kings and lawgivers should arise from
among his children until the Saviour of the world should come.

Jacob was an hundred and forty-seven years old when he died, and there
was great mourning for him.

Joseph had the body of his father embalmed, as the Egyptians had the
custom of doing, and after a long mourning in Egypt, Joseph and his
brothers and many Egyptians who were Joseph's friends, carried the body
of Jacob to Canaan, in a great procession, and buried him in the cave
of Machpelah, where his fathers were buried.

After they had returned to Egypt, the brothers of Joseph said:

"Perhaps now he will hate us, and bring upon us all the evil we did to
him."

So they sent to him to ask his forgiveness for all that was past.  Then
Joseph wept, for he had nothing but love in his heart toward his
brothers, and he wished them to trust him.  He comforted them and spoke
kindly to them, saying:

"Fear not: ye meant evil unto me, but God meant it unto good.  I will
nourish you and your little ones."

And so through all Joseph's life, and he lived one hundred and ten
years, he was a tender father to all his family, and a wise ruler of
the people, and he died after making his family promise to carry his
body back into Canaan to be buried with his fathers when they
themselves should go.

"For God will surely visit you," he said, "and bring you out of this
land into the land which he promised to Abraham, to Isaac and to Jacob."




CHAPTER IX.

THE CRADLE THAT WAS ROCKED BY A RIVER.

After Joseph and all the sons of Jacob had grown old and had passed
away, their children's children grew in numbers until they became a
great multitude.

The Pharaoh whom Joseph had served also died, and the king who followed
him did not like the Hebrews.  He feared them because they had grown to
be strong, so he set overseers to watch them, and make them work like
slaves.

He treated them cruelly, and made them lift the great stones with which
they built the tombs of the kings and temples of the gods.  He also
tried to kill all the little boys as soon as they were born, but the
Lord took care of them.  Also, the king told his servants, that
wherever they found a baby boy among the Hebrews, to throw him into the
river Nile, but the little girls, they should save alive.

There was a man named Amrom, who, with his wife Jochebed, had a
beautiful little boy whom they tenderly loved.  They hid him as long as
they could, and then when he was three months old and she could hide
him no longer, she made up her mind to give him into the care of God.
She made a little boat, or ark of stout rushes, that grew by the river.
She wove it closer than a basket, and then covered it with pitch that
the water might not enter, just as Noah covered the great ark before
the flood.

Then she wrapped her baby carefully and laid him in the little boat,
and set it among the reeds at the edge of the river Nile.  God and His
angels watched the cradle of the child, and the river gently rocked it.
Jochebed told the baby's sister to wait near by and see what might
happen to him, and this is what happened, or rather what God prepared
for the baby in the boat of rushes.

The king's daughter came down to bathe in the river, and as her maidens
walked up and down by the riverside, she called one of them to bring to
her the little ark that she saw rocking on the river among the reeds.
When she had opened it she saw a beautiful little child, and when it
cried her heart was touched, and she longed to keep it for her own.

[Illustration: Pharaoh's daughter finding Moses]

"This is one of the Hebrew's children," she said, and as the baby's
sister came near she asked the princess if she should go and get a
nurse from among the Hebrew women to bring it up for her, and the
princess said to her, "Go," and the maid went and called the child's
mother.  The princess said: "Take this child away and nurse it for me,
and I will give thee thy wages."

And the mother took her baby joyfully though she hid her joy in her
heart, and carried him home to nurse and bring up for Pharoah's
daughter.

And the child grew, and when he was old enough his mother took him to
the king's palace, and he became the son of the princess.  She called
his name Moses, which means "drawn out," because she drew him out of
the water.




CHAPTER X.

MOSES IN MIDIAN.

Moses had teachers, and was taught all the learning of the Egyptians,
but his heart was with his own people.  He was grieved when he saw
their burdens, and heard their cries when their taskmasters struck them.

Once, when he was a grown man, he saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, and
he struck the Egyptian and killed him, for he thought he ought to
defend his people: and when he saw that the man was dead, he buried him
in the sand.  In a day or two Moses tried to make peace between two
Hebrews who were fighting, and they answered him roughly, and one of
them said:

"Who made thee a ruler over us? wilt thou kill me, as thou didst the
Egyptian yesterday?"

Then Moses was afraid, and when the king heard of it, and tried to take
his life, Moses fled away out of Egypt, through a desert into Midian.
There he found a well and sat down by it to rest.  While he sat there
the seven daughters of the priest of Midian came to draw water for
their father's flocks, and some rough shepherds came and drove them
away, but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flocks.
When their father knew that a noble stranger had been kind to his
daughters, he asked him to come into his house, and eat bread with him,
and stay as long as he would.  So Moses stayed and Zipporah, one of the
seven sisters, became his wife.

But Moses did not forget his people.  God was preparing him to lead
them out of bondage, and he learned many things, during the years that
he kept the sheep of his father-in-law in the wilderness.

One day he led his flocks across the desert to Mount Horeb or Sinai.
There he saw a bush all bright within as if it burned.  He drew nearer
to see why the bush was not consumed, and heard the voice of the Lord
calling him.  The Lord told him to come no nearer, and to put off his
shoes, for he stood on holy ground.  Then the Lord told him that He was
the God of his fathers, and that He had heard the cry of his oppressed
people in Egypt.

"I know their sorrows," said the voice from the midst of the fire, "And
I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to
bring them up out of that land into a good land, and a large--unto a
land flowing with milk and honey."

Then the Lord said that Moses must go to the new Pharaoh, for the old
king was dead, and bring the children of Israel out of Egypt.  Moses
was a very humble man, and he could not believe that Pharaoh would
listen to him or that the Hebrews would follow him, but the Lord said,

"Certainly I will be with thee."

And as a sign that it should be so, He said that after Moses had
brought his people out of Egypt, they should serve God in this mountain.

But Moses had many fears.  He knew that he had been brought up as an
Egyptian, and he feared that his people would not listen to his words.

Then the Lord showed signs to Moses to help his faith.

He turned the rod in Moses' hand into a serpent, and then when he was
afraid of it, the Lord told him to take it in his hand and it became a
rod again.

He also turned his hand white with leprosy, and then changed it again
to natural flesh, and told Moses, that these, and other signs he should
show in Egypt--to prove that he was sent of God.

But Moses felt himself to be so weak and faithless as a leader of his
people, that he still cried out that he was "slow of speech, and of a
slow tongue," and when the Lord said, "I will teach thee what thou
shalt say," he did not believe, but begged the Lord to send by whom he
would, only not by him.

Then the Lord said that Aaron, the brother of Moses could speak well,
and that he should go with him to Pharoah and to his people, and should
speak for him, but that the wisdom and power of God should be with
Moses, and that he should do wonders with the rod in his hand.




CHAPTER XI.

THE ROD THAT TROUBLED EGYPT.

So Moses took his wife and his sons and returned to Egypt, and the rod
of God was in his hand; and Aaron, sent of God, came to meet him in the
wilderness, and there Moses told him all that was in his heart, and all
that God had sent him to do.

When they came into Egypt they gathered the Israelites together, and
Aaron spoke to them, and they believed his words, and the signs that
Moses showed them.

Afterward, they went to Pharoah and gave him the message of the Lord,
and Pharoah said:

"I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go."

And he began to oppress the Israelites more than he had ever done
before.  They made bricks of clay mixed with straw, that hardened in
the sun, and were as lasting as stone, but he forced them to find the
straw wherever they could, and make as many bricks as before.  This
they did until no more straw could be found, and their Egyptian masters
beat them cruelly because they failed to make the full number of
bricks.  Then they turned upon Moses and Aaron and said, that they had
put a sword in the king's hand to slay them.

Where could Moses turn except to the Lord who had sent him?  The Lord
heard him and made to him again the great promise, as he did at the
burning bush, and Moses told the people, but they could not believe it,
for they were crushed under their cruel burdens.

And now the Lord sent Moses and Aaron again to Pharoah, to show by sign
and miracle, that their message was from Him.  They took the rod that
Moses brought from Mount Horeb, and Moses told Aaron to cast it down
before the king, and it became a serpent.  Pharoah called his wise men
and wizards, and they did the same, only Aaron's rod swallowed up their
rods, and Pharoah would not listen to their words.

[Illustration: The rod that troubled Egypt]

But in the morning when Pharoah walked by the river the two men stood
by him and said again:

The Lord God of the Hebrews hath sent me unto thee saying:

"Let my people go that they may serve me in the wilderness," and then
Aaron struck the waters of the river Nile with his rod, and the waters
turned to blood.

In all the land, in every stream and pond there was blood, so that the
fishes died and no one could drink the water.

But because the wizards could turn water to blood also, Pharoah's heart
was hardened toward Moses and Aaron.

While the people were digging wells for water, Aaron stretched forth
his rod over the river again, and frogs came up from it, and spread
over all the land and filled the houses of the people.  This also the
magicians did, but so great was the plague that the king said:

"I will let the people go."

"When shall I entreat for thee and for thy people to destroy the frogs
from thee and thy houses?" said Moses; and Pharoah told him to do so
the next day.

So on the next day Moses prayed to the Lord that the frogs might go out
of the land, and the Lord answered his prayer; but when Pharoah saw
that the frogs had been destroyed his heart grew hard, and he would not
listen to Moses and Aaron.

Then another plague was brought upon the Egyptians.  The dust of the
land was changed to lice that covered man and beast, and this was
followed by swarms of flies that settled upon all the land except
Goshen where the Israelites lived.

Then Pharoah said:

"Go, sacrifice to your God in this land," but they would not worship in
Egypt, and Pharoah at last told them that they could go into the
wilderness, but they must not go very far away.  So Moses prayed, and
the swarms of flies were swept out of Egypt, but Pharoah did not keep
his word.

Then a great sickness fell upon the cattle and sheep of the country,
though the flocks and herds of the Israelites were free from it; and
this was followed by a breaking out of boils upon men and beasts
everywhere, even upon the magicians, but Pharaoh's heart was still too
wicked to yield to God.

Then came a great storm of hail over Egypt, such as had never been
known in that sunny land.  It killed the cattle in the fields, and
destroyed the grain that was grown, and broke the trees and herbs.  The
lightnings fell also and ran upon the ground, and when it was over the
heart of Pharaoh was still hard against God.

Then Moses told Pharaoh that the face of the earth would be covered
with clouds of locusts that would eat every green thing left by the
storm, if he did not let God's people go.  This frightened Pharaoh's
servants and they begged him to send them away, and though he would not
let their wives and little ones go, he said:

"Go now, ye that are men, for that ye did desire," and he drove them
out of his presence.

Then at the Lord's word, Moses arose and stretched forth his rod over
Egypt, and the plague of locusts came, driven by the East wind, and
covered the land until there was no green thing left in Egypt.

Then Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron in great haste, and confessing
his sin, begged to be forgiven and to be saved from, "this death only,"
and, at Moses' prayer, a mighty west wind drove the army of locusts
into the Red Sea.

But again the heart of Pharaoh turned against God, and the Lord brought
thick darkness over the land for three days, only in the homes of the
Hebrews there was light.  Then Pharaoh was willing to let them take
their wives and their little ones, but not their flocks and herds, and
because they would not leave them behind, Pharaoh drove Moses and Aaron
from him in anger, saying:

"See my face no more."

But the Lord proposed to break the hard heart of Pharaoh.  He told
Moses to see that every Israelite should take a lamb from the flock and
keep it four days.  Then, at evening, he was to kill it, and dip a
branch of hyssop in its blood, and strike it against the sides of his
door, also over it, leaving three marks of blood there.  Then he was to
close his door and no one was to go out of it until morning.

They were to roast the lamb and eat of it, and be ready for the journey
they were to make, and it should be to them forever the feast called
the Passover.  They were to eat it with unleavened bread, and the feast
should be kept forever from the first to the seventh day of the month,
a holy feast to the Lord.

And this is why it was called the feast of the Passover.  At midnight,
after the lamb was killed in each house of the Israelites, and the
doors were shut, the Lord passed through the land, and wherever he saw
the blood on the side posts and the top of the door, he passed over
that house, and it was safe, but in every Egyptian house the first born
died, from the child of Pharaoh who sat on the throne, to the child of
the captive in the cell, and all the first born of cattle.

The next morning a great cry went up from the land of Egypt, for there
was not a house where there was not one dead.

Then Pharaoh was quite ready to let the Israelites go.

"Take all you have and be gone," he said.

They were all ready, and rose up very gladly to join the great
procession, led by Moses and Aaron, that gathered in Goshen, and
started on its long journey toward the east.

They had heard of the land of their fathers, and now they were going
home to be slaves no more.  They were a family of seventy souls when
they came into Egypt, four hundred and thirty years before, and now
they went out a great nation, as the Lord had promised when he blessed
their fathers.

The feast of the Passover has been the chief one held by the
Israelites, from the time of their coming out of Egypt until now, and
since Jesus held the Passover feast with his disciples on the night
that he went forth to death, it has become to all Christians the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.




CHAPTER XII.

FOLLOWING THE CLOUD.

"God led the people," says the Word, as they came up out of Egypt.  He
gave them the two leaders by whom He had broken the power of Pharaoh,
and set His people free, and He also set a great cloud in the air, just
above and before them, to lead them in the right way.  It was to them
the presence of the Lord.  By day it rose white and beautiful against
the blue sky, and moved slowly before them.  At night it stood still
while they rested, and shed light over all the camp, for there seemed
to be a fire within the cloud at night.  How safe and happy they must
have felt away from the cruel taskmasters of Egypt, and the Lord's
presence, spreading a wing of cloud over them.  They were not led by a
straight way to Canaan, for a warlike people lived in the land which
they must pass through, but they were led at first through a country
without cities or armies, where they would not trouble many people or
be troubled by them.  They bore with them the embalmed body of Joseph,
for they had promised to bury him with his fathers in the cave of
Machpelah; and they also had much wealth in herds, and flocks, and
gold, and silver.  Pharaoh thought of this after they had gone, and his
wicked heart grew harder than before, so he ordered his chariots and
horsemen to follow them, and they found the Israelites camped by the
Red Sea.

Then there was great fear and mourning in the camp when they saw the
army of Pharaoh coming, but Moses cried:

"Fear ye not, stand still and see the salvation of the Lord.  The Lord
shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace."

Then the Lord told Moses to speak to the people that they go forward.
He also told him to lift up his rod and stretch his hand over the sea
and divide it, and the children of Israel should go on dry ground
through the midst of the sea.  Night was falling, and the waters lay
dark before them, but the angel of God, the pillar of cloud and fire,
moved from its place before them and went behind them, while Moses and
Aaron led them on.  Then the presence of the Lord was a cloud and
darkness to the Egyptians, but it gave a light by night to the
Israelites.  A strong east wind drove the waters apart all night, so
that there was a way through the sea, and the waters were a wall upon
their right hand and on their left.  Pharaoh's army saw the broad path
through the sea, and followed fast after the Israelites, but as morning
dawned the Lord looked from the cloud and troubled the Egyptians.
Their chariot wheels came off, and all went wrong with them.

At last the Lord told Moses to stretch his hand forth over the sea,
that the waters might come back upon the Egyptians, and he did so; and
as the sun rose, the sea swallowed up the Egyptian host, and their
bodies were cast upon the shore.  There on the other side stood the
great host of Israel, and saw the salvation of God, and they believed
in Him, and in Moses His servant.

[Illustration: Destruction of Pharaoh's army]

Then a great shout went up from the host of Israel.  Moses led them in
a song of praise, and Miriam, the sister of Aaron, took a tambourine,
and the women followed her in dances as they answered in a chorus of
praise:--

"Sing ye to the Lord, for He hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and
the rider hath he thrown into the sea."

Soon they took up their journey, the cloudy pillar going before.  There
was but little water by the way, and after three days of thirst, they
came to the waters of Marah, but they were bitter, and the people cried
to Moses,

"What shall we drink?"

Then the Lord showed him a tree which he cast into the waters, and they
were made pure and sweet.  Soon after they came to Elim, where there
were twelve wells of water, and seventy palm trees, and there they
rested.

Again they took up their journey and passed through a desert land,
where they could get no food, and again they complained to Moses
because he had brought them into the wilderness to die.  They did not
yet believe that God could supply all their need.

"I will rain bread from heaven for you," said the Lord to Moses.  He
was ready to provide, if they would only believe in Him and obey Him.

Moses called them to come near before the Lord while Aaron should speak
his word to them.  As they came near and looked toward the wilderness
where the cloud stood, the glory of the Lord shone out of it.  The Lord
had heard them speak harshly to Moses for bringing them into a desert
to die, but he said,

"At even ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with
bread."

And his word came true.  Great flocks of quails came up and covered the
camp at sunset, so that they caught them for food; and in the morning
the dew lay around them, and when it had risen, there lay on the ground
a small, round, white thing, something like frost, or a little seed,
and it tasted like wafers made with honey.  The Lord told Moses that
the people must gather just enough to eat through the day, and no more.
The morning before the Sabbath they must gather enough for two days,
for none would fall on the Sabbath.  This was the bread that the
heavenly Father provided for his children through all the years of
their journey from Egypt to Canaan, and they called it "Manna."

There were hard things to bear in the wilderness.  Often when they
wanted water for their little ones and their cattle, and could not find
it, they were like fretful children when they were tired and thirsty.
Once, at Horeb, Moses struck a rock with his wonderful rod, and water
sprung out in a stream.

There were enemies also in the way.  The Amelikites came out to fight
with the Israelites.  The strong men went to meet the enemy, but Moses
stood on a hill with the rod of God in his hand, and Aaron and Hur were
with him.  While Moses held up the rod, Israel prevailed; but when he
let down his hand Amalek prevailed.

But Moses grew tired and they placed a stone for him to sit upon, and
Aaron and Hur held up his hands on either side until the going down of
the sun, when Amalek was conquered.  Moses built an altar there, and
called it "The Lord my Banner."

They were now drawing near the Mount, where Moses saw the burning bush,
and heard the Lord calling him to be the leader of his people.

They were far out of their way to Canaan, but it was in the Lord's
purpose to bring them into obedience and faith before he brought them
into the promised land.  They had lived long among the Egyptians, and
were very far from being like Jacob and Joseph, but there were good and
true men like Aaron, and Joshua, and Hur, who helped Moses.  It was
about three months after the children of Israel left Egypt, that they
came into the wilderness of Sinai.  There the "Mount of God" still
lifts its great granite cliffs toward the sky.  There are high valleys
midway where it is cooler than below, and there the people encamped and
waited to hear what God would say to them, for God talked with Moses on
the Mount.

He said He had chosen them, if they would obey his voice, to be a holy
nation.  He told Moses to tell the people to be ready, and on the third
day He would come down in the sight of all the people on Mount Sinai.

And so it was, as the people looked there was a thick cloud upon the
Mount, from which came thunder and lightning, and the sound of a great
trumpet, while the mountain trembled as with an earthquake.  Only Moses
and Aaron could approach the holy Mount, and from it God gave to Moses
the laws that the people were to live by, and Moses wrote them all down
that he might read them to the people.  A company of the Elders of
Israel went up and saw the glory of God afar off, but God called Moses
up into the Mount, and the cloud closed him round, while the Lord gave
him the laws for a great nation, and the pattern of the tabernacle
which He wished him to make for a church in the wilderness.

Forty days and forty nights Moses was on the Mount with God, and then
God gave him the ten great commandments written with his own hands on
tablets of stone, that he might give them to the people.  They were to
be kept as the rules of life for all people in all times.

Forty days and nights seemed a long time to the people camped around
the Mount.  Perhaps they thought Moses would never come back to lead
them, for they began to think of the gods of Egypt, and asked Aaron to
make one for them.  So to please them he told them to bring him their
gold ornaments, and he melted them and made a golden calf such as the
Egyptians worshiped, and before it they made an altar, and they
worshiped the calf.

The Lord who sees all things told Moses to go down to the people for
they were worshiping an idol.  So Moses went down a little way and met
Joshua, and they both went down and saw the people feasting, and
singing, and dancing, and Moses cast the tablets of stone upon the
ground and they were broken.  The heart of Moses, too, was almost
broken, but he destroyed the golden calf, and punished the people for
their great sin, and then went up to the Mount to plead for the life of
his people.

"O this people have sinned a great sin," he cried, "and have made them
gods of gold, yet now if thou wilt forgive their sin, and if not, blot
me, I pray thee, out of the book which thou has written," so great was
the love of Moses for his people.

There was a time of repentance among the people after this, and Moses
and his servant Joshua reared a tent outside the camp and called it the
Tabernacle of the congregation.  It was for worship until the true
Tabernacle should be built according to the pattern given in the Mount.
All who sought the Lord went to worship there, and the pillar of cloud
came and stood at the Tabernacle door while Moses talked with God, and
all the people saw it and worshiped.

Moses prayed again for the people, and the Lord said:

"My presences shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest."

The Lord called Moses again into the mount, and told him to bring with
him two tablets of stone and He would again write the ten commandments
upon them.

So Moses hewed them from the rock and took them up into Mount Sinai.
Then the Lord came down again in a thick cloud and talked with Moses,
and wrote upon the tablets of stone.

After forty days Moses came down to the people bringing the
commandments with him, but his face shone with a strange light that the
people never saw before, and they were afraid of him.  It was something
above the light of the sun, for Moses had seen the Glory of the Lord.

[Illustration: Moses descending from the Mount]

While they still camped around the mount they began to build the
Tabernacle.  Moses told the people to bring gold, and silver, and
brass, and wood.  They also brought precious stones, and oil for the
lamp, and fine linen, and they gave so willingly that at last Moses
told them that there was more than enough.

These were put in the hands of two wise men whom the Lord had chosen
and taught to do the work, and they had willing helpers among the
people, for wise hearted women did spin with their own hands, and bring
what they had spun, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen to
make the hangings of the Tabernacle.

If you would know all the beautiful and costly and curious things that
were made for this church in the wilderness, you will find them
described in the last chapters of Exodus.

The Israelites camped a long time in the high valleys around the Mount
of God, and at last set up the Tabernacle.  It was so made that it
could be taken down and carried with them when they journeyed, for it
was a beautiful tent.  Over it the pillar of cloud stood.  Whenever it
moved the people followed, and when it stood still, they rested.
Within the Tabernacle they placed a beautiful chest of wood overlaid
with gold, which ever after held their most precious things, the
tablets of stone written upon by the Lord himself.

This "Ark of Testimony," as it was called, had rings at the sides
through which men laid strong rods by which to carry it, and so had the
golden table for bread, and the golden altar of incense.  There was a
beautiful seven-branched candlestick of pure gold in which olive oil
was burned for a sacred sign, and there was a brazen altar for burnt
offerings, and a great brazen bowl for washing, and other things to be
used in the worship of the Sanctuary.

There were beautiful garments, also, for the priests, Aaron and his
sons, and for Aaron there was a wonderful breast-plate of gold set with
twelve precious stones, bearing the names of the twelve tribes of
Israel.

When all was finished, and the Tabernacle was set up, the cloud that
veiled the presence of the Lord came and covered it, and the glory of
the Lord filled it, so that Moses could not enter; but the Lord spoke
to him from the cloud, and told him how the priests should order the
worship of the Lord there.

Afterward, Aaron and his sons offered burnt offerings for their sins,
and the sins of the people, in the way the Lord had commanded, and fire
from the Lord came down and consumed the offering.

When the people saw the answer of the Lord they fell on their faces
before him.

In the second month of the second year the cloud rose from over the
Tabernacle, and then the people knew it was time to go on their
Journey.  So they took down the tent of the Tabernacle and put all
things in order for the journey.  Each of the twelve tribes descended
from the twelve sons of Jacob marched by themselves, carrying banners,
and having captains.  In the midst of them all marched the Levites
carrying the Ark and the different parts of the Tabernacle, and when
the cloud stood still, they stopped and set up the Tabernacle, while
the people formed their camp all around it in the order of their tribes.

Still the manna fell with the dew at night, and the people gathered it
in the morning, and when they tired of it, the Lord sent them quails
again.

Over and over the people complained and rebelled, but the Angel of the
Lord's Presence still hovered over them, and led them toward the
promised land.  Forty years they were on the journey that was so easily
made by the sons of Jacob when they went back and forth to buy wheat in
the time of famine; and forty-two times did they encamp on the way, yet
the mercy of the Lord never failed them, and they were brought into
their own land at last.  Then the cloud was no longer needed to go
before them, but long after, when they built a beautiful temple at
Jerusalem in which to put the sacred Ark of Testimony, the cloud came
again and filled the temple with the glory of the Lord.




CHAPTER XIII.

IN THE BORDERS OF CANAAN.

While the host of Israel was in camp at Paran, the Lord told Moses to
send men before them into Canaan to spy out the land.

So he sent twelve men who walked through the land and saw the people,
and the cities and the fields and the fruits.  They were forty days
searching the land and they brought from the brook Eschol a cluster of
grapes so large that two of them bore it on a staff between them.  They
also brought some pomegranates and figs.

[Illustration: The return of the spies]

When they came into the camp they said that the country where they had
been was good, and flowing with milk and honey, but the people were
strong, and the cities had very high walls.  They said they saw giants
there.

Caleb, who was one of the twelve, and a good and true man, said:

"Let us go up at once and possess it, for we are well able to overcome
it," but the men who were with him were afraid of the giants, and said
they felt like grasshoppers before them.  Then there was great weeping
among the people all that night, and they said,

"Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt."  Moses and Aaron
were greatly troubled, but the two good men, Caleb and Joshua, stood up
and encouraged the people, saying that they need not fear, for the Lord
had given them the land, yet they were ready to stone Caleb and Joshua.

Then the Lord spake to Moses from the Tabernacle, and the people saw
his glory.  He said the people were unbelieving and disobedient, and
for this reason they could not enter the promised land.  He said, that
all who were twenty years old and upward would die in the wilderness,
except Caleb and Joshua, who had followed the Lord wholly.  He also
said that the people would be forty years in the wilderness, and only
the youth and the children would live to enter Canaan.

There was mourning and repentance then because of the word of the Lord,
and the people promised again to believe and obey, but over and over
they lost faith and rebelled, and great storms of trouble fell upon
them.

Once the earth opened and many were swallowed up; a sudden sickness
destroyed thousands.  Near Mount Hor, where Aaron died, fiery serpents
ran among the people, and all who were bitten by them died; but there
was full forgiveness and cure for those who turned to the Lord.  When
the fiery serpents entered the camp Moses lifted a brazen image of a
serpent up on a pole so high that it could be seen all over the camp,
and whoever looked upon it lived.  It was a sign of the coming Saviour.

Between the marches and the battles with heathen tribes, some of whom
were giants, Moses wrote in a book the laws that God gave him for the
government of the people.  They were wise laws, the keeping of which
would bring health, peace and blessedness to the people.  He gave the
book to the Levites who carried the Ark, and they were to keep it
always beside the Ark, and often read it aloud to the people.

Moses said many things to the people, and as Jacob blessed his twelve
sons, so Moses blessed each of the twelve tribes that descended from
them, for he was near the end of his long life.  The Lord had told him
that He should take him to Himself before the people entered Canaan,
and that Joshua must lead the people into the promised land.  So when
they had reached the borders of Canaan, and were encamped near the
Jordan, the Lord called his tried servant up into Mount Nebo, that he
might see the land beyond the Jordan, where the twelve tribes were to
find their promised home.  Then the Lord gave him a view of the land,
and there he died, as Aaron died on Mount Hor.

No one saw Moses die, and no one knows where he was buried, for the
Lord buried him.  He was one hundred and twenty years old, and yet as
strong as a young man.  After his death Joshua became the leader of
Israel.




CHAPTER XIV.

A NATION THAT WAS BORN IN A DAY.

The time had come for the people to cross the river Jordan, and enter
their own land, and the Lord told Joshua to prepare the people for
their last journey before going over Jordan.  Joshua first sent two men
over the river to see the land.

They went to the walled city of Jericho, and to the house of a woman
named Rahab.  The king heard that they were there and sent for them,
but the woman hid them under the flax that she was drying on the roof
of her house.  Afterward she let them down by a rope through a window
(for her house was built on the town wall), and they escaped.  They
promised Rahab before they went, that if she would hang a long line of
scarlet thread from the window on the wall, that when they came to take
the city she should be saved and all her family because of her kindness
to them.

After they had returned to the camp they told Joshua that the Lord
would surely give them the land, for the people were afraid of them.
Then they rose up and marched to the banks of the Jordan and waited for
Joshua to lead them over.  Some of them remembered how they had passed
through the Red Sea, and others had heard it from their parents, and
they now waited to see the salvation of God.  Joshua told them to
follow the priests, and the Levites who would bear the Ark of the
Covenant, so when Joshua said:

"Behold the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of all the earth passeth
over before you into Jordan," the people followed.

The Jordan lay spread before them like a lake, for it was the time of
year when it overflowed all its banks, but when the feet of the priests
who bore the Ark were dipped in the edge of the water, the waters from
above stopped and rose like a wall, while the waters below flowed away
into the Dead Sea, and left a wide path for the people to walk in, and
the Ark stood still in Jordan until every one had passed over.  Then
twelve men, one out of every tribe, took a stone from the bed of the
river and carried it over for a memorial altar, so that when any should
ask in years to come, "What do these stones mean?" someone might tell
them how the Lord led Israel through Jordan into their own land.

[Illustration: Crossing the Jordan]

After the Ark had come up from the bed of Jordan, and there was not one
of all the thousands of Israel left behind, the waters came down from
the place where they had stayed, and flowed down into the Dead Sea, and
overflowed the banks of Jordan as before.

The stones were heaped in Gilgal where they camped, and directly before
them rose the walls of Jericho, and here they kept the passover.  For
forty years they had been fed with manna from heaven as they camped or
journeyed in the wilderness, but now they began to eat the grain and
the fruits of the land, and the manna fell no more.

Nearly five hundred years before the family of Jacob left this land to
go down into Egypt where Joseph was.  They grew to be a great people,
but they were slaves.  Then the Lord sent Moses to make them free, and
they began the long journey, which at last brought them to their own
land.

Forty years they were on the journey, and all this time they were
pilgrims, but on the day that the Jordan ceased to flow, and parted
while they passed over into the land promised to their fathers, they
became a nation.

The land was before them, and they had only to obey the Lord and his
servant Joshua to conquer and possess it.

As they filled the valley of the Jordan before Jericho, the hearts of
the heathen fainted for fear, for they knew that only the Lord could
divide a river to let his people pass.

Joshua went out of the camp to look at Jericho, the walled city.  It
was shut up for fear of the Israelites, and there was no one to be seen.

Suddenly Joshua saw a warrior standing with a drawn sword in his hand.

"Art thou for us," said Joshua, "or for our adversaries?" and the
warrior angel answered,

"Nay! but as Captain of the host of the Lord, am I now come," and
Joshua fell on his face before him.

He knew then that it was the Lord who would conquer Jericho, and he was
told how the people were to help him.

So Joshua called the priests, and told them to take up the Ark, and he
told seven priests to go before it bearing trumpets of rams' horns.
Then the army of Israel, ready for war, followed, half of them marching
before the Ark, and half of them coming after, and as the trumpets gave
a great sound, they marched once around the city, and then went to
camp.  This they did once every day for seven days, but on the seventh
day they marched around the city seven times, and as the priests blew
the trumpets for the last time, Joshua cried with a mighty voice,

"Shout! for the Lord hath given you the city."

Then as a great shout went up from the people, the walls of the city
fell down flat, so that the soldiers of Israel went up, every man
straight before him, and took Jericho.

And Rahab was not forgotten.  The Lord cared for her little house on
the wall, and she, with all her family, were brought into the Camp of
Israel.

And so by the conquest of Jericho the new nation of Israel began to
possess its land.




CHAPTER XV.

SAMSON THE STRONG.

All the days of Joshua--and he lived to be an hundred and ten years
old--the Israelites were conquering the people who lived in Canaan, and
dividing it among the tribes.  Joshua was a father to them, as Moses
had been, and when at last they were at rest, each tribe within its own
borders, and they had begun to build their houses, and plant their
fields, Joshua spoke words of loving counsel to the people, and they
set up a stone under an oak tree, as a sign that they would always
serve the Lord and keep the law, and then he went to be with God.
After his death Israel was ruled by wise men called judges, who helped
them to conquer the land little by little.  Some of them were good men
and brave warriors as Othniel and Gideon and Jephthah and one was a
prophetess named Deborah, a noble mother in Israel, and one was a
mighty man of strength, Samson, the son of Manoah.

The people of Israel had turned away from the Lord, and could no longer
conquer their enemies, but the Philistines had conquered them, and had
been their masters for forty years, when the Lord sent Samson to
deliver them.  He was not a wise man like Moses or Joshua, but he had
great strength, and the Lord used him against the Philistines.

Once a young lion came roaring against him, and he caught it and rent
it in two, as if it had been a kid.  When he passed the same way
afterward he saw that the bees had built a nest in the body of the
lion, and it was full of honey.  At his marriage feast--for he married
a Philistine woman--he made a riddle for the young men to guess:

"Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong, come forth
sweetness."

[Illustration: The young Samson]

They tried for seven days to guess the riddle, but they could not, and
then they told Samson's wife to find it out for them, or they would
burn her house.  She begged him with tears to tell her, and at last he
told her of the honey comb in the body of the lion, and she told the
young men, so that at the end of the seventh day they said to Samson,

"What is sweeter than honey?" and "what is stronger than a lion?"

He saw that he had been betrayed, so he paid his debt, a suit of
clothes to each guest, and went home to his father's house.  Afterwards
when he found that his wife had been given to another he tied
firebrands to the tails of three hundred foxes, and sent them among the
wheat fields of the Philistines so that the fields were set on fire.

Once the men of Gaza tried to kill him when he was within their city,
but he rose at midnight and took the city gates, with its posts and
bar, and carried them away on his shoulders to the top of the hill.
Again the Philistine lords had promised a great deal of money to a
woman, if she would get Samson to tell her what made him so strong, so
she begged him to tell her.  Three times she thought she knew the
secret, and told the Philistines, but they could not bind him.  At last
he was tired of her questions, and said to her plainly--that from a
child no razor had ever touched his hair.  If it should be cut he would
be as weak as other men.  Then she watched and cut his hair while he
slept, and the Philistines bound him and carried him to Gaza, where
they made him blind, and forced him to grind in the mills of a prison
house.  The Philistines were glad because Samson was their prisoner at
last, and so they came together in a great feast to sacrifice to their
god Dagon, for they said,

"Our god has delivered Samson into our hands."  While they were merry
they said:

"Let us send for Samson to make sport for us," and he was brought out
of the prison.  It was very sad to see the strong judge of Israel, weak
and blind, led by a little lad, and making sport for the people in
front of their temple.  All the lords of the Philistines were there,
and upon the broad roof of the temple were about three thousand people
watching Samson while he showed his strength, for his hair had grown
and his strength was returning.  At last as he was standing between two
great pillars that held up the roof, he prayed, lifting his sightless
eyes to God:

"O Lord God, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me only this
once."

Then he clasped his arms around the pillars on either side of him, and
bowing himself with all his might, saying,

"Let me die with the Philistines," he drew the great pillars with him,
and the house fell with all that were upon it, on all that were within
it.  So died Samson who judged Israel twenty years, yet a woman,
Deborah, who was also one of the judges in Israel, was stronger than
he, for the Lord looketh on the heart.

[Illustration: The death of Samson]




CHAPTER XVI.

RUTH.

In the days when the judges ruled in Israel, there was a famine in the
land, and an Israelite, who lived in Bethlehem, took his wife and his
two sons into Moab where there was food.  After a while the Israelite
died, and the two sons married women of Moab.

After two years the sons died also, and their mother, Naomi, longed for
her home in Bethlehem, for there was no longer a famine there.  So she
took Ruth and Orpah, her sons' wives, and started on the journey into
the land of Israel.

But before they had gone far Naomi said:

"Go! return each to her mother's house; the Lord deal kindly with you,
as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me."

She kissed them, and they wept and would not leave her.

"Turn again, my daughters," she said, "why will ye go with me?"

And Orpah kissed Naomi, and went back to her own mothers' house, but
Ruth, whose heart was with Naomi, would not go back.

"Entreat me not to leave thee," she said, "or to return from following
after thee, for where thou goest I will go; and where thou lodgest I
will lodge; thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God; where
thou diest I will die, and there will I be buried; the Lord do so to
me, and more also, if aught but death part thee and me."

And so they came to Bethlehem, and the old friends of Naomi greeted her
tenderly, and welcomed her back.  It was about the beginning of the
barley harvest.

There was a good and great man in Bethlehem named Boaz, and he was of
the family of Naomi's husband.  He had a field of barley where the
reapers were at work, and Ruth asked Naomi if she should not go and
glean after the reapers, to get grain, for they were poor.

Naomi said, "Go, my daughter," and she went.

When Boaz came out of the town into his field and greeted his reapers,
he said to his servant having charge of the reapers,

"What maiden is this?" and he told him that she was the Moabitish girl
who had come back with her mother-in-law Naomi.

Then Boaz spoke very kindly to Ruth, and told her to stay with his
maidens, and freely drink of the water drawn for them, and Ruth bowed
before him and asked why he should be so kind to a stranger.  He told
her that he knew all her kindness to her mother-in-law since the death
of her husband, and how she had left her own family and country to come
among strangers, and he blessed her, saying,

"A full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose
wings thou art come to trust."

Then he told her to sit down and eat bread with them, and he helped her
to the parched corn with his own hands, and when they returned to work
he told his young men to let her glean among the sheaves and reprove
her not, and to let some handfuls fall purposely for her to glean.
When Ruth went home Naomi said,

"Where hast thou gleaned to-day?" and Ruth told her.  Then Naomi
blessed Boaz, and told Ruth that he was one of their near relatives.

And so Ruth gleaned in the fields of Boaz through all the barley and
the wheat harvest.  When all the reaping was done, the grain was
threshed on a piece of ground made very smooth and level.  The sheaves
were beaten, and then the straw was taken away, and the grain and chaff
below it was winnowed.  By this the chaff was blown away and only the
grain was left.

When Boaz winnowed his barley Naomi told Ruth to go down to his
threshing floor and see him for he had a feast for his friends.

So after the feast Ruth came near to him and said,

"Thou art our near kinsman," and Boaz said,

"May the Lord bless thee my daughter," and with many kind words he gave
her six measures of barley to take to Naomi.

[Illustration: Ruth and Naomi]

Boaz remembered that it was the custom in Israel for the nearest
relative of a man who had died, to take care of the wife who was left,
and so he went to the gate of Bethlehem where the rulers met to hold
their court, and spoke to the elders and chief men about Ruth.  He also
wished them to be witnesses that he was going to take Ruth to be his
wife.  Then the rulers all said,

"We are witnesses," and they prayed that God would bless Ruth and make
Boaz still richer and greater.

So Ruth became the honored and beloved wife of Boaz, and they had a son
named Obed.

Obed grew up and had a son named Jesse; and Jesse was the father of
David, King of Israel, who was first a shepherd lad of Bethlehem.

More than a thousand years after Ruth lived there was born in
Bethlehem, of the family of Boaz and Ruth, a little Child, who came, to
be the Saviour of the world, and the shepherds in the fields, where,
perhaps, Ruth gleaned, and David kept his sheep, heard the angels tell
the good news and sing

"Peace on earth, good will to men."




CHAPTER XVII.

SAMUEL--THE CHILD OF THE TEMPLE.

The Tabernacle that was built in the wilderness, and was brought into
Canaan by the priests was set up at Shiloh in the very centre of the
land of Canaan, and once every year the tribes came to it to worship
and offer sacrifices.  After it had come to Shiloh to stay it was
called the temple.

When Eli was high priest a man named Elkanah came up from Ramah to
worship, and Hannah his wife went with him.  She was a good woman, and
very sorrowful, because she saw other wives with sons and daughters
around them, and she had none.  Her husband was loving and kind and
said:

"Am I not better to thee than ten sons?" but she prayed to God for a
son.  While she was at Shiloh she prayed in the temple, and Eli saw her
lips move, though he heard no voice.  At first he spoke harshly to her,
thinking she had been drinking wine, but she told him that she had not
taken wine, but was praying.

"I am a woman of sorrowful spirit," she said, "and have poured out my
soul before the Lord."  Then Eli blessed her and said:

"Go in peace, and the God of Israel grant thee the prayer that thou
hast asked of him."  Then Hannah was no longer sad.

Her prayer was answered, and the Lord sent her a little son, and when
he was old enough, she took him to the temple, for she had promised the
Lord that the child should be His.  So Elkanah came bringing
sacrifices, and the young child was with them.  Hannah told Eli that
she was the woman whom he saw praying in the temple.

[Illustration: Samuel speaking to the Lord]

"For the child I prayed," she said, "and the Lord has answered my
prayer.  Therefore I have lent him to the Lord; as long as he lives he
shall be lent to the Lord."  Eli was very glad and gave thanks to the
Lord, and took the little boy to help him in the service of the temple.
Every year his father and mother came to bring offerings to the Lord,
and his mother always brought him a little coat which she had made.

Over it was a linen garment called an ephod, such as the priests wore.
Eli was an old man, and his sons, though they were priests, were not
good men, and he believed the Lord had sent him one who would be good,
so he loved little Samuel as if he were his own.

One night when Eli was laid down to sleep, and Samuel also, while the
light was still burning in the golden candlestick before the Ark,
Samuel heard a voice calling him, and he answered, "Here am I," and ran
to see what Eli wanted.  But Eli said that he had not called, and
Samuel lay down again.  When the voice called again, Samuel went again
to Eli's bed, but Eli told him to lie down again, for he had not called
him.  When the voice called the third time, Samuel said: "Here am I,
for thou _didst_ call me."

Then Eli told the boy to lie down once more, but if he heard the voice
again to say,

"Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth."

And when the voice called again, "Samuel, Samuel," the boy answered,

"Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth."

Then the Lord told Samuel that the sons of Eli had become very wicked,
and their father had not kept them from the evil, and therefore He
could not accept their offerings.

When Eli asked Samuel what the Lord had said to him, the boy told him
all and hid nothing from him, and Eli bowed his spirit before the Lord,
and said:

"It is the Lord, let Him do what seemeth Him good."

After this all the people of Israel knew that the Lord had called
Samuel to be a prophet.  And as he grew up the Lord was with him, and
he was a judge over his people all his life.

As for Eli and his sons, the word of the Lord soon came true.  When the
Philistines came against the Israelites in battle, the Elders of Israel
said:

"Let us bring the Ark of the Lord out of Shiloh to us, that it may save
us out of the hand of our enemies."  And so they took it from the holy
place to the camp of Israel.  Then the Philistines fell upon the camp
and scattered the men of Israel.  They also took the Ark of God, and
the two sons of Eli were among the thousands slain.

Eli, who trembled for the Ark of God, sat outside the city gate, by the
wayside watching.  He was nearly a hundred years old, and his eyes were
dim, but when a messenger came with the bad news, he fell backward in
his seat and died.  His heart was broken.

Where was Samuel?  Perhaps he was praying in the temple for the return
of the Ark of the Covenant.

Wherever the Ark went among the Philistines, there went also trouble
and death.  When they put it in the temple of their fish-god Dagon, the
great idol fell down before it and was broken.  And when it was taken
to another city, the people were smitten with sickness, until at last
the Philistines said:

"Send away the Ark of the God of Israel, and let it go to its own
place."

After seven months they sent it with gifts of gold to the Israelites.
They placed it on a new cart drawn by two cows, and the cows, guided by
the Lord alone, took a straight way into the land of Israel.  How glad
the people were when they looked up from their reaping in the fields,
and saw the Ark coming safely back to them.  The Philistines watched it
from afar to see if it would be guided of God to its own place or not
and then they returned to their city.

Samuel gathered the people to the Lord after this, and though they had
sinned greatly, and had gone after the gods of the heathen around them,
they repented and returned to the faith of their fathers, and were
faithful all the days of Samuel.  He went from year to year on a
journey to three cities of Israel, and judged the people in those
places, but his home was in Ramah, the city where he was born, and
where Hannah had brought him up for the Lord.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE MAKING OF A KING.

When Samuel was old he made his sons judges in his place, but they were
not holy men like their father.

They loved money, and would judge unjustly, if money were given to them
as a bribe.  So the people came to Samuel at Ramah and said,

"Give us a king to judge us."

And Samuel prayed to the Lord, and the Lord told him to do as the
people had asked him to do, for they had not rejected him as judge, but
the Lord as their King, and now they must learn what kind of a king
would reign over them.  So Samuel told them what they must be ready to
do for their King, for a king was often a hard master, and ruled his
people cruelly, taking the best of their fields, and their harvests,
and their flocks for themselves, and the finest of their sons and
daughters to be his servants; but they said,

"We will have a king over us, that we may be like other nations, and
that our king may judge us, and go out before us and fight our battles."

When Samuel told these things to the Lord he said, "Make them a king,"
and Samuel sent the people to their own cities.

Samuel did not choose a king for the people himself, but he waited for
the Lord to send him the man He had chosen, and the Lord said to him as
he went to a city called Zeph, to hold a sacrifice,

"To-morrow about this time I will send thee a man from the land of
Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people
Israel."

On the next day as Samuel came out to go up to the hill of sacrifice he
met a tall, noble looking young man, who, with his servant, was looking
for the lost asses of his father, Kish, the Benjaminite.  He had come
far, and had heard that Samuel, the seer was in that place, and he
hoped he would tell him where to go for the asses that were lost.

Samuel knew from the Lord that this was the man God had chosen, so he
told him to go up with him to the sacrifice, and the next day he would
let him go.

He told him that he need not be troubled about the asses, for they were
found, but the desire of Israel was set upon him.  Saul, for that was
his name, did not understand him until he was invited to feast with
thirty of the chief men, and Samuel had talked with him upon the
house-top.  Early the next morning they both rose and went out of the
city, and while Saul sent his servant on before, Samuel anointed Saul
with oil, and kissed him saying, that the Lord had anointed him to be
Captain over his inheritance.

As a sign that the Lord had done it, he told Saul three things that
would happen to him on the way home, and charged him to go to Gilgal,
where he would meet him and sacrifice to the Lord for seven days.  As
Saul turned to leave the prophet, God gave him another heart, and all
the signs came to pass that day.

At Mizpah Samuel called all the tribes together, that the man who was
to be their king, might be chosen in their sight, and when Saul, the
son of Kish, the Benjaminite was chosen he could not be found; he had
hidden from the people; but when they brought him out before them, he
was taller than any of the people from his shoulders up, and looked a
king indeed.  For the first time in all their history they cried,

"God save the King!"

Then Saul went home, and there went with him a body of men whose hearts
God had touched, while Samuel wrote in a book the order of the kingdom
and laid it up before the Lord.




CHAPTER XIX.

THE SHEPHERD BOY OF BETHLEHEM.

After Saul had been king of Israel for a few years, Samuel was deeply
troubled about him, for he had hoped that he would be as truly a king
as he looked, but he had a strange and wilful spirit that led him to
turn away from the counsel of the Lord and follow his own way.

Samuel had been grieved again and again by Saul's rashness, until at
last he said to him when he had taken the spoil of the enemy to
sacrifice to the Lord,

"To obey is better than sacrifice; because thou hast rejected the word
of the Lord, He hath also rejected thee from being king," and he went
to his house and mourned over Saul, for he had loved him.

At last the Lord told Samuel to cease from mourning for Saul, for He
had rejected him, but to fill his horn with oil, and go to Bethlehem
where Jesse lived, for He had chosen one of the sons of Jesse to be
king in place of Saul.

Samuel went to Bethlehem leading a heifer, as the Lord had told him to
do, that he might hold a sacrifice.  He told the elders of the city to
make ready for the sacrifice, and when he had found the house of Jesse,
he called him and his sons.  Jesse was the grandson of Ruth and Boaz,
and owned the fields, no doubt, where Ruth gleaned.  When Samuel saw
Eliab, the son of Jesse, he said:

"Surely the Lord's anointed is before Him," but the Lord said:

"Look not on his countenance or on the height of his stature, because I
have refused him, for the Lord seeth not as man seeth, for man looketh
on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart."

Then Jesse called Abinidab, but Samuel said:

"The Lord hath not chosen this."  Then he made Shammah to pass before
him, but Samuel said:

"Neither hath the Lord chosen this."

Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel, but Samuel said:

"The Lord hath not chosen these."

"Are here all thy children?" said Samuel.

"There remaineth yet the youngest, and he keepeth the sheep," Jesse
replied.  Then Samuel said:

"Send and fetch him, for we will not sit down till he come hither."

So Jesse sent out into the sheepfolds on the hillsides outside the city
to bring the lad David in.  What did the boy think when he found his
father and his brothers waiting, with the old prophet in the midst?
What did it mean that the eye of the seer was set upon him, as were the
eyes of all in the house?

[Illustration: The young shepherd boy]

Samuel saw a noble youth, "ruddy, and of a beautiful countenance, and
goodly to look to."  He had been told that he must not look on the
outward appearance "for the Lord seeth not as man seeth," and so he
waited a little until the Lord said:

"Arise, anoint him, for this is he."  Then he took the horn of oil, and
anointed him in the midst of his brethren, and the spirit of the Lord
came upon David from that day forward, and Samuel went back to his
house in Ramah.

It may be that his father and his brothers did not understand that the
boy had been called to be king over Israel, but a new spirit of wisdom,
and love, and strength came upon David, and though he went back to his
father's flocks with no thought of being greater than his brothers, he
went with a new song in his heart which he sang to the little harp he
had made while watching the sheep.  Long after when he was King of
Israel, he made in memory of these days the beautiful Psalm to be sung
in the temple beginning,

  "The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want."




CHAPTER XX.

THE POWER OF A PEBBLE.

Saul the sullen was still king over Israel, although he had departed
from the Lord, and in His sight he was no longer a king.  He was very
gloomy and dark in his mind, for he had driven the Lord's spirit away,
and his light was gone.

His servants tried to amuse him, and told him of David, the son of
Jesse, who was a skillful player on the harp, and a brave and handsome
youth.  So Saul sent for David, and David, bringing presents from his
father, came to the king's house.

Saul was greatly pleased with David, and asked Jesse to let his son
stay with him, for when the evil spirit was upon him, if David played
upon his harp the darkness left him.  But this did not last, and after
a while David went back to his flocks, and Saul forgot him.

Then the Philistines rose against Israel again.  Their camp was on a
mountain side, and Saul gathered his warriors on the side of another
mountain and there was a valley between them.

Out of the Philistine camp a giant came one day, Goliath of Gath.  He
talked loud and often in order to terrify the Israelites, asking them
to send out a man to fight with him, but he was not truly brave, for he
had carefully covered his great body with armor of brass, so that no
spear or sword could touch him.  He defied Israel every morning and
evening for forty days, and no one was found who would dare to go out
alone to fight him.  David's elder brothers were in camp, and Jesse,
their father, called David from the flocks to take food to them.  He
found the army of Israel ready to go into battle, but Goliath came out
as he had done each day and defied the Israelites, who ran in terror at
the sight of him.  The spirit of David was moved at this, and he said:

"Who is this Philistine that he should defy the armies of the living
God?"  "The man who killeth him," said one, "the King will enrich him,
and, will give him his daughter and make his father's house free in
Israel."

Then Eliab, David's eldest brother, spoke sternly to David asking him
why he had left his sheep to come down and see the battle, and called
him naughty and proud, but David still talked with the men, for the
spirit of the Lord was strong within him.  When Saul heard of him and
sent for him, David said:

"Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy servant will go and fight
with the Philistine."

Saul frowned at David and said:

"Thou art not able to go against this Philistine; thou art but a youth,
and he is a man of war."

Then David told the king how he had killed both a lion and a bear that
had come down upon his father's flocks, and that he could also conquer
the Philistine.

"The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and the paw of
the bear," said David, "He will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistine."  And Saul said: "Go! and the Lord be with thee."  Then
Saul armed David with his own armor, but David said:

"I can not go with these, for I have not proved them," and he put them
off.

And this was the way David armed himself to meet the giant.

He took his staff in hand, and chose five smooth stones from the brook
and put them in his shepherd's bag, and with his sling in his hand, he
drew near to the giant.  Goliath came on also, his armor-bearer
carrying the shield before him, but when he saw the youth David, he
despised him, for he was without armor, or sword or spear, only his
staff.

"Am I a dog, that thou comest to me with a staff," said Goliath, and
then he told him that he would soon give his flesh to the birds and the
beasts.

"Thou comest to me with a sword, and a spear, and a shield," said
David, "but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of
the armies of Israel whom thou hast despised."

Then the Philistine came down upon little David to destroy him, and
David ran, not away from him, as the men of Israel had done, but
straight toward him, taking a pebble from his shepherd's bag as he ran.
Quickly putting it in the sling, he whirled it in the air once, twice,
and then it went swift and straight to the mark.  It sunk into the
forehead of the giant, and he fell dead upon his face.  Then David ran
and stood upon the dead Philistine and cut off his head with the
giant's great sword, and when the Philistines saw that their champion
was really dead, they fled, pursued by the shouting hosts of Israel.

[Illustration: David cutting off Goliath's head]

Saul had forgotten the youth who played upon the harp before him, for
when he sent for him after the battle he said,

"Whose son art thou, thou young man?" and David answered,

"I am the son of thy servant Jesse, the Bethlehemite."

And Saul took him to live with him from that day.




CHAPTER XXI.

FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH.

Saul had a son named Jonathan, and he loved David as his own soul.  He
took off his princely robes, even to his sword, and his bow, and his
girdle, and made David wear them; and David acted wisely in all that
the king gave him to do.  There was great joy and much feasting over
the Death of Goliath and the flight of the Philistines, and wherever
Saul went, the women came out of the cities to meet him, singing and
dancing, and the song with which they answered one another was,

  "Saul hath slain his thousands,
  And David his tens of thousands."

Saul did not like this, and an evil spirit of jealousy came upon him,
and he thought, "What can he have more but the kingdom."

The next day the evil spirit came upon Saul in the house, and David
played on his harp to quiet him, but Saul hurled a spear at David,
hoping to fasten him to the wall with it.  This he did twice, but the
Lord guided the spear away from David, just as he guided the pebble to
Goliath, and he was unhurt.  Saul was afraid of David.  He was afraid
that God was preparing him to be king over Israel, so he sent him into
battle, hoping he would be killed, but the life of David was in the
Lord's hand, and no enemy could destroy it.

After a great battle, in which David had been victorious, the evil
spirit came again upon Saul, as he sat in his house with his spear in
his hand, while David played on the harp.  Again he tried to kill
David, but the spear struck the wall and David slipped away.

[Illustration: The spear struck the wall]

It was clear that David could not live near the king, and so he talked
with Jonathan, his friend, who said,

"God forbid, thou shalt not die," but David said,

"Truly there is but a step between me and death."

Then they made a promise to each other before the Lord that should last
while they lived.  They promised to show "the kindness of the Lord" to
each other while life should last.

Jonathan told David that he might go away for three days, and they went
out into a field together.  They feared the anger of Saul when he found
that David was absent from the feast of the new moon.  So Jonathan told
David to return after three days and hide behind a great rock in the
field.  Then Jonathan said he would come out and shoot three arrows
from his bow, as if he were shooting at a mark, and he would send his
arrow-bearer to pick them up.  If he should call to the lad, "The
arrows are on this side of thee," David would know that Saul was not
angry, and would not hurt him, but if he cried, "The arrows are beyond
thee," David would know he was in danger and must go away.

On the second day of the feast, Saul asked why David was not there, and
Jonathan told him he had asked permission to go away for three days.
Then Saul was very angry.  He blamed his son for loving David, for, as
Saul's son, Jonathan should be king after his death, but he never would
be if David lived, and he commanded Jonathan to bring him that he might
put him to death.  When Jonathan asked what evil David had done that he
should be put to death, Saul cast his spear at his own son.  Then
Jonathan knew there was no hope for David, and left the table in sorrow.

The next day he went out to the rock in the field with his armor-bearer
and sent him on before.  When he shot an arrow, he cried:

"The arrow is beyond thee; make haste! stay not!"

And David, in his hiding place heard it, and knew that he must flee for
his life.

Then Jonathan gave his bow and arrows to the lad to take to the town,
and David came out from his hiding place, and they kissed each other
and wept together.  But at last Jonathan said:

"Go in peace: as we have sworn both of us in the name of the Lord,
saying, The Lord be between me and thee, and between my children and
thy children forever."

And David went away to hide from Saul, and Jonathan went back to the
king's house.

For seven years Saul hunted for David to take his life, and David,
often hiding in caves in the wilderness, could not see his friend
Jonathan, but they were faithful in their friendship, and when at last
Saul was slain in battle, and Jonathan also, David came to mourn over
his friend, saying:

"I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan: very pleasant hast thou
been unto me; thy love for me was wonderful, passing the love of women."




CHAPTER XXII.

DAVID THE OUTCAST.

For seven years King Saul hunted David from one end of the land of
Israel to the other.  The evil spirit of jealousy and hate had full
possession of him, and David, with a few faithful men, was driven from
one stronghold to another, until he cried, "They gather themselves
together; they hide themselves; they mark my steps when they wait for
my soul.  What time I am afraid I will trust in thee."

He had escaped again and again from the hand of Saul, and now he was
down in the desert country by the Dead Sea, hiding among the cliffs and
caves of Engedi.  Saul heard of it and took three thousand men to hunt
for him among the rocks of the wild goats.  He was very tired after
climbing the rocks, and seeing a cave, he went in to lie down for a
little sleep.  He did not know that David and his men were in the cave
hiding in the dark sides of it.  Then his men whispered to David:

"Behold the day of which the Lord said unto thee: 'I will deliver thine
enemy into thine hand that thou mayest do to him as it shall seem good
to thee.'"  Then David arose and crept near to Saul, and--did he kill
the man who had so often tried to kill him?

No, he bent down and cut off a part of Saul's robe.  Even this seemed
wrong to David.

[Illustration: The garment of Saul]

"The Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my master," he said
"to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the anointed of the
Lord," and in this way he kept his servants from harming Saul, and
after Saul awoke he went out of the cave.

David also went out of the cave and cried,

"My Lord the King!"

And when Saul turned David bowed down to him and asked him why he
listened to men who said that he wished to harm the king, and then he
told him how the Lord had given him into his hand in the cave, but he
would not touch the Lord's anointed to harm him.

"See, my father," he cried "see the skirt of thy robe in my hand.  I
have not sinned against thee, yet thou huntest my soul to take it."

Much more he said, and asked the Lord to judge between them, and Saul's
hard heart was moved so that he wept aloud.

"Is this thy voice, my son David," he said, "Thou art more righteous
than I, for thou hast rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee
evil," and he made a covenant with David.  For though he made no
promise to spare David's life, he made David promise to spare the life
of his children when he should be made king.

But a year was hardly past before the evil spirit was again upon Saul,
and he went out with three thousand men to hunt for David.  Saul's camp
was on a hill, and David saw where it was.  At night he took Abishai,
one of his warriors, and went down from the cliffs to Saul's camp,
where Saul lay sleeping in a trench, and the spear stuck in the ground
by his pillow, while all his men lay around him.  Abishai wished to
strike him through with the spear, but David said,

"Destroy him not, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's
anointed and be guiltless?  The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall
come to die, or he shall fall in battle and perish; but take thou now
the spear that is at his pillow, and the cruse of water, and let us go."

And they took them and went away.  A deep sleep had fallen upon the
camp of Saul from the Lord, so that no one saw them.

Then David went up to his stronghold, and from the top of the cliff he
cried to Abner, the captain of Saul's men, and asked why he had not
defended his Master, and where was the king's spear, and his cruse of
water?

Then Saul cried as before,

"Is this thy voice, my son David?"

"It is my voice, my lord, O King," said David, and again he plead his
cause with his old enemy, but who could trust to the repentance of
Saul?  He cried,

"I have sinned; return, my son David, for I will no more do thee harm,
because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day.  I have played the
fool, and erred exceedingly."

But David trusted him no more, and went and made friends with a
Philistine prince that he might live within their borders.

Samuel the prophet was dead, and there was no one to give counsel to
the darkened soul of the King when trouble fell upon him.  The
Philistines had come with a great army, but Saul was afraid, for the
Lord's spirit was not with him.  He tried to seek the Lord through the
priests, and through dreams, but the Lord answered him not.  Then he
went to a witch by night, and asked her to bring up the spirit of
Samuel.  The witch could not bring up Samuel, but the Lord sent him to
speak to Saul, and the woman cried out with terror when she saw the
prophet of the Lord, and knew also that it was the King who had called
for him.

"I am sore distressed," said Saul, "and God is departed from me.  What
shall I do?"

Then Samuel told him plainly that the kingdom was taken from him and
given to David, and that on the next day he and his sons should fall in
battle, and the Israelites into the hands of the Philistines.

Saul, forsaken and despairing, fell to the earth fainting, but was
revived by the woman, who gave him food so that he went away through
the dark to the camp of Israel.

In the battle of the next day the Philistines conquered.  The three
sons of Saul were slain, and Saul himself, when chased by the
Philistines, fell upon his own sword and died.

When a messenger brought news of the battle to David he rent his
clothes for grief, and in the chant of lamentation that he made, he
mourned for his faithful friend Jonathan, and had no word of blame for
his enemy Saul, neither did he triumph over him.




CHAPTER XXIII.

EVERY INCH A KING.

After Saul's death David came back to live with his own people, for he
was of the tribe of Judah.  He went to Hebron, the old home of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, for the Lord had told him to go there, and the men of
his tribe came to Hebron and anointed him king.  The other tribes did
not come, for Saul's son and the captain of his host, Abner, were still
holding the kingdom.  But when both were killed by an enemy, then all
the other tribes came to Hebron and made a league with him, so seven
years after Saul's death David became king over all Israel.  He was
then thirty years old and his reign lasted forty years.

Then David began to establish the kingdom.  There was a rocky height
not far from Hebron with a valley all around it that was still held by
the Jebusites, one of the tribes of Canaan that the Lord said must not
be left in the land.  The city was Jerusalem, and the stronghold was
Zion, and close by Zion was the mount to which Abraham had once gone to
offer up Isaac.  David wanted this stronghold for the chief city of the
kingdom, and so he took it, and it became the city of David.  He built
a beautiful house for himself there, and King Hiram of Tyre sent
skilled workmen, and cedar trees, and they built a house of cedar for
him.  But stronger than the wish to have a house for himself was the
longing to see the Ark of God set within the curtains of the Tabernacle
in the city of David.  It had been in the house of Abinadab in
Kirjath-Jearim for seventy years, ever since it was sent home by the
Philistines who captured it.  Because the people had grown cold toward
God, they did not wish to hear the reading of the law, or be led by his
counsel.  Now David called together the flower of all Israel, thirty
thousand men, and they went to bring the Ark to the city of David.
While on the way a man who had laid his hand upon the Ark when it was
unsteady was smitten and died, for no one but the priests and Levites
could touch the Ark of God.  David feared to bring it further, and so
he placed it in the house of Obededom which was near by.  It was there
three months, and great blessing came to the house because of it.  When
David heard this he went joyfully down to bring the Ark to his city,
and it was with sacrifices, and shouting, and the sound of trumpet that
it was brought and set in the Tabernacle that had been made ready for
it.  And so the worship of the Lord was established in Jerusalem, which
was to be the great altar for the sacrificial worship until the
sacrifice should be taken away, and the kingdom of Christ established
on the earth.

But David was not satisfied.

"See," he said to Nathan the prophet, "I dwell in a house of cedar, but
the Ark of God dwelleth within curtains."

That night the Lord spoke to Nathan and told him what to say to the
king.  He promised to establish the royal house of David, and give
final peace to the people, and also to build a house for the worship of
the Lord, but he said that David's son, who should be king after him,
should build a house to his name, and of him the Lord said, "I will be
his Father, and he shall be my son."

Then King David went in to the Tabernacle and thanked the Lord for His
promise to him and to his son, and asked His blessing upon them.
Though he reigned forty years, he never forgot that his work was not to
build the temple of the Lord, but to prepare for it.  So he subdued
enemies, built cities, made leagues with friendly nations, gathered
much wealth of wood, and stone, and gold, and silver and precious
stones for the house of the Lord, and trained choirs of singers for the
service.  He also kept his heart open toward the Lord, so that he was
able to write some wonderful poems that were set to music and sung by
the temple choirs.  We call them the Psalms of David.

Though David had grown rich and great, he did not forget his promise to
Jonathan.  He called Ziba, who had been Saul's servant and said to him,

"Is there not yet any of the house of Saul that I may show the kindness
of God to him?"

Then Ziba told him of a man who was lame in both his feet, who was the
son of Jonathan.  David sent for him, and gave him all the land of
Saul, and a place was made for him at the king's table among his own
sons, and it was his while he lived.




CHAPTER XXIV.

DAVID'S SIN.

The army of Israel was at war with the Ammonites, and Joab was the
chief captain.  David did not go out with the army, but stayed in his
house in Jerusalem.  One evening he was walking on the flat roof of his
house, as the people of that country always do, and he saw a little way
off a very beautiful woman.  He sent a servant to ask who she was, and
found she was the wife of Uriah who was in the army with Joab, fighting
the Ammonites.  Then a great temptation was set before David, and
instead of going to the Lord to be saved from it, he sent to Joab,
asking him to send him Uriah, the Hittite.  So Uriah came, and David
talked kindly with him, and found him a good and faithful man.  When he
went back to Joab he took a letter from David, who asked that he be set
in the front of the battle.  So Joab placed him there, and when the two
armies met Uriah was killed, and Joab sent a messenger to tell David.
After her mourning was ended, Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah, became the
wife of David, but the Lord was displeased with David.  He also knew
David's heart and how to deal with him, so he sent Nathan the prophet
to him.

"There were two men in one city," said Nathan, "one of them rich and
the other poor.  The rich man had many flocks and herds, but the poor
man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and
nourished up; and it grew together with him and with his children: it
did eat of his own meat and drink of his own cup, and lay in his bosom
and was unto him as a daughter.  And there came a traveller unto the
rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock to dress for the
wayfaring man that was come to him, but took the poor man's lamb and
dressed it for the man that was come to him."

David was very angry at the man who could do such a cruel thing, and he
said to Nathan,

"The man that hath done this thing shall surely die; and he shall
restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he
had no pity."

Then Nathan said to David, "Thou art the man," and he told him how
greatly the Lord had blessed him in making him King over Israel, and in
delivering him from the hand of Saul, and how he had slain a faithful
servant and taken his wife for himself; therefore evil would befall him.

David said, "I have sinned against the Lord," and the Lord saw that his
repentance was real, and forgave the sin, but that David might never
forget and sin again, the Lord took the little child that was born to
him and to Bathsheba.  While it was sick David fasted and lay all night
upon the earth, and would not rise to taste food.  This he did for
seven days while the little child was sick, but when they told him that
his child was dead he arose and bathed and dressed himself and went to
the house of the Lord to worship, and returned to take his food.  Then
his servants wondered at it, and replied,

"While the child was yet alive I fasted and wept, for I said, who can
tell whether God will be gracious unto me that the child may live.  But
now he is dead, wherefore should I fast?  Can I bring him back again?
I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me."

After this another child was born to Bathsheba, and they named him
Solomon, which means "Peaceable."

And David wrote a prayer of repentance for his sin.  It is the
fifty-first Psalm, and has been the prayer of penitent souls for nearly
three thousand years.




CHAPTER XXV.

DAVID'S SORROW.

David had a very beautiful son named Absalom.  From the crown of his
head to the soles of his feet there was no fault to be seen in him.
His hair was thick and long, and his beauty was much talked of through
all Israel.  But the Lord who looks upon the heart saw that the heart
of Absalom was wicked and false.  He killed his brother Amnon, and then
fled to another country and stayed three years.  When he returned he
tried to see his father, but David would not see him for two years.
Then Absalom forced Joab to bring him to the king's house by setting
Joab's barley field on fire.  He was false as well as handsome, and won
his father's heart by pretending to be humble.

After this Absalom began to live more like a king than a prince.  He
had fifty men to run before his chariot when he rode, and he stood in
the city gates and talked with the men who came to see the king about
their rights.  He told them that if he were ruler over the land every
man should have all that he wanted, and deceived many by a false show
of friendship.

Then he asked the king if he could go to Hebron to pay a vow to the
Lord by offering sacrifice there, and David told him to go in peace,
and he went.  But he had cruelly deceived his father.  He had sent
spies through all the land to persuade them to join him at Hebron and
make him king.  He also took two hundred men out of Jerusalem to help
him, and one of them was David's counsellor.  They had arranged to have
all the people, as soon as they heard anywhere the sound of the
trumpet, to cry,

"Absalom is king in Hebron."

Then it came to the ears of David that his people had been led away by
deceit to follow Absalom, and David, who had been fearless before
Goliath and before great armies of other nations, was afraid.  His
heart was broken at the treachery of his son, and he said to his
servants,

"Arise, and let us flee; make haste and go, for fear Absalom may come
and fight against the city with the sword."

His servants were ready to fight for him, but he fled in haste over the
brook Kedron and went toward the wilderness, with all of the people of
the city with him, until there was a great multitude, and in the midst
the priests and the Levites bearing the Ark of God, but when David saw
this he said,

"Carry back the Ark of God into the city.  If I shall find favor in the
eyes of the Lord He will bring me again.  Let Him do to me as seemeth
good to Him."

So the priests and the Levites returned to the city with the Ark of God.

It was a sad procession that went over the Mount of Olives led by
David, weeping as he went, with his head covered and his feet bare.
Some enemies of the house of Saul came out and troubled him by the way,
but there was no anger in the heart of David toward any.  He believed
the hand of the Lord was upon him, and he said,

"It may be the Lord will look on mine affliction."

Absalom came to Jerusalem, and while he was asking his chief counsellor
what to do, he was persuaded by a friend of David, who had stayed
behind, to wait until he had gathered a larger army before he followed
after David.  This gave him time to send word to David to cross over
Jordan before Absalom should overtake him.  The chief counsellor, when
he saw that his advice was not followed, went to his own house and
hanged himself, for he knew that the Lord was bringing his counsel to
naught.

After David had passed over into Gilead the people of that land brought
food, and dishes, and beds to the sorrowful king and his tired people,
and they were cared for in the city of Mahanaim.  Then Joab, the
captain, gathered the men together to go and meet Absalom and his army,
and as they passed out of the city David stood in the gate and charged
all the captains as they passed, saying

"Deal gently, for my sake, with the young man, even with Absalom."

So they went out to battle, and it was in a wood.  God had given
David's army the victory, and twenty thousand men of Absalom's army
were slain.  Absalom, who rode on a mule, was caught by his long thick
hair in the branches of an oak tree, and the mule went away and left
him hanging there.

A man ran and told Joab that he had seen Absalom hanging in an oak.

"Why didst thou not smite him there?" said Joab.

The man said he would not have done it for a thousand shekels of
silver, because David had charged them all not to touch the young man
Absalom.

But Joab turned away, and when he had found Absalom in the oak, he,
with the ten young men who were with him, killed Absalom, and they
buried him in the wood.

[Illustration: The death of Absalom]

Then Joab sent two messengers to carry news of the victory to the king,
who sat between the city gates, while a watchman stood over the gates
on the city wall.  When the watchmen saw the two men running, one after
the other, he cried out and told the king.  The first man cried as he
came, "All is well," but when the king said, "Is the young man Absalom
safe?" he could not answer, and when the second messenger cried,
"Tidings, my lord, the king," again David asked,

"Is the young man Absalom safe?"

"The enemies of my lord the king and all that rise against thee to do
thee hurt be as that young man," said the messenger.

Then the king went up to the room over the city gate and wept, and as
he went he cried,

"O my son Absalom! my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died for
thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!"

[Illustration: David mourning for Absalom]

The people who had come back joyful because the enemy had been
conquered were distressed by the grief of the king, so that Joab
persuaded David to come down to the gate and meet the people.

After this those who were left of the followers of Absalom begged the
king to come back to Jerusalem, and so he came, and thousands came to
meet him.  He had only forgiving words for those who had injured him,
and for Barzillai and the men of Gilead who had fed them and shown them
great kindness in the darkest hour of the king's life, and who came a
little way on the journey with them, he had grateful words and
blessings.

And so the king came to his own again.  He was now getting to be an old
man, and the love of his people made his last days blessed.

His warriors said, "Thou shalt go no more out with us to battle, that
thou quench not the light of Israel."

Once he sinned against the Lord by numbering his people.  He wanted to
know how many men in his kingdom could bear arms in battle, and he
forgot that victory over the enemy was not with the many or the few,
but with the Lord, who is the strength of his people.  When he saw that
he had done wrong he confessed it and begged for forgiveness, but a
pestilence spread over all the land, and came near to Jerusalem, and
the angel was stayed by the Lord's hand just over the threshing floor
of Araunah.  This was the broad flat top of Mount Moriah where long
before Abraham had built an altar on which to offer Isaac.

When David saw the angel he said,

"I have done wickedly, but these sheep, what have they done?  Let Thine
hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my father's house."

Then the prophet Gad said, "Go up, rear an altar to the Lord in the
threshing-floor of Araunah," and David went as the Lord commanded.

When they reached the mount Araunah offered David the piece of ground
with the oxen for a sacrifice, but he would not take them as a gift.

"But I will surely buy it of thee at a price," said David, "neither
will I offer burnt offerings to the Lord my God of that which doth cost
me nothing."

So he bought the piece of ground and paid for it six hundred shekels of
gold.  Twice had the Lord blessed this spot with a miracle of
salvation, and twice an altar had been built there, and looking upon
it, David said,

"This is the house of the Lord God, and this is the altar of burnt
offering for Israel," and he prepared to build there the temple of
Solomon,--the altar of the world.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE BUILDING OF THE GOLDEN HOUSE.

The time was near when David must leave his people and go to his God,
and his chief thought was about the house of the Lord that he had
longed to build, that the Ark of God might be at rest, and that the
people might have a place of worship for all time to come.  He knew
that his son Solomon was to build the temple, but he was still young,
and David made ready as far as he could for the building of the house.
There were men at work in the quarries, cutting great stones, and there
were men in the forests of Lebanon cutting and hewing cedars, and
others gathering iron and brass, and gold, and silver for the treasury
of David.  He also spent much time dividing the sons of Levi into
companies, so that they could in turn serve with the priests in the
temple, and ordering the times and manner of service, for he believed
that this temple would be a house of prayer for all nations.  David had
been a man of war, for he had been called to destroy idol worship in
the land of Canaan, and to make it the land of Israel, in which the one
true God should be worshipped forever, but Solomon's reign was to be
one of peace, and the Lord chose a man of peace to build his house.

David had another son, Adonijah, who tried to make himself king as
Absalom did, but David heard of it, and had Solomon proclaimed king
before his own death, lest trouble should arise after.  When Adonijah
heard the shouts of the people, and the sound of the trumpets he was
afraid, and expected Solomon would kill him, but Solomon said if he
would only show himself a good man no harm should come to him.

The last things that David did were to call his princes and chief men
together and tell them that the Lord had promised many years before,
that Solomon should build the house of the Lord during his reign; and
also that his children's children should rule over Israel, and he
begged them to keep the Lord's commandments, that they might keep the
good land that had been given them.

He also charged Solomon before them all to serve God with all his
heart, but if he failed to do so he would be cast off forever.

David gave Solomon all the plans and patterns for the house of the
Lord, as the Lord had given them to him; also the gold and silver
stored up for time of building.  He also told the people, when he had
called them together, what he had stored for the work of the temple,
and asked them who were willing to give also.  Then the people brought
gifts, as they did when the Tabernacle was built, and gave them to the
Lord.  David led them in a great thanksgiving service, and they offered
three thousand sacrifices.

Solomon was again anointed king in the presence of all Israel, and took
the throne of David; and David died, honored and loved by his people,
and he was buried in his own city.

When Solomon went to Gibeon to sacrifice the Lord came to him in a
dream and said,

"Ask what I shall give thee."

Solomon was wiser than all the sons of David, and yet he did not feel
himself to be so.  He said,

"I am but a little child; I know not how to go out or come in, and thy
servant is in the midst of a great people that cannot be numbered.
Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people,
that I may discern between good and bad, for who is able to judge this
thy so great a people."

And the Lord said,

"Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself
long life, neither riches, nor the life of thine enemies, lo, I have
given thee a wise and understanding heart, and I have also given thee
that which thou hast not asked--both riches and honor; and if thou wilt
walk in my ways as thy father David did, then I will lengthen thy days."

The Lord was true to his word.  Solomon had wisdom, beyond all the old
and the learned men of his kingdom, and many came to him for counsel
who were not of Israel, for he was famous among the nations.  Some of
these nations wished to be ruled by him, and brought him many precious
things as gifts; they had been conquered by David, and now they wished
to be ruled by Solomon.  He had thousands of servants and he knew how
to direct their work.  Away up in the mountains of Lebanon they worked
with the servants of Hiram, King of Tyre, getting the cedar timbers
ready for the temple, while Hiram's artisans in gold, and silver, and
brass, and fine linen came to Jerusalem to work on the temple, and
Solomon sent Hiram wheat, and olive oil, and wine.  So wise were the
workers in stone and wood that when the temple was built there was no
sound of a hammer or any tool heard on Mount Moriah.  Each stone was
ready to fit into its place, and each piece of wood to fit another.

The house was not like any that we have ever seen.  It was not large,
but it was very precious.  The cedar boards that lined the walls were
carved in flower patterns, and covered with gold.  The floor also was
covered with gold.  He divided the temple in two parts, as the
Tabernacle had been, with a rich curtain of blue and purple and
crimson.  The innermost room was called the most holy place, and was
for the Ark, and its walls were beautiful with cherubim, and palm
trees, and flowers, overlaid with gold, as was the floor also.  Within
this most holy place stood two cherubim fifteen feet high.  They were
of olive wood covered with gold, and they stood with wings spread forth
so that they touched each other, and also touched the wall on either
side, and their wings overshadowed the mercy seat where the Ark of the
Lord was to rest.  All the carvings upon wood were covered with gold,
and precious stones were set among them for light and beauty.

Solomon's workmen made two great pillars of brass to stand before the
house, and a great brass altar for the burnt offerings.  They also made
ten basins of brass that were set upon wheels, and one very great one
called the "sea" which stood on twelve brass oxen.

They also made many things for the use of the temple--candlesticks, and
spoons, and censers all of pure gold, and there was also a golden altar
and a golden table.

Solomon was seven years building the house of the Lord, and when it was
finished, and its outer courts made ready, he called all the elders and
chief men of Israel together to carry the Ark of God to its place.  So
the Ark, borne by the priests, and holding the tables of the law, was
carried into the most holy place, and set under the wings of the
cherubim.  After the priests came out a cloud filled the house of the
Lord so that the priests could not go in.  It was the glory of the
presence of the Lord.

Then Solomon stood before all the people and gave thanks to God and
asked him to take the temple for his own house to dwell in, and
kneeling down, he prayed that wherever the children of Israel might be,
at home, or captives in a strange land, that the Lord would hear them
when they prayed toward his house, and that all prayer offered in it
might be heard and answered

Then fire from heaven fell upon the great altar, and the sacrifice was
consumed, and all over the great pavement of the court the people bowed
and worshipped the Lord, saying, "For He is good, and His mercy
endureth forever."

There were offerings and feasting for fourteen days, and then the
people went to their homes to think of the wonderful things they had
seen.  And there were sacrifices offered morning and evening each day,
on the Sabbath, and at the three great feasts of the year--the feast of
the passover, the feast of the harvest, and the feast of tabernacles.

Solomon also built a wonderful house for himself, and another called
the "house of the forest of Lebanon," where he kept his armor.  The
roof was upheld by cedars of Lebanon, standing like mighty pillars
beneath it.  So famous did his work and his wisdom become that a queen
from a distant land called Sheba came to visit him.  She came with a
caravan of servants and camels bringing costly presents of spices, and
gold, and precious stones.  She asked him many things that she had
longed to know, and he answered all her questions, and told her strange
and wonderful things, so that after she had seen all his palace, and
his servants, and the service of his table, and the beautiful ascent by
which he went up to the temple, she said that the half had never been
told her in her own country.  They exchanged costly presents, and she
went back to her own land.

[Illustration: The Queen of Sheba before Solomon]

Solomon had many ships upon the sea that brought riches from every land
He learned much of the world in this way, and as he grew older and from
his throne of gold and ivory judged his people, he dropped many wise
sayings that were written in a book by the scribes and are now called
the "Proverbs of Solomon."

But in Solomon's latter days his wives, who were daughters of heathen
kings, turned his heart from the Lord.  When his father sinned he
repented at once, and his heart never turned to idols, but with all his
wisdom, Solomon was weak of will, and built temples for his wives to
worship idols in.

The Lord had made a promise to David that his sons should inherit the
throne, and He kept the promise, but he allowed the kingdom to be
divided.  The two tribes who lived near to Jerusalem--Judah and
Benjamin--were left to Solomon's son Rehoboam, but the ten tribes chose
a man named Jeroboam to be their king.  The men of Rehoboam, led by
their king, went out to fight with the ten tribes, but the Lord would
not let them.  He spoke to them through a prophet and they went home.

So now there were two kings in Israel, and Rehoboam's kingdom was
called the kingdom of Judah, and that of Jeroboam was called the
kingdom of Israel; but after the kingdom was divided no kings ever
reigned who could be compared with David and Solomon.




CHAPTER XXVII.

ELIJAH THE GREAT HEART OF ISRAEL.

During the reign of Jehoshaphat, fourth king of Judah, and Ahab, sixth
king of Israel, after the division of the kingdom, there came out of
Gilead Elijah, a prophet of the Lord.  Two of the kings of Judah, and
all of the kings of Israel had been wicked men, and the Lord sent
Elijah to Ahab, king of Israel, to tell him that there should be no
rain for years in the land of Israel, and then only as Elijah should
ask for it.  Ahab was more wicked than the kings that reigned before
him, and had built a temple for the god Baal in Samaria.

Because he would seek to destroy Elijah, the Lord told His prophet to
go to the brook Cherith that ran into the Jordan, and there He would
take care of him.  "Thou shalt drink of the brook, and I have commanded
the ravens to feed thee there," said the Lord.

And so it was.  Morning and evening the ravens came bringing bread and
meat, and the brook brought him water out of the rock, but as there was
no rain, the brook at last dried up, and there was a great famine.

[Illustration: Ravens bringing food to Elijah]

Then Elijah was told to go to Zarephath, for a woman there had been
told to feed him, and he went at once.  As he came near the city gate
he saw a woman gathering sticks, and he asked her to bring him a cup of
water and a little bread.  She told him that she had but a handful of
meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse, and she was going to
bake it for herself and son, that they might eat it and die.

Then Elijah said, "Fear not; go and do as thou hast said, but make me
thereof a little cake first, and after that make for thee and thy son,
for thus saith the Lord God of Israel, 'The barrel of meal shall not
waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail until the day that the Lord
sendeth rain upon the earth.'"

She believed Elijah, and did as he commanded, and they ate for a whole
year, and the meal and the oil lasted all that time.

After this the woman's son grew very sick, so very sick that he
appeared to be dead, and the woman cried to the prophet in her distress,

"O thou man of God, art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance
and to slay my son?"

Then he said, "Give me thy son," and he took him up to his own room and
laid him upon his bed and prayed over him.  Then he stretched himself
upon the child three times and cried,

"O Lord my God, I pray Thee let this child's soul come unto him again!"

And God heard Elijah, and the soul of the child came to him again, and
he revived.

Then he gave the boy to his happy and grateful mother, saying, "See,
thy son liveth."

In the third year of the famine the Lord said to Elijah,

"Go, show thyself to Ahab, and I will send rain on the earth."

As Elijah went he met a good man named Obadiah, who was governor of the
king's house.  This man worshipped the Lord, and when Ahab's wicked
wife, Jezebel, tried to kill all the Lord's prophets he hid a hundred
of them in two caves and kept them alive with bread and water.  He was
seeking grass and water for the king's horses, and when he saw Elijah
he fell on his face and said,

"Art thou my Lord Elijah?"

"I am," said Elijah, "go, tell thy lord, 'Behold, Elijah is here.'"

Obadiah was in distress at this command, for he knew that the king
would kill Elijah if he found him, and he could not think that Elijah
would be brave enough to meet the king, or he thought perhaps the
spirit of the Lord would carry him away, and he alone would have to
meet the anger of the king.

"As the Lord of hosts liveth," said Elijah, "I will surely show myself
unto him to-day."

So Obadiah told Ahab, and Ahab went to meet Elijah, and said to him,

"Art thou he that troubleth Israel?"

"I have not troubled Israel," he said, "but thou and thy father's
house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and thou
hast followed Baalim."

Then he told Ahab to call all Israel to Mount Carmel which overlooks
the sea, and to bring there also the four hundred and fifty prophets of
Baal, and the four hundred prophets of the groves.

So the king called them together, and Elijah cried to the people,

"How long halt ye between two opinions?  If the Lord be God, follow
Him; but if Baal, follow him."

And the people, afraid of the king and his wicked wife, answered not a
word.

"I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord," said Elijah, "but
Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men."  And then he told the
people how it could be proven which was true--the God of Israel, or
Baal.

He told the prophets of Baal to make an altar and place wood and a
sacrifice upon it, and he also would do the same, and they should call
upon Baal, and he would call on the name of the Lord, and "the God that
answereth by fire, let him be God."

This the priests of Baal were willing to do, and they cried around
their altar from morning until night, "O Baal, hear us," but there was
no voice, and no answer by fire.

Elijah watched and waited, sometimes telling them that perhaps their
god was asleep, and could be waked; or that he had gone on a journey,
or was talking with somebody, and then they became wild and leaped upon
the altar and cut themselves with knives.

After many hours Elijah called the people to him, and he repaired a
broken altar of the Lord that stood there with twelve stones for the
twelve tribes of Israel, and made a trench all around it.  Then he
placed wood on the altar and told the people to pour four barrels of
water over the sacrifice.  This they did three times, and the water ran
down and filled the trench around the altar, and the people saw that
Elijah could not by any means make a fire there.

Then, as it was the hour of the evening sacrifice in the temple, Elijah
knelt by his altar with his face toward Jerusalem, and prayed to his
God that He would hear him, and show the people that they were called
from the worship of idols to the service of the living God.

What a wonderful sight was that, when fire fell from heaven and burnt
up the sacrifice, and the wood, and the altar, and even the water in
the trench around the altar!

And the people all fell on their faces at the sight, and cried,

"The Lord He is the God!  The Lord He is the God!"  Then Elijah told
them to take the prophets of Baal and destroy them, and they did so.

"There is a sound of abundance of rain!" said Elijah to the king, and
then he went to the very top of Carmel, and threw himself upon the
earth, hiding his face between his knees, while he sent his servant to
look toward the sea, and watch for the coming of the rain.

This the servant did seven times, each time coming to his master and
saying, "There is nothing," but the prophet told him to look seven
times more, and when he came back the seventh time he said,

"Behold, there ariseth a little cloud out of the sea like a man's hand."

Then he sent his servant to Ahab, saying,

"Prepare thy chariot and get thee down, that the rain stop thee not."

The little cloud grew to be a great one, and filled all the sky until
it was black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain.  And as
Ahab rode in his chariot, Elijah, who was strong with the spirit of the
Lord and glad for His great victory over sin, ran before the chariot to
the gates of the city.

Jezebel the queen was furious when she heard that the priests had been
destroyed.  She sent word to Elijah that he would be treated the same
way on the morrow, and so Elijah fled for his life, and leaving his
servant in Beer-Sheba on the southern border of Israel, he went a day's
journey into the wilderness.  There he sat down under a juniper tree,
and for the first time his heart grew weak within him.

"It is enough," he said, "Now, O Lord, take away my life, for am I not
better than my fathers."

Perhaps he was discouraged because he was tired and hungry, for he fell
asleep, and when he awoke it was because an angel touched him, saying,
"Arise and eat," and he looked, and there was a cake just baked on the
hot coals, and a bottle of water close beside him.  So he ate and
drank, but he was not yet rested, and he fell asleep again.  The angel
waked him the second time telling him to eat and drink, for the journey
was too great for him.  Then he ate and drank again, and went on the
strength of that food forty days and forty nights, till he came to
Horeb, the mount of God, where the Ten Commandments were given to
Moses, and there he lodged in a cave.  He was still gloomy and
discouraged, and when the Lord said, "What doest thou here, Elijah?" he
said,

"I have been very jealous for the Lord God of hosts, for the children
of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and
slain thy prophets with the sword, and I, even I only am left, and they
seek my life to take it."

[Illustration: Elijah and the angel]

Then the Lord told him to go out and stand on the mount before the
Lord, and he passed by.  There was a great wind that split the
mountains, and broke the great rocks, but the Lord was not in the wind,
and after the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the
earthquake; and after the earthquake a fire, but the Lord was not in
the fire; and after the fire a still, small voice.

When Elijah heard that, he wrapped his face in his mantle and stood at
the door of the cave, and the Lord asked again, "What doest thou here,
Elijah?" and Elijah answered him just as he did before.

Then the Lord told him to go back and anoint a new king over Syria,
also a new king over Israel, and Elisha to be prophet in his place.

Elijah went, and he found Elisha ploughing with twelve yoke of oxen.
He cast his mantle over Elisha, and Elisha followed him and became his
servant.

When Elijah came back to his own country he found there had been war
between Israel and Syria, and Ahab had grown hard of heart again.  He
and his wicked wife Jezebel had taken the vineyard of Naboth away from
him because Ahab wanted it for a garden, and they had caused the death
of Naboth, so when Elijah came he found Ahab in the vineyard, and said,

"Hast thou killed and also taken possession?" and he told him that he
should die where Naboth died.

"Hast thou found me, O mine enemy!" cried the king.

"I have found thee," answered Elijah, and he spoke to him the word of
the Lord, that he should be destroyed out of Israel with his whole
family.

Then Ahab repented, and the Lord spared his life two years, but later
his wife Jezebel came to a dreadful end, with the seventy sons of Ahab.

When the time came for the Lord to take his servant to himself, Elijah
wished to be alone, but Elisha his servant would not leave him.  He
followed his master from one town to another until they came to the
river Jordan.  Then Elijah took off his mantle, and folding it, struck
the waters and they were divided, so that they went over on dry ground.
Then Elijah said, "Ask what I shall do for thee," and Elisha prayed
that a double portion of his Master's spirit might rest upon him.

"If thou see me when I am taken from thee it shall be so unto thee," he
said, "but if not, it shall not be so."

And as they went there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire,
parting them from each other, and Elijah went up in a whirlwind to
heaven.  Now Elisha wished his master to know that he saw him, so he
cried,

"My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!"
and he saw him no more.

[Illustration: Elijah and the chariot of fire]

Then he took Elijah's mantle that fell from him, and struck the waters
of Jordan again, and they parted, and he went over, and he knew that
the power of the old prophet's spirit had been given to him.

Fifty young men, sons of the prophets, saw him return, and they said,

"The spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha," and they bowed themselves
to the ground before him.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE LITTLE CHAMBER ON THE WALL.

Elisha did many wonderful things in the strength of the spirit that
Elijah's God gave him.  He changed the waters of Jericho, so that they
were no longer poisonous, by casting salt in the spring.

He brought water for the thirsty armies of three kings who had gathered
to battle, by telling them to dig ditches in a valley of Edom, and
watch for the water to come, without wind or rain.  When the morning
dawned the valley was full of running water.

He helped a poor widow to pay a debt and take care of her two sons by
telling her to borrow empty pots and pans of all her neighbors, and
pour into them her one little pot of oil.  The oil increased until all
the pots and pans were full, and she had plenty to sell.

He saved the sons of the prophets from death by casting meal into the
pot when a poisonous nut had been mingled with the food, and he fed a
hundred people with the bread that was brought as a portion for himself.

But the most beautiful story in the life of Elisha is that of the
Shun-amite mother and her son.  The mother was a noble lady of Shun-em,
who believed in God, and in the good man who passed her house so often,
and she said to her husband,

"Let us make for him a little chamber on the wall."  And so they did,
and when Elisha came again he lodged there.  He was grateful to these
kind people, and asked the woman what he should do for her--if she
would ask anything of the king, but she only said,

"I dwell among mine own people."

Then the prophet, knowing that she had no child, promised that she
should have a son, and though it was hard to believe, the little son
was sent to her, and she was very happy.  But one day when he went out
in the field where his father and his men were reaping, he cried out,
"My head, my head!" and they carried him in to his mother.  She held
him in her arms until noon, and then he died and she laid him in the
prophet's chamber.  Perhaps the heat of the harvest time had been too
great for one so young.  Did the mother cry out and call her husband?
No, she called for a servant and a donkey, and rode as fast as she
could to Mount Carmel where Elisha was.  His servant saw her coming,
and Elisha sent him to meet her and ask if it was well with her and her
husband and her child, and she said,

"It is well," though her heart was breaking.

"Did I ask a son of my lord?" she said as she came to Elisha and fell
at his feet.  Then he knew that the child was ill or dead, and he would
have sent his servant to lay his staff on the child, but the mother
cried,

"As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee,"
and he arose and followed her.

When he came to the Shun-amite's house he went into his little room
where the dead child lay upon his bed, and, shutting the door, prayed
to the Lord.  Then he stretched himself upon the child, and breathed
upon him until life began to creep back into the little cold body, and
when he had done this twice the child opened his eyes  Then Elisha
called the mother, and when she had fallen at his feet in grateful joy,
she took up her child and went out.

[Illustration: Elijah raises the widow's son]




CHAPTER XXIX.

A LITTLE MAID OF ISRAEL.

There was war almost all the time between Israel and Syria.  A band of
Syrians from Damascus would often come into a village of Israel and
take the people away for slaves.  One little girl who was carried off
by the Syrians became a slave in the house of a Syrian general called
Naaman, and was a maid to Naaman's wife.

Naaman was a great man, and beloved by all, but he had a disease that
could never be cured.  It was leprosy.  He could go about, but he could
not touch others without giving them the disease which turns the skin
white and dead, and finally eats the flesh away.

The little maid said to her mistress one day,

"Would God my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria! for he
would recover him of his leprosy."

When this was told to Naaman he talked with the king, who sent him to
the king of Israel with a letter, but the king of Israel was angry.

"Am I God to kill and make alive, that this man doth send unto me to
recover a man of his leprosy?" he cried, but when Elisha heard of it he
said,

"Let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in
Israel."

So Naaman came with his horses and chariot to Elisha's house, but the
prophet did not even come to the door, but sent his servant with this
message,

"Go wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee,
and thou shalt be clean."

But Naaman went away in a rage.  He expected Elisha to come out, and
that there would be a fine scene while he called on the name of God,
waved his hand over the leprous spots, and made a cure.

"Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the
waters of Israel?  May I not wash in them and be clean?" he said.

Then some of his servants came near to him and said,

"My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, wouldst
thou not have done it?  How much rather, then, when he saith to thee,
'Wash and be clean.'"

Then he went down and dipped himself seven times in Jordan, and his
flesh became like the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.

After this he, with all that were with him, went humbly back to Elisha
and said,

"Now I know that there is no God in all the earth but in Israel."  And
he urged the prophet to take gifts from him, but he would not.

But Naaman begged of Elisha two mule-loads of earth to take to his own
country.  He wanted to build an altar upon it to worship the God of
Israel, and he thought it must stand on the soil of Israel.

Did Naaman ever send the little maid of Israel to her home?  We do not
know, but surely he was kind to her in some way.




CHAPTER XXX.

THE TWO BOY KINGS.

There were many kings over Israel from the days of Solomon until the
time when they were carried away captives to Babylon.  The kingdom was
divided soon after Solomon's death, and a king reigned in Jerusalem
over the kingdom of Judah, and another in Samaria over the kingdom of
Israel.  There were a few kings who tried to follow that which was
right, but the most of them were men who were given to idolatry, and
who did not help the people to remember the true God.  The Lord sent
them prophets to remind them of Him, but they were often driven away or
ill treated.  There were a few good kings of Judah, such as Asa and
Jehoshaphat, and Hezekiah, and among them were two who became kings
when they were very young.

When Ahaziah, King of Judah, was killed, his mother, who was a wicked
woman, killed all his sons, that she herself might be queen.  All but a
baby boy who was hidden with his nurse in the temple, and tenderly
cared for by the good high priest and his wife for six years.  Then
when he was seven years old the priests and the Levites brought out
little Joash and anointed him king.  They formed a guard all about him,
and when the high priest had crowned him there was a great cry around
the temple of "God save the King."

The old queen heard this and came to see what it meant.  When she saw
the little Joash standing by a pillar with a crown on his head she
cried out that the people were plotting against her.

The people did by her as she had done by her grandsons--they took her
life.

Then there was great rejoicing.  The house of Baal was torn down, and
the Lord's gold and silver brought back to the temple, and the good
high priest began the worship of God in the temple after the manner of
former days.

When Joash was old enough to understand he longed to make the temple
beautiful again, for it was falling into decay, so he called for money
throughout his kingdom.  Everyone was asked to drop a silver piece in
the chest that was set at the temple door, and more than enough was
brought to re-build the temple, and while the high priest lived the
king worshipped there with all the princes of Judah, but as soon as he
died they went back to idol worship, and killed the new high priest in
the court of the temple because he told them that the Lord would bring
great trouble upon them.  And so it came to pass in less than a year
the Syrians came and killed the princes, and took away the gold and
silver treasures of the temple.  Joash himself became very sick, and
his own servants took his life as he lay helpless.

It was quite different with little Josiah.  He was only eight years old
when he was crowned King of Judah, and he had no one so good as the
high priest Jehoida, who was the teacher of Joash, to help him to do
right.  Even the holy writings that were given to Moses were lost, and
the people did not ask to hear them read.  But the Lord had not allowed
His word to be destroyed, and when Josiah was having the temple
repaired the high priest found the rolls of parchment on which the law
was written, and sent it to the king by a servant of the king who was a
writer.  Josiah was full of interest in the ancient book, and wished to
know what was in it, and his servant read it to him.

When he found that he and his people were not living as God had
commanded in the law, he sent to inquire of the Lord what He would have
them to do, and they went to Huldah, the prophetess.  She told the
king's messengers that a great calamity would fall upon the kingdom
because they had turned away from the true God, but because the king's
heart was tender and full of desire to follow the Lord, it should not
come during his lifetime.

Then the king called all the chief men of Judah, and the people of the
city, both great and small, with the priests and the Levites, to the
Lord's house, and there he read in their hearing the word of the Lord.
It was like a new book to the most of them, but they were ready to
follow the king in making a solemn promise to the Lord to do His
commandments, and bring back the true worship.

So they had a great feast of the passover, to which all the people came
with offerings, and there was no passover in all the history of the
kings of Judah and Israel that was like this one that was held in the
eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah.

After he had prepared the temple for worship, and had destroyed the
altars of the idols, he went out to meet the King of Egypt in battle
and was killed, and there was a great mourning for him in all the land,
for he had been a good king--kind to his people and faithful to his
God.  Jeremiah the prophet made a great lamentation for him, for he
knew that one of Josiah's sons would be the last king of Judah, and
that for their sins the people would be driven out of their own land to
be captives in Babylon for seventy years.




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE FOUR CAPTIVE CHILDREN.

Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, came with his armies and besieged
Jerusalem, just as Jeremiah the prophet had foretold.  He took the king
and the princes of Judah captive, and carried away their precious
things from the temple and the palaces into his own land, and put them
in the temples of his gods.  Before twenty years had passed the whole
nation had been driven into captivity, and their holy house had been
burned, and the ark of the covenant lost or destroyed.  As the kingdom
of Israel had also been scattered, the whole land lay desolate, and the
walls of the cities were broken down.

When the King of Babylon first besieged Jerusalem he carried away the
finest of the princely families to serve him.  They were the flower of
Jerusalem--young men of noble face and form; well taught in the
learning of the Jews, and skilfull in the sciences of that time.  They
were also chosen for their natural ability to learn the language and
the wisdom of the Chaldeans.

Among these were four boys named Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah.
The king gave these boys into the care of his chief officer, who set
teachers over them and treated them very kindly, while the king sent
them each day meat and wine from his own table.  The Chaldeans offered
these things to idols, and then ate of them themselves; they also used
some meats for food that were unclean to an Israelite, so that the four
children of Judah determined that they would not touch the king's meat
and drink.

Daniel spoke to the chief officer about it, and though he had learned
to love Daniel very much, he was afraid to have the boys refuse the
king's food.

"I fear my lord the king," he said, "who hath appointed your meat and
your drink, for why should he see your faces sadder than the children
which are of your sort?  Then shall ye make me endanger my head to the
king."

But Daniel turned to Melzar, the steward, and begged him to prove them
by giving them only vegetables to eat and water to drink for ten days,
and "Then," said he "let our countenances be looked upon before thee,
and the countenance of the children that eat of the portion of the
king's meat: and as thou seest, deal with thy servants."  And he proved
them for ten days.

At the end of that time their faces were fatter and fairer than the
faces of all the others who ate portions from the King's table, and
they were allowed to eat the food they had chosen.

They also grew in wisdom and judgment.  Daniel had the gift of
understanding visions and dreams, and the gift came from God, and not
from the study of magic.  Among all the young men these four were most
pleasing to the king, and they were called to the palace to stand
before him.

Not long after this the king had a dream that seemed very wonderful to
him, but he could not remember it.  He called all his magicians, and
astrologers, and wise men together, and told them that they must tell
him what his dream was, and the meaning of it, or he would destroy
them.  There was no man wise enough to tell him, and he ordered that
all the wise men of Babylon should be killed, Daniel and his friends
among them.

Daniel asked the captain of the king's guard why the king was so hasty
with his decree, and the captain told him.

Then Daniel went to the king and told him that if he would give him a
little time he would tell him his dream and its meaning, and he went to
his three friends and together they prayed the God of Heaven to show
them the dream and its interpretation.

That night Daniel saw in a vision from God the same thing that the king
had seen and had forgotten.  It was a great image standing before the
king, and shining like the sun.  The head was of pure gold, the breast
and arms of silver, and the rest of the body of brass; while the legs
were of iron, and the feet were part of iron and part of clay.  As he
looked a great stone cut from a mountain by unseen hands was hurled at
the image, striking its feet and breaking them.  Then the image fell
and broke into pieces so fine that the winds blew them away, but the
stone grew to be a great mountain that filled the earth.

Then Daniel gave thanks to God for showing him the dream, and went to
the king.

He told the king that the God of Heaven alone had revealed the dream,
for no man could know it, and he told him what the dream had been.  He
also told him that God had shown him the meaning; that the head of gold
was the king himself, who reigned over the greatest kingdom on earth,
but after him new kingdoms would rise, and the silver, the brass, the
iron and the clay stood for these; but in the days of the kingdom of
iron and clay the God of heaven would set up a kingdom which should
never be destroyed, but it would destroy all the kingdoms that had gone
before it.  This kingdom--the great stone cut without hands from the
mountain--meant the Kingdom of Christ.

The king was so astonished at Daniel's wisdom--for it was the dream he
had forgotten brought back and interpreted--that he fell on his face
before Daniel and reverenced the God of heaven.  He made Daniel chief
ruler in his realm and gave also great honors to his friends.

Nebuchadnezzar soon forgot God, for he set up a great golden image on
the plain of Dura, and called a feast of dedication.  He had all his
princes and governors there, and his captains, and judges, and rulers.
The musicians were there also, with many kinds of instruments, and a
herald was there who cried in a loud voice the command of the king.  It
was a call to worship the golden image.  At the first sound of the
bands of music all were to fall down before the golden image, or
failing to do so, be thrown into a fiery furnace.

Among the rulers were the three friends of Daniel, whose names had been
changed by the king to Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.  They did not
fall before the golden image, and some jealous Chaldeans who saw them
went and told the king.  Then the king, who had a fiery temper, was
angry, and sent for the three young men.  He told them the bands should
play again, and if they failed to worship the golden image they should
be cast into the furnace, "and who is that God that shall deliver you
out of my hands?" he asked.

"We are not careful to answer thee in this matter," they said, "If it
be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning
fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O king."

Then the king in a great rage called his mighty men to bind the young
men, and after the furnace was heated seven times hotter than before,
they were thrown in.  So great was the heat that the men who threw them
in were killed by it in the sight of the king.  As he watched the great
door of the furnace the king rose up and said,

"Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire?"

"True, O king," said his lords and captains.

[Illustration: In the fiery furnace]

Then the king with his eyes fixed upon the glowing door of the furnace
said,

"Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they
have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God."

Then he went near the door of the furnace and cried,

"Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of the most high God,
come forth and come hither!"

Then they came out before the king and all the people, who saw that the
fire had no power over their bodies, for no hair of their head was
burned, and no smell of fire was upon their garments.

Then the king was very humble, and acknowledged the God of heaven,
"because there is no other God" he said "that can deliver after this
sort."  And he promoted the young men to still higher places in his
kingdom.




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE MASTER OF THE MAGICIANS.

The Lord saw that the heart of Nebuchadnezzar was lifted up with pride
because he was king of a great people, and had conquered many weaker
nations.  He was proud of his royal city, Babylon.  The walls of
Babylon were sixty miles in length, and in them stood one hundred
brazen gates.  There were wonderful palaces, and statues, and bridges,
and gardens.  The river Euphrates ran through the city, and near the
king's palace was a hill covered with trees and flowering plants from
many lands, called the Hanging Gardens.

Babylon was built on a plain, but the king had these gardens made for
his wife, who had come from a country of hills.

The king was praised so much by the princes and rulers that he thought
only of his own power and riches, and became proud and cruel.  So the
Lord sent him a dream.  He saw a tree great and high, standing in the
midst of a wide plain.  It grew until it reached the heavens, and its
branches spread to the ends of the earth.  It was thick with green
leaves, and heavy with fruit; the birds lived in it, and the beasts lay
in its shadow, and all things living came to it for food.  Then he saw
an angel coming down from heaven crying,

"Hew down the tree, and cut off his branches; shake off his leaves, and
scatter his fruit; let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls
from his branches; nevertheless, leave the stump of his roots in the
earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the
field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be
with the beasts of the grass of the earth; let his heart be changed
from a man's, and let a beast's heart be given unto him, and let seven
times pass over him."

This dream was given that the king might be taught that the Lord alone
is King.

Daniel, named by the king Belteshazzar, was called to interpret the
dream, and the Lord gave him power to do it.

"The tree that thou sawest," said Daniel, "it is thou, O king, that art
grown and become strong; for thy greatness is grown and reacheth unto
heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth."

Then Daniel told the king that he must be driven from men to dwell with
the beasts of the field; to eat grass with the oxen, and be wet with
the dews of heaven, until he had learned that the Most High rules in
the kingdom of men, and gives to whosoever He will.  But as the roots
of the tree were left in the ground, so his kingdom should be preserved
for him until he had learned that the heavens do rule.

At the end of a year the king's heart had not been made humble, for as
he walked in his palace he said to himself:

"Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the
kingdom by the might of my power, and for the honor of my majesty?"

And while he yet spoke there fell a voice from heaven, saying:

"O, King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken; the kingdom is departed
from thee."

And within an hour the word of the Lord came true.  For seven years he
was without reason, and was an outcast from his kingdom.  But at the
end of that time his eyes were lifted to heaven and his reason
returned, and his kingdom was restored to him, for he had learned that
God alone is great, and "Those that walk in pride He is able to abase."

Belshazzar was the next king of Babylon.  He made a great feast, and a
thousand of his lords were bidden to sit around his tables in the great
hall of the palace.  While he drank the wine he thought of the holy
vessels of gold and silver that his father had brought out of the
Temple at Jerusalem, and he sent for them, and into these golden bowls
that had been consecrated to the worship of God he poured wine and gave
it to his princes and to his wives, while they praised the gods of
gold, and silver, and wood, and stone.

While they were feasting, and laughing, and singing, there came a man's
hand and wrote some strange words on the wall of the great hall where
they sat.  The king saw the hand as it wrote, and he was so much afraid
that he trembled and grew very weak.  He called for his wise men and
they could not read the writing, but the queen remembered that in the
time of Nebuchadnezzar there was a man whom he made master of the
magicians because he had power to interpret dreams and make all
doubtful things clear.

[Illustration: The handwriting on the wall]

So Daniel was brought before the king, and the king told him that if he
would read the writing on the wall he should be clothed royally and be
made the third ruler in the kingdom.

"Let thy gifts be to thyself," said Daniel, "and give thy rewards to
another, yet I will read the writing unto the king, and make known to
him the interpretation."

Then Daniel reminded the king of that which fell upon his father
Nebuchadnezzar, when he had grown proud and hard-hearted toward God and
men, and, though he knew all this, he also had lifted himself up
against the Lord of heaven, and had defiled the holy vessels of the
Temple by drinking from them to gods which could neither see or hear,
and because of this the message had been written on the wall.  And this
was the interpretation of the strange words,--

"God hath numbered thy kingdom and finished it.  Thou art weighed in
the balances, and art found wanting.  Thy kingdom is divided, and given
to the Medes and the Persians."

The king clothed Daniel in scarlet, and gave him a chain of gold, and
proclaimed him third ruler in the kingdom, but the same night
Belshazzar was slain, and Darius the Medean took the kingdom.

The new king set one hundred and twenty princes over the kingdom, and
over these he set three presidents, the first of which was Daniel.  The
king loved Daniel for the wise and good spirit that was in him, and
this stirred up jealousy in the hearts of the Babylonian princes, and
they watched Daniel to see if they could find something against him to
tell the king, but they could not, for he was faithful in all his work.

Then they agreed to plot against him, and they went to the king and
persuaded him to make a decree that whoever should ask any petition of
any god or man for thirty days, except of the king, he should be thrown
into the den of lions, and they asked the king to sign the decree, so
that it could not be changed, and he signed it.

When Daniel heard of the decree, and knew that the king had signed it,
he went into his own house, and to his chamber.  There the windows were
always open toward Jerusalem, and he kneeled down as he had done every
day since he was taken from his own land, and prayed to God with his
face toward the Temple in Jerusalem.  And the men who were plotting
against him watched him.

Then they hurried to the king, saying,

"That Daniel, which is of the captivity of Judah, regardeth not thee,
O, King, nor the decree that thou hast signed, but maketh his petition
three times a day."

The king was greatly disturbed at this, and set his heart on the
deliverance of Daniel, and labored till sunset to do it.  But his
princes said it could not be done, because, according to the law of the
Medes and the Persians, no decree made by the king could be changed.

So Daniel was condemned to be cast into the den of lions, but the king
said,

"Thy God, whom thou servest continually, he will deliver thee."

[Illustration: Daniel in the den of lions]

Then a stone was laid over the mouth of the den, and the king sealed it
with his own signet, and with that of his lords, that the purpose might
not be changed.

That was a long night for Darius the king.  He could neither eat nor
sleep, and he would hear no music, but very early in the morning he
went to the den of the lions and with a very sorrowful voice cried:

"O Daniel, servant of the living God! is thy God whom thou servest
continually able to deliver thee from the lions?"

Then up from the pit came a strong, cheery voice saying:

"O king, live forever!  My God hath sent his angel, and hath shut the
lions' mouths, that they have not hurt me."

Then there was joy in the king's heart and he had Daniel brought up out
of the den, and no hurt was found upon him, because he had believed in
God, but the men who had accused Daniel were cast into the lions' den
and destroyed.

Darius acknowledged the God of Daniel before all his kingdom, and
commanded the people to honor Him, so that Daniel and his people
suffered no more from their enemies during the reign of Darius.  After
the death of Darius, Cyrus was made king of Persia, and he also was
kind to Daniel.  The Lord gave him a tender heart toward the captives
of Judah who had been in his land for seventy years, so that he sent
them back into their own land and helped them to rebuild their city and
their Temple.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE STORY OF JONAH.

More than eight hundred years before the birth of Christ a prophet
named Jonah lived in the land of Israel.  He had given the Lord's
messages to his own people, and they had listened to them, and a part
of their country had been saved by obeying the Word of the Lord as it
was brought to them by Jonah.

But when the Lord wished to send Jonah to warn a great city in Assyria
to repent of their sins, he did not wish to go.  Nineveh was a very old
and a very great city.  It was built soon after the flood, but was
still at a high point of glory and wealth in the time of Jonah.

It was a heathen city, but God is the Father of all who live, and cares
for all His children, though they may not know or care for Him.

Perhaps Jonah was afraid, for the people were strong and warlike, and
they would not wish to hear about their wickedness.  So Jonah ran away
to the sea shore and took a ship from Joppa to go to Tarshish.  He had
not gone far from shore when a storm of wind rose, and the wind tossed
the ship on the great angry waves until it was very nearly wrecked.

The men were afraid, and each prayed to his God, and threw out the
goods they were carrying in order to make the ship lighter.

Where was Jonah?  He was below the decks asleep.  When the captain
found him he cried out,

"What meanest thou, O sleeper?  Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that
God will think upon us, that we perish not."

Then they began to wonder if the storm had not been sent upon them for
the wickedness of some one in the ship, and they cast lots to see who
it could be.  The lot fell upon Jonah.  Then they asked Jonah his name
and country, and of his journey.  He told them all about it.  Then the
men were more afraid, for they knew that he had tried to run away from
the Lord, and they said,

"What shall we do unto thee, that the sea may be calm unto us?"

"Take me up and cast me forth into the sea," he said, "so shall the sea
be calm unto you, for I know that for my sake this great tempest is
upon you."

It was not easy for the men, who were kind-hearted, to throw into the
sea a man so honest and so willing to die, so they rowed very hard, and
tried their best to reach the shore, but they could not.  So they
prayed to Jonah's God to forgive them, and then threw Jonah into the
sea.

But the Lord meant not only to teach Jonah a lesson, but to teach,
through Jonah, a lesson to His children who should live in the ages to
come.  He was to make him also a sign of the coming Christ.

When Jonah believed he was sinking down into the green depths of the
sea to die, a great fish, prepared by the Lord, opened his mouth and
took him in.  We cannot understand all the ways of God, but we know
that "nothing is impossible with God," and that he was able to keep his
servant alive even in such a strange place as this.

For three days and three nights he was kept in his living prison, and
was able to pray to God, and to know where he was.

"The waters compassed me about," he said, "even to the soul; the depth
closed me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head.  I went
down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars was about
me forever."

Then he praised and thanked God, for he knew that he meant to save him.
And when the Lord spoke to the fish, it threw Jonah out upon the dry
land.

[Illustration: Jonah thrown on the dry land]

The second time Jonah heard the voice of the Lord telling him to go to
Nineveh and preach the words that should be given him to say, and this
time he obeyed.

It was a long journey to Nineveh, and when Jonah reached it he found
that the city was so great that it would take three days to walk around
the walls.

The walls were a hundred feet high.  And so broad that three chariots
could be driven on them side by side.  The walls had fifteen hundred
towers, each two hundred feet high.  Inside the walls lived hundreds of
thousands of people, many of them rich merchants or princes and nobles
who lived in palaces, and thought only of their own pleasure and glory.
They had grown very selfish and wicked.

When Jonah had walked a day's journey into the city, he began to cry in
the streets the message God had given him,

"Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown!"

The people began to tremble and be afraid of the strange voice that
went up and down the long streets crying out these terrible words.
They began to believe in Jonah's God, and to repent.

They repented in the eastern way, by putting on a garment of coarse
sack-cloth, and sitting in ashes.  All did this, even to the king, who
took off his beautiful robes and sat down in ashes before the Lord.  He
also proclaimed a fast to all the people, and urged them to "turn every
one from their evil way."

When the Lord saw that they turned away from their sins, for He could
look into their hearts, and read all their thoughts, He was satisfied,
and said he would not destroy Nineveh.

But Jonah, who could not read the hearts of men, was not satisfied.  He
was very angry.  He wanted to have the Ninevites see that he was a true
prophet, for if no destruction came upon them he feared that they might
call him a false prophet.  So he complained to God, and said,

"Now, O Lord, take, I beseech Thee, my life from me, for it is better
to die than to live!"

The Lord's gentle word to Jonah was,

"Doest thou well to be angry?"

Jonah went outside the city walls, and made for himself a little house
of the branches of trees and waited to see if the city would be
destroyed.  It was very hot and Jonah was deeply troubled, and the
Lord, who is full of love and pity for His children, caused a gourd
vine with large leaves to spring up and grow over the dried branches of
the little house that sheltered Jonah, and he was very glad and
grateful.  But the Lord, who always looks upon the heart, saw that the
heart of Jonah was not yet wholly right, and the next morning he
allowed a worm to eat the gourd until it withered.  Then the sun beat
down upon Jonah's head until he fainted and wished to die, saying, as
he had said before,

"It is better for me to die than live!"

But the Lord was patient with him, and said,

"Doest thou well to be angry for the gourd?"

And Jonah replied ungraciously,

"I do well to be angry, even unto death."

Then the Lord in his love and pity answered,

"Thou hast had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast not labored,
neither madest it grow; which came up in a night and perished in a
night; and should not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are
more than six-score thousand persons that cannot discern between their
right hand and then left hand, and also much cattle?"

Jonah did not know all that was in the mind of the Lord, though he was
a prophet.  He did not know that he was one of the signs of the Lord's
first coming, for Jesus spoke of Jonah as a "sign," that as he was
three days and three nights within the great fish "so shall the Son of
man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth."




CHAPTER XXXIV.

ESTHER, THE QUEEN.

About five hundred years before Christ King Ahasuerus (Xerxes) reigned
over Persia.  In the third year of his reign he gave a royal feast to
all the princes and nobles of Persia and Medea, in Shushan, the royal
city.  It lasted one hundred and eighty days, and was very costly, for
the king wished to show the great men from all his provinces the riches
and glory of his kingdom and of his palace.

At the end of these days he made another feast to all who were in
Shushan, a feast of seven days, and which included great and small.
The palace garden was hung with awnings of white and green and violet,
fastened with cords and silver rings to pillars of marble.

Wine was given to the guests in golden cups as they sat on couches of
gold and silver, and the pavement of the court was of many colored
marbles.

In another part of the palace Vashti, the queen, also made a feast for
the women.

On the seventh day the king sent his seven chamberlains to bring Queen
Vashti before him, wearing her royal crown.  He wished to show to his
people and princes the beauty of the queen, for she was very fair to
look upon.

But the queen refused to obey the king's command, and he was angry.  He
asked the seven princes who stood next to him in the kingdom what he
should do, and what the laws of the Medes and Persians (which could not
be broken) would say in such a case.

The princes did not speak of any law, but one of them told the king
that the conduct of Vashti would do them great harm through all the
kingdom, for women hearing of the act of the queen, would despise and
disobey their husbands.  They advised, therefore, that a commandment
should go forth from the king and be written among the laws of the
Medes and Persians, that Vashti should no more come before the king,
and that her royal estate should be given to another better than she.

This pleased the king, and he did as Memucan, the prince, had advised,
and he sent letters into all parts of his empire to people of various
languages, that every man should rule in his own house.

Then the king's servants, the nobles, advised the king to send officers
to every part of his kingdom to find some one worthy to take the place
of Queen Vashti, and the plan pleased the king, and he did so.

There was in Shushan a Jew named Mordecai, who had been brought away
from Jerusalem with the captives when Nebuchadnezzar conquered the
city.  He had an adopted daughter named Hadassah.  This was her true
name, although the Persians called her Esther.  She was the daughter of
Mordecai's uncle, and when her father and mother died, Mordecai took
her for his own.  She was very beautiful, and as good as she was
beautiful, for Mordecai had taught her to be faithful to the true God,
though living among a strange people.

When Mordecai heard that the king was seeking for a maiden worthy to be
a queen through all his provinces, he brought Esther and placed her in
care of Hegai, who had the care of that part of the king's house where
the women lived.  Hegai was very kind to her, and gave her seven maids
to serve her, and the best place in the house for her own.

Mordecai had told Esther not to speak of her Jewish family, but every
day he walked before the court of the women's house to ask how she did
and what had become of her.

Out of all the maidens brought from the city and the kingdom Esther was
chosen by the king to be queen in the place of Vashti, and he placed
the royal crown upon her head, and proclaimed a great feast that he
called Esther's feast, when he gave gifts and made a holiday for all
the people to rest and be happy in all his provinces.

Mordecai sat daily at the king's gate, and once while there he heard of
a plot to kill the king by two of his chamberlains, and he sent word
secretly to Esther, and she told the king in Mordecai's name, so that
these two men were hanged, and the account of it was written in the
king's book of records.

About this time the king gave great honors to a man named Haman.  He
set him above all his princes, and when the king's servants who were at
his gate knew it they all bowed down and gave great honor to Haman,
whenever he passed, for the king had so commanded them; but Mordecai
would not bow to Haman.  When Haman saw this he was full of anger
toward Mordecai the Jew, and he made a wicked plan to destroy not only
Mordecai, but all his people.

So he came with wily ways and cunning speech to the king, saying,

"There is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the
people in all the provinces of thy kingdom, and their laws are diverse
from all people, neither keep they the king's laws, therefore it is not
for the king's profit to suffer them.  If it please the king let it be
written that they be destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand talents of
silver to the hands of those that have the charge of the business, to
bring it into the king's treasuries."

Then the king gave his ring to Haman as a sign that he would pledge his
word to do what he asked, and said,

"The silver is given to thee, the people also, to do with them as it
seemeth good to thee."

Then Haman had letters written and sealed with the king's seal ring,
saying to the rulers of every province in the kingdom that all Jews,
both young and old, throughout the kingdom, must be destroyed in one
day, and their goods, and money, and lands be taken for a prey, and the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month was set in which to destroy them.

After the messengers were sent out the king and Haman sat down to drink
wine, but the city was troubled.

Then Mordecai rent his clothes in sign of mourning, and went out into
the streets of the city clothed in sack-cloth uttering a loud and
bitter cry.  He cried even before the king's gate.

All through the kingdom there was great mourning among the Jews, and
they fasted and wept in sack-cloth and ashes.

When Esther heard that Mordecai was clothed in sack-cloth she was
deeply grieved, and sent some garments to clothe him, but he would not
receive them.  Then she sent for the king's chamberlain Hatach, and
gave him a command to Mordecai to tell what caused his grief.

Hatach found him at the king's gate, and Mordecai told him all that had
happened to him, and of the great sum of money that Haman had promised
to pay into the king's treasuries for the Jews to destroy them.  He
also gave him a copy of the decree to show Esther, and told Hatach to
charge her that she go before the king and make request for her people.

Hatach took these words to Esther, and Esther sent a reply by Hatach,
saying that it was known in all the king's palace that no man or woman
could come into the king's presence in the inner court who had not been
called, and for any who so entered there was but one law, and that was
that they be put to death, unless the king hold out to them the golden
sceptre.  She had not been called to see the king, she said, in thirty
days.

Hatach gave this message to Mordecai, and he again sent word to Esther
that she could not hope to escape the decree, as she too was of the
Jews.  He told her that deliverance must come to the Jews in some other
way, but she and her family would be destroyed, and then he added,

"Who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as
this?"

Then Esther made her resolve, and sent word to Mordecai to gather all
the Jews in Shushan together to fast night and day, while she and her
maidens fasted also.

"And so I will go in unto the king," she said, "which is not according
to the law, and if I perish, I perish."

And Mordecai went his way and did as Esther had commanded.

It was the third day when Esther arose from her fast before the Lord
and put on her beautiful royal robes and stood in the inner court of
the king's house in sight of the royal throne.

When the king saw Esther standing in the inner court he was not
displeased, but his heart was turned toward her, and he held out to her
the golden sceptre that was in his hand.

"What wilt thou, Queen Esther?" he said, "and what is thy request? it
shall be even given thee to the half of the kingdom."

"If it seem good unto the king," said Esther, "let the king and Haman
come this day unto the banquet that I have prepared for him."

So the king commanded Haman, and they came to the queen's banquet.  The
king knew that Esther had a favor to ask of him, so he said again:

"What is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee; and what is thy
request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed."

But Esther was wise.  She begged as her petition and request that the
king and Haman would come to the banquet she should prepare the next
day also, and she would then do as the king had said.

Haman went home very happy and proud that he had been so honored by the
queen, and told his wife and his friends of all the glory and honor
that had come to him.

"Yet all this availeth me nothing," he said, "so long as I see Mordecai
the Jew sitting at the king's gate."

Then his wife and his friends urged him to build a high gallows and ask
the king on the next day to hang Mordecai upon it.  "Then go thou
merrily with the king unto the banquet," they added.

This pleased Haman, and he ordered the gallows to be made.

That night the king was restless, and he could not sleep, and he
commanded that the book of records be brought and read aloud to him.
Then he found that it was written that Mordecai had saved the king's
life when it was threatened by his two chamberlains.

"What honor and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for this?" he asked,
and his servants replied:

"There is nothing done for him."

"Who is in the court?" cried the king.  Now Haman had come in to speak
to the king to have Mordecai hanged.

"Haman standeth in the court," said the king's servants, and the king
said,

"Let him come in."

As Haman came in the king said,

"What shall be done to the man that the king delighteth to honor?"

Haman thought in his heart, "To whom would the king delight to do honor
more than to myself," and then he replied, thinking all the time of
himself.

"For the man whom the king delighteth to honor let the royal apparel be
brought which the king useth to wear, and the horse that the king
rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set upon his head, and let
this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king's
most noble princes, that they may array the men withal whom the king
delighteth to honor, and bring him on horseback through the street of
the city, and proclaim before him, 'Thus shall it be done to the man
whom the king delighteth to honor.'"

Then the king said, "Make haste, and take the apparel and the horse as
thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai, the Jew, that sitteth at
the king's gate; let nothing fail of all that thou hast spoken."

Haman did as he was commanded, for he could do nothing else, and after
it was all over Mordecai took his place again at the king's gate, but
Haman hastened home mourning, and with his head covered.

The next day he came to the queen's banquet with the king, and again
the king said,

"What is thy petition, Queen Esther? and it shall be granted thee; and
what is thy request? and it shall be performed, even to the half of my
kingdom."

Then the queen made her request, saying,

"If I have found favor in thy sight, O king, and if it please the king,
let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request;
for we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to
perish.  But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen I had held
my tongue, although the enemy could not countervail the king's damage."

"Who is he, and where is he," cried the king, "That durst presume in
his heart to do so?"

Then Esther said, "The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman."

[Illustration: Haman denounced by the queen]

Haman was overcome with fear at this, and the king was so angry that he
rose up and went out into the palace garden.  Haman stood up to make a
plea for his life, and when the king came in he found Haman fallen at
the queen's feet.

One of the king's chamberlains who knew what the king wished told him
of the gallows at Haman's house that had been made for Mordecai, and
the king said, "Hang him thereon," and they did so, and the king's
anger was pacified.

That day the king gave Haman's house to the queen.  Mordecai came
before the king that day also, for Esther had told him how he was
related to her, and the King gave to Mordecai the ring that he had once
given to Haman.  Esther's petition was not yet finished, so she fell
down at the king's feet and asked for the life of her people, and that
the decree might be changed.

Then the king held out his golden sceptre to Esther, and she arose.
She spoke noble words of petition for her people, and the king told
Mordecai to write in the king's name and seal with the king's seal
letters that should make the decree void.

So the scribes were called in and the letters were written and sealed
with the king's ring, and sent out to every province in the kingdom.

Mordecai went out of the palace that day clothed in royal garments of
violet and white, fine linen and purple, and a great crown of gold upon
his head, and there was joy in Shushan, and there was joy among the
Jews all over the land.  They hanged the ten sons of Haman, and
destroyed their enemies by the king's permission, so that they had rest
from persecution.  They also set apart two days for a feast of
thanksgiving through all time, and the feast of Purim is kept by all
Jews to this day, as it was first confirmed by the decree of Esther.

And Mordecai was next to the king and honored by his brethren the Jews
as long as he lived, for he always sought their peace, and was as a
father to them.




CHILD'S STORY OF THE BIBLE.

THE NEW TESTAMENT.

CHAPTER I.

THE ANGELS OF THE ADVENT.

There was an old priest named Zacharias, who lived in the hill country
of Hebron, where Abraham the father of the Jewish people used to live.
He went to Jerusalem when it was his turn to serve in the temple, and
once while he was offering the incense of sweet spices on the golden
altar, he saw through the rising smoke an angel standing on the right
side of the altar.  The good priest was frightened, but the angel said,

"Fear not, Zacharias, for thy prayer is heard," and he promised that to
him and his wife Elizabeth should be born a little son, whose name
should be John.  He was coming to prepare the way for the Messiah, and
must not drink wine or strong drink, for he was to be filled with the
Holy Spirit.

It was too wonderful for Zacharias to believe, and when he went out of
the temple he was dumb, and all the people who waited for him knew that
he had seen a vision.  He did not speak while he stayed to minister in
the temple, and when his time of service was ended he went to his home
in Hebron.

A few months later the angel Gabriel went to the little town of
Nazareth, high up among the hills of Galilee, and spoke to a young girl
named Mary.  She had never seen an angel, and she also was afraid when
he said to her,

"Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee; blessed art
thou among women.  Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found favor with God."
And then he told her that she should become the mother of a Holy Child,
who should also be the Son of the Highest, and a King whose kingdom
should have no end, and His name should be Jesus.  He also told her of
her cousin Elizabeth away in Hebron, to whom a little son was promised.

Then Mary said these beautiful words to the angel:

"Behold the hand-maid of the Lord; be it unto me according to Thy
word," and the angel went away into heaven.

Mary was so full of wonder at the angel's words that she set out on a
journey to see Elizabeth.  It was eighty miles to Hebron, but it was
early summer, and as Mary went through the green valleys and fruitful
plains, and along by the flowing Jordan, she thought about the angel's
words, and prayed to God to make her good and wise.  She was not
afraid, though the journey was four days long, for she knew God was
with her.

On the fourth day she passed Jerusalem, the Holy City, and went on and
up into the Hebron Hills to the house of Elizabeth.  When they told to
each other the wonderful words of the angel Gabriel they were full of
joy, for they knew that the coming of the Christ was near, and that the
Lord had trusted them with the heavenly secret.  They were filled with
the Holy Spirit, and Mary broke out into a beautiful song of praise.

Mary stayed three months with her cousin Elizabeth, and learned many
things, for the old priest and his wife were wise and good.  When she
went back to Nazareth she told no one of her vision, not even her
mother or Joseph, the good carpenter, whose promised wife she was.  But
the angel came one night to Joseph and spoke to him through a dream of
the Holy Child that was to be born.

Now Joseph and Mary were of the family of King David, and they knew
that the prophets had long ago talked of a King who was to come and
restore the kingdom, and reign on the throne of David.  They even told
where he was to be born, in Bethlehem, the "City of David."  And though
the Jews had become the servants of the Romans, yet it was time,
according to the promise, that the new King should come and set them
free, and many were looking for His coming.

Perhaps Joseph and Mary thought of these things when the time came for
them to go to Bethlehem, for the Emperor of Rome had made a decree that
all Jews should be enrolled, that he might know how many were in his
empire.  So all Jews, who had gone to live in other parts, returned to
their own tribe and city to be enrolled among their own people.

When Joseph and Mary came to Bethlehem they found it full of people who
had also come home to write their names for the Emperor, and there was
no room for them in the inn.  It was winter, and while Joseph wondered
what he should do the keeper of the inn showed them the stable where
the gentle oxen and asses were kept, and where it was much quieter than
in the noisy yard and crowded rooms of the inn.

It was here in a humble stable that the Lord of Heaven was born upon
earth, and cradled in a manger.  He chose the stable instead of a
palace, and a bed of straw instead of a bed of down, for He had come to
be the Brother of the poor and the Saviour of the world.

Out in the fields near by were some shepherds watching their flocks.
It has been said that the flocks kept in the Bethlehem fields were for
the sacrifices in the temple, and were watched night and day the year
long, while other flocks were kept in their folds in winter.

While they sat on the rocks, wrapped in their cloaks and sheepskin
jackets, with a fire of brushwood to keep the beasts away, perhaps they
thought of young David, who once kept his sheep there, and killed a
lion and a bear to defend his flock; or they watched the stars and
wondered at their beauty.

But suddenly an angel stood by them, and a great light shone round
about them, and they were terrified.  But the angel spoke kindly to
them saying:--

"Fear not, for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which
shall be to all people.  For unto you is born this day, in the city of
David, a Saviour which is Christ the Lord."  And the angel told them
how they would know it to be the Holy Child--because it lay in a
manger.  Then, in a moment the air was full of angel faces, and
heavenly voices sang this song of praise to God and promise to all
people:--

"Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward
men!"  And they went away into heaven.

The shepherds looked at one another and then one said; "Let us go to
Bethlehem."  And they went in great haste.  There they found Mary and
Joseph with the Holy Child lying in a manger, just as the angel had
said.  They told the people of Bethlehem about the angels they had seen
and the words they had heard, and they were very much astonished.  But
Mary was silent, and kept all these things in her heart to think about
and to pray about.

[Illustration: The Holy Child in the manger]

As for the shepherds they went back to their flocks praising God.

When the Holy Child was eight days old his parents called His name
Jesus, as the angel had commanded, and they dedicated him to the Lord.
Later they took him up to the Temple at Jerusalem to make the offering
that all Jewish mothers made, some money, if it was the first
boy-child, and a lamb, or a pair of doves.  Joseph bought for Mary a
pair of doves, and they went up the white steps of the beautiful porch
of the Temple, and passed the long rows of marble pillars into the
court of the Gentiles where they could look up and see the Temple
itself with its white marble pillars and golden roof shining in the sun.

Mary gave her doves to the Priest at the gate of the Court of the
Women, and he took them away to be offered on the altar, while Joseph
took the Holy Child into the Men's Court for the Priest to bless as he
dedicated Him to the Lord.  When all was done and they were going away,
an old man named Simeon saw them, and begged to hold the child.  He was
a good man who had longed to see the Christ who was to come, and now
the Spirit of God told him that this was He.  He thanked God, and said:

"Lord, now lettest Thou thy servant depart in peace, according to Thy
word, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation."

He also spoke as a prophet of the days to come, and just then a very
old woman who lived in the Temple, Anna, the prophetess, came and gave
thanks to God, and told the people that the Redeemer had come to
Israel.  All these things Mary kept in her heart, as she had kept the
words of the angel, and wondered why she had been chosen to be the
mother of the Holy Child.

Seven months before this time a little son had been born to Zacharias
and Elizabeth.  The neighbors wished to name him for his father, but
Elizabeth said, "Not so; but he shall be called John."  When they asked
his father what it should be, he wrote an answer (for he had been dumb
ever since he talked with the angel in the Temple) and they read, "His
name shall be called John."  Then his mouth was opened, and he began to
speak and to praise God, and his friends wondered what the child would
be when he grew to manhood.  His father became a prophet for a time,
and said some strange things about him that were written down.  He said
that John should be called a prophet of the Highest, and go before the
Lord to prepare His ways.

John grew, and he also grew strong in spirit, and while he was yet
young he went to live in the deserts where he was taught of God to be a
prophet and a preacher.




CHAPTER II.

FOLLOWING THE STAR.

While Joseph and Mary and the Holy Child were still staying in
Bethlehem, some Wise Men came from an Eastern country to Jerusalem,
asking,

"Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen His Star
in the East, and are come to worship Him."

No one knows who these men were, but it may be that they were Jews who
lived in Persia, as David had done long before, and were learned in all
the wisdom of the Chaldeans, who studied the stars, and believed that
they had much to do with the lives of people on the earth.  These wise
men were called Magi.  They had heard that a great One would be born
about this time, and that He would be the King of the Jews.

When they saw a strange and beautiful Star near the earth away toward
Jerusalem they prepared to go and see if it would lead them to the
King.  Their servants loaded the camels with food and water and some
costly gifts, for they were rich men, and mounted on beautiful saddles
covered with blue and crimson cloth they rode away toward Jerusalem.
They had deserts of yellow sand to cross, and they were tired at the
end of the hot day, but at night they saw the beautiful Star shining
before them low in the sky, and watched it from their tents on the sand
where they rested for the night, and rose to follow it before it faded
in the morning.  They were glad when they came to the fresh green
mountain country of the Jews, and rode through the flowery valleys till
they came to the gates of Jerusalem.  Perhaps they expected to hear all
about the new King, and to find the people feasting and rejoicing, but
they did not.

[Illustration: Following the star]

When they asked, "Where is He that is born King of the Jews?" the
people were surprised, and only wondered who these men were who looked
liked princes from a foreign court, for they had armed servants, and
from their camels hung tinkling silver bells, and swinging tassels of
silk and gold.

They searched Jerusalem for the king, and Herod heard of it and was
troubled.  He wished always to be king himself.  He set the scribes to
searching for the prophecies of the Messiah's birth.  They knew very
well where to find them, and they read to the king these words from the
prophet Micah:--

"But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, which art little among the families of
Judah, out of thee shall One come forth unto me that is to be the ruler
of Israel; whose goings forth are from of old, from ancient days."

Then the king sent for the wise men, for he had a secret plan.  They
came in their best robes, hoping perhaps, to find the newly born King
in the beautiful palace of Herod on Mount Zion, but they found only the
gloomy old King Herod waiting for them.  He asked them when they first
saw the Star, and when they had told him, he sent them to Bethlehem and
said,

"Go and search diligently for the young child, and when ye have found
him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also."

They were very glad to hear about Bethlehem, and as they came down the
marble steps of Herod's palace it was evening, and there, low down
before them in the sky was the Star!  They went out through the
Bethlehem gate toward the south, and followed the Star again over the
hills until the white walls of Bethlehem shown in the moonlight before
them, and they saw the Star standing still and shining down upon a
little house within the walls.  Then they rejoiced with exceeding great
joy, for they had come to the end of their long journey, and they had
found the King!  When they came to the house where Mary and Joseph were
staying they told their servants to unpack the presents of gold, and
frankincense, and myrrh, and they went in.  Then they found the lovely
young mother and the Holy Child, and they fell down before Him and
offered their gifts.

They did not go away at once.  They slept in Bethlehem that night, and
the Lord showed them in a dream that they must not go back to tell King
Herod that they had found the Christ.  They told Joseph of their dream,
and went away by another road that led past Hebron to their own country.




CHAPTER III.

THE FLIGHT INTO EGYPT.

It seems very strange that in a few hours after the wise men had gone
over the hills to their own country, that Mary and Joseph and the Holy
Child should be swiftly following the same road.  The night after the
wise men had been warned in a dream to go to their own country, Joseph
was warned also in a dream to take the young Child and His mother and
go into Egypt.  He was told to stay until he had orders to return, for
Herod would seek to take the Child's life.  Their flight was in the
night, and Mary's heart beat fast as she held her baby close and rode
down the steep path from Bethlehem with Joseph walking beside her.
They did not rest until they were far on their way.  It was nearly a
week before they reached the river that was the border of Egypt, but
when they crossed it King Herod's soldiers could not harm them.

[Illustration: The flight into Egypt]

They had gold that the wise men had given them, and Joseph knew how to
make many things of wood, so they lived quietly in Egypt waiting until
the Lord should call them back.

Herod was very angry when he heard that the Magi had gone away without
telling him anything about the young King; so angry that he ordered his
soldiers to destroy every baby boy in Bethlehem.  So all the little
boys of Bethlehem under two years of age were killed by the order of
this wicked king, and the Holy Child whom Herod believed would be
destroyed with them was safely borne in His mother's arms along the
road to Egypt, while Joseph walked beside them and led the patient ass,
and angels went with them unseen to be their guard by night and by day.

They lived in Egypt about a year, and then the sick and unhappy old
king died, and an angel came to Joseph one night in a dream, and said,

"Arise and take the young Child and His mother and go into the land of
Israel, for they are dead which sought the young Child's life."

They were glad to know that they could come home again, and they came,
perhaps with a company of merchants, into their own land.  Joseph would
have settled in Judea, the part of the land of Israel in which stands
Jerusalem, and Bethlehem, the city of his ancestors, but Herod's son
had been made king over Judea, and Joseph was told in a dream to go
into Galilee.

In Galilee was Nazareth, where both Joseph and Mary lived when they
were married, and there they went and were at home again, and there
Jesus grew to manhood.




CHAPTER IV.

THE BOY OF NAZARETH.

Nazareth was a little town high among the hills of Galilee.  It still
stands there, but it is not so large a town as it was when Mary and
Joseph and the Child Jesus lived there.  Then Galilee was full of
cities and villages, and men and women were busy among its fields, and
vineyards, and gardens, and the shores of the beautiful Lake of Galilee
were lined with the boats of fishermen.

Nazareth was more quiet than the crowded cities by the Lake.  A great
green plain lay below it, and a narrow road winding among the limestone
rocks led up to it.  Its streets were narrow and steep, and steps of
stone led from house to house.  A fountain of pure water breaking out
of a rock was the meeting place of the women of Nazareth, who came with
their tall pitchers for water and bore them away upon their heads.
Here Mary often came tenderly leading the Holy Child.  Perhaps He
gathered the bright wild flowers that grew thick around the fountain
and along the stream flowing from it.  When he grew a little older He
could climb the rocks around His home, or go with His mother and Joseph
to the top of the hill from which they could see the snowy peak of
Hermon, or the long line of shining blue sea beyond the hills on the
west, or they would point out a slowly moving caravan of heavy-laden
camels from Tyre and Sidon by the sea on their way to Damascus.

Sometimes He would go with Joseph to the woods when a certain piece of
wood was needed, for Joseph was a carpenter, and in a lower room of his
humble house of rough white stone there was a long bench and the tools
of a wood-worker.  Here, perhaps, the Holy Child played with the curled
shavings that fell from the bench, and watched the making of the plows,
the yokes, the doors, and the lattices until He was old enough to help
in the making of them.

He learned to read and write while a young child at home, as Jewish
children did, and His reading book was the Old Testament, which was the
Jews' Bible.  Then He went to school at the Synagogue, which was the
Jews' Church, and there, we may be sure, He was a gentle, obedient
pupil, and a loving, unselfish playmate.  While he read He may have had
many strange thoughts about the prophecies in the Book that were
promises of the Messiah, the King that was to reign in righteousness.

When He was twelve years old His parents took Him with them to the
Feast of the Passover at Jerusalem.  Great companies of people went
from all parts of the Jews' country, and from every country in which
they had settled, to keep the feast that the Lord had commanded when
they were led out of Egypt.  The very journey to Jerusalem was a
festival, for their friends joined the company from almost every house
in Nazareth, and on horses, and camels, and asses, the men walking
beside them, a happy group set forth from home to keep the Passover
week in the city of the great King.  It was the first visit of the boy
Jesus to Jerusalem, and as He walked strong and beautiful beside
Joseph, what tender and holy thoughts, what questions about the future
must have filled the mind of Mary.  He was going to see His Father's
House, the beautiful Temple where the thousands of Israel gathered
every year for worship and of which He had read in the Book of the Law,
for He was now old enough to be called a "Son of the Law," and verses
from the Bible folded in little boxes, had been tied upon his arm and
his forehead by the village Rabbi, as a sign that He was old enough to
think for Himself and go to the religious Feasts at Jerusalem.

When they reached the great public roads they found other companies of
pilgrims going up to the Holy City, and by their banners they knew the
tribe and city from which they came.  There was music, also, of timbrel
and pipe and drum as the songs of Zion were sung along the way, or at
evening when they camped in the fields.

When they had climbed the steep Jericho road and the Mount of Olives, a
glorious sight opened before them.  There lay the City of David shining
in the sun, its thick walls set with towers; its marble palaces, and
castles, and gardens, and, most wonderful of all, the Temple with its
hundreds of white marble pillars, its beautiful porches and arches,
and, rising within its richly-paved courts, the Holy Place with the sun
like fire upon its roof of gold.  The people shouted and sang a song of
joy.  Perhaps they sang that song of David beginning:

  "I was glad when they said unto me
  'Let us go into the house of the Lord,'
  Our feet shall stand within thy gates,
  O Jerusalem!"


Like thousands of others they pitched their tents outside of the walls,
perhaps on the slopes of Olivet, and after eating the Passover supper
together went daily into the Temple.  To the Boy of Nazareth this must
have been the one charmed spot in all Jerusalem.  Other boys loved to
watch the strange people from far countries, and wander among the
bazars, but Jesus stayed in the Temple.  He saw the white-robed
priests, the altars, and the sacrifices; He saw the great curtains of
purple and gold that hid the Holy place, and He heard the Temple choirs
answer each other in song; He also saw the old Rabbis who taught and
answered questions daily in the outer courts, and stood long among the
listeners.

When the company from Nazareth began the Journey home, and had gone as
far as the plains of Jericho, Mary looked for her boy.  She had not
been troubled about him, for she thought He was walking with the other
children, or with relatives, but when Joseph found that he was not with
them they went back over the long, steep road full of fear and anxiety.
They searched Jerusalem through, asking everybody they knew if they had
seen the Boy Jesus.

When they had been searching for three days, and Mary's heart was
almost broken, they went again to the Temple, and looking through a
crowd gathered around the Rabbis, Mary saw her Boy.  She pressed
through to speak to Him, but He was speaking.  She listened, and her
heart must have stood still to hear His simple, yet wonderful words.
Sometimes he asked questions which the old teachers could not answer,
and when he replied to the questions of the learned teachers His wisdom
astonished all who heard Him, for it was not like the wisdom of the
Rabbis, who used many words to explain the Word of God.

[Illustration: The Boy Jesus in the temple]

When Jesus saw His mother and came to her, she said,

"Son, why hast Thou so dealt with us?  Behold thy father and I have
sought Thee sorrowing."

"How is it that ye sought me?" He said, "wist ye not that I must be
about my Father's business?"

They did not quite understand how He could so easily forget them, and
yet Mary, perhaps, remembered that the angel had told her that He
should "be called the Son of God," and that He was at home in His
Father's house.

But He was content to go home and be subject to His parents, so that
through all the world children may learn how He lived, and try to live
like Him.

He found that His Father's house was greater than the Temple, and under
its starry roof, and wandering over its wide courts paved with grass
and flowers, He learned more than the Rabbis could teach Him.  And
every day He grew in wisdom as He grew in stature, and "in favor with
God and man."




CHAPTER V.

THE YOUNG CARPENTER.

There are many years of the life of Jesus of which the Gospel story
tells us nothing.  He lived with Mary and Joseph in Nazareth, and was
preparing for the great work for which He came.  He learned easily all
that other boys were taught in the synagogue school, and no doubt
caused His teacher to wonder at such wisdom coming from a boy.  He was
so humble and teachable that no one could accuse Him of setting Himself
above His companions, and so winning and unselfish that He was loved by
all.  The school days ended, perhaps, when He was fourteen, and He was
asked, as every Jewish boy was asked, to choose what trade He would
learn, for every boy had to learn a trade.  He chose to learn the trade
of His father, and began to work with him making the many things that
were then used by the people.  Few houses, if any, were made of wood,
for the white limestone was then, as now, used in making the houses of
Nazareth, but they were finished with wood, and wood was used not only
for boats, tables, benches, yokes and carts, but also for plows,
saddles, and many things we now make of other material.  Can you make a
picture in your mind of this tall, beautiful youth standing near His
father ready to serve in any humble way in the work they were doing?

There was no service so small that He did not willingly do it, and no
labor so rough and common that He did not make it noble and beautiful
by the doing.  But He was always thinking--thinking.  The world around
Him was full of pictures and stories through which heavenly truths
shone, and they formed themselves in His mind, and when He began to
teach He used them to help others with.  We call them parables.
Wherever He saw the flowers, the grape vines, the olive and the fig
trees, the wheat fields, the shepherds and their flocks, the fishermen
and their nets, He read high and holy lessons that were much more
simple, and true, and beautiful than those taught by the Rabbis.

The more He thought about the teaching of the Rabbis, the more He saw
how false and hard it was.  The Law given by Moses was full of the good
thoughts of God, but the Jewish teachers had only taught the outward
form, and had not given the people the inward spirit.  It was like
bringing to the hungry a beautiful dish with no food in it, or to the
thirsty a costly cup with no water in it.

As He grew older He would sit sometimes long into the night on some
hillside watching the stars, and with his great heart going out beyond
the hills to the people of the world in longing love and in desire for
their salvation.  He wanted to show them how God loved the world.  He
wanted to take the empty forms of the Law and fill them full of the
Spirit--the real thought and love of God.  He wanted to take away the
burdens on the minds of the people, which were heavier than those that
Pharoah laid upon their bodies long before, and give them the rest and
peace of God.  He wanted to take away their endless rules and give them
one rule--to do by others as they would have others do to them.  And He
wanted to add a new Commandment to the Law--that they love one another.

In this way, by living with His mind in heaven and His body on earth He
came to know that He was the Christ of God, and that He must go out
from Nazareth to be a Teacher of Truth, and begin to build The Kingdom
of Heaven among men.  But His friends thought that He was fitted to be
a Rabbi and teach in the Temple with the Doctors of the Law.  He waited
many years, caring for His mother and His younger brothers and sisters
after the death of Joseph, and then He left Nazareth.




CHAPTER VI.

THE VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS.

Jesus was thirty years of age when He left Nazareth to begin His work
as a Teacher of the Truth.  It was the age set by the older teachers
for a young man to begin his work.

His cousin John, the son of Elizabeth and Zachariah, was six months
older than Jesus, and he had begun his ministry on the lower Jordan.
While Jesus had been living quietly at Nazareth preparing for his work,
John had been away in the wilderness beyond the Dead Sea alone with the
Spirit of God.  He was a prophet who could be taught by God only.  When
his time to speak came he came out of the wilderness to a place on the
banks of the Jordan, just above Jericho, called The Fords.  Many people
crossed at this place, and he stood on a bank above the river crying,
"Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand."

[Illustration: John the Baptist at the Jordan]

Like those who had made a vow to the Lord, John had never cut his hair,
he wore a coarse garment woven of camel's hair, and lived on the simple
food of the wilderness--locusts and wild honey.  He seemed never to
think of himself, but always of One who was coming.  He said that he
was only a "Voice," preparing the way for the Messiah, as Isaiah had
prophesied centuries before, and the "Messenger" that had been promised
through Malachi.

"Behold I will send My messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me."

He did something which seemed new and strange to the people.  He called
them to a change of mind--a turning away from sin, and, as a sign that
they had done so, he baptized them in the river Jordan.  He was getting
the people ready for the coming of Christ, who was to begin the Kingdom
of Heaven on earth.

Thousands were flocking down to the river to hear the new prophet.
They went from all parts of Palestine, and Jesus, knowing that his hour
had come, went also.  He wore a white tunic gathered at the neck and
reaching to his feet, and on it the large blue mantle of thick stuff
that was worn in cold weather, for it was in the winter of the year 31.

We cannot know all about His parting with His mother, and the three
days' journey to the Fords of Jordan, but we know that He came and
stood with others on the banks while John preached.

On this day John's words were different  He had said that the Christ
was coming, but to-day he said,

"There standeth One among you whom ye know not, whose shoe's latchet I
am not worthy to unloose."

After this Jesus came down to the water's edge to be baptized, and
John, though he had not seen Jesus since he was a young boy, knew Him.
Ready to fall at His feet, John cried,

"I have need to be baptized of Thee, and comest thou to me?"

Jesus replied in a low voice,

"Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becometh us to fulfill all
righteousness," and so reverently John baptized his Master.

As Jesus stepped from the water's edge to the river bank a strange and
beautiful thing happened.  Out of the warm, blue sky a white dove came
circling down around the head of Jesus, who stood silent in prayer.
With eyes lifted to heaven He saw the dove, which was the form in which
the Spirit of God descended upon Him, and John saw it also, and both
heard a voice from heaven saying,

"_Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased._"

This was the answer to Jesus' prayer.  Only Jesus and John understood
the meaning of these words, for they heard with the spirit.  To others
it seemed like thunder out of a clear sky, and they were full of wonder
about the strange young man who had been baptized with such a beautiful
and singular sign following.  They also remembered what John had said,
that the Christ was now standing among them, and perhaps this was he!
And they wondered what John meant when he said that though he baptized
with water, the coming Christ would baptize them with the Holy Spirit
and with fire.

It was of little use to wonder about the Messiah, however, unless they
could remember and do all that John had said to them about being honest
and true in their hearts, for that was the only way to prepare for the
kingdom that was near at hand.  He told the rich to share with the
poor; the people who handled money to be honest, and the soldiers to
harm no one with word or hand, and to be contented with their wages.

When they were willing to give up the sins that John showed them they
took the sign of baptism from John, which meant that they wished to be
washed from their sins, and begin life in a new way.




CHAPTER VII.

JESUS IN THE DESERT.

The people were looking for the promised Messiah, and would have
welcomed John as the Christ if John had not always said "One mightier
than I cometh."  "I am not the Christ."  The sign of the Dove filled
them with new thoughts.

While they were thinking Jesus went up the river bank alone.  The power
of the spirit was upon Him, and His great work before Him, and He
wished to go for a time as far as possible from every human being.  He
went into the wilderness--a wild desert country beyond the Dead
Sea--not even wishing to talk with John, whose home was in the
wilderness.  Perhaps John looked after Him and longed to see and talk
with Him, but Jesus had one great desire, to know Himself, and what His
work was to be.  He felt two natures within Him, the human and the
divine, and before He began to teach He wanted to hear the voice of the
Divine within Him as clear and strong as He had heard it that day from
the skies.

The desert to which He went was not a waste of flat sand, like the
African desert, but masses of rock with sand and dry grasses between,
great cliffs of chalk and limestone rise a thousand feet above the
gloomy gulfs of rock through which torrents run in the rainy season,
but which are dry and oven-like in summer.  One great cliff called
Quarantana is now full of caves cut out of the face of the rock by men
who have hoped to win heaven by suffering as Jesus did.

Jesus was thinking--thinking, His human nature being full of hopes,
fears, and prayers; His divine nature being full of strength, promise,
comfort.  He did not think of food when He came, and there was none to
be found.  So resting at night in a cave, and wandering farther among
the mountains by day, Jesus spent forty days in the wilderness of
Judea.  While there He was tried by the spirit of evil in every way
known to human nature, and when all was over, and He had not yielded to
sin, His mind was calm and ready for His work, for He knew He was the
Son of God.

When He was hungry the tempter said, "If thou be the Son of God command
this stone that it be made bread."

It would have been easy for Him to try His power, but He knew that He
did not come into the world to use it for Himself, but for others, and
so He answered in the words of the Bible,

"Thou shalt not live by bread alone, but by every word of God."

Then in a vision He seemed to be in the Holy City upon a tower of the
Temple that stood over a deep valley, and the tempter speaking within
Him, said,

"If Thou be the Son of God cast Thyself down, for it is written, 'He
shall give His angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands they
shall bear thee up, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.'"

But Jesus knew that though the words were the words of God, the voice
was the voice of the tempter, and He answered,

"Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God."

Then in a vision again He seemed to see, from the top of a very high
mountain, all the kingdoms of the world spread out before Him with
their kings, and armies, and cities; their beautiful homes and lovely
women, and great men with their gold, and jewels, and precious works of
art, and the tempter said,

"All these things will I give Thee if Thou wilt fall down and worship
me."

Then all the Divine power in Jesus rose up against this evil whisper,
and He said,

"Get thee hence, Satan; for it is written, 'Thou shalt worship the Lord
thy God, and Him only shalt thou serve.'"

We shall never know all that Jesus suffered during this long time when
He was away from His home in Nazareth, and away from every human being,
tempted by evil, surrounded by wild beasts, and faint from hunger, but
we know He won a great victory over evil for us.  So he became the
Elder Brother and Friend of all who are tempted.

After His long fast and struggle with the powers of evil, angels came
and cared for Him, bringing heavenly strength and comfort, and He rose
in that strength and came again into the valley of Jordan, and found
that spring had come while he had been in the desert, and the willows
were green by the river side.  John was still preaching and baptizing,
but was a little farther up the river at Bethabara.

As Jesus came near John pointed to Him and said to the people,

"Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world.  This
is He. . . .  And I knew Him not, but He that sent me to baptize with
water, the same said to me, 'Upon whom thou shalt see the spirit
descending and remaining on Him, the same is He which baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost.'"




CHAPTER VIII.

THE FIRST DISCIPLES.

The next day while two men named John and Andrew were talking with John
the Baptist, Jesus passed by, and again John said, "Behold the Lamb of
God."  These two men had been priests and disciples of John, but they
turned and followed Jesus, and John was content to have them do so, for
he sought no honor for himself.  Jesus when he saw them following said,

"What seek ye?"

And they, hardly knowing what to say, and wishing very much to know
Him, said,

"Rabbi, where dwellest thou?"

He did not reprove them for giving Him the honored name of Master, but
said,

"Come and see."

How gladly they went!  No one knows where or how He lived, but whether
in a house, or in such a little tent as the people of that region now
carry with them when they travel, it was a quiet place where these two
men who were looking eagerly for the Kingdom of God could sit at the
feet of Jesus and talk with Him.  He was a young man like themselves,
but there was a wonderful spirit in Him that made them feel like
worshipping Him.

The first thing that Andrew did was to go and find his brother, Simon
Peter.  They were both fishermen from Bethsaida on Lake Galilee, and
had come down to hear the new prophet John.

"We have found the Messiah!" said Andrew, and they both went back to
Jesus.

When the Lord--for this He had been always--saw Simon Peter He saw his
heart, and knew that he would be one of the founders of the kingdom
with Him, and so He, looking straight through him, said,

"Thou art Simon, the son of Jona; thou shalt be called Cephas, which is
by interpretation Peter."  (A stone.)

So John, the loving; Andrew, the obedient, and Peter, the believing
began to follow Jesus.  And Peter's strong faith was like a foundation
of stone in the beginning of the building of the kingdom.

There was another man from Bethsaida who had come down to hear John.
His name was Philip.  Jesus found him and said, "Follow Me."  And he
not only followed Jesus, but he went joyfully to find his friend,
Nathanael, and tell him that they had found the Messiah, Jesus of
Nazareth, the son of Joseph.

Nathanael could not believe that the Messiah would be a man of
Nazareth, because the prophets had said that He would come from
Bethlehem.

So he said, "Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?"

"Come and see," said Philip, urgently, and he went.

As he came to Jesus he met the deep, kind look that had searched
Peter's heart and heard Jesus say,

"Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile!"  He saw
innocence in the heart of Nathanael, but Nathanael wondered how Jesus
could know him.

"Before that Philip called thee when thou wast under the fig-tree, I
saw thee," said Jesus.

Then Nathanael's whole heart went over to Jesus, and he cried, "Rabbi,
Thou art the Son of God; Thou art the King of Israel!"

He needed nothing more to prove that Jesus was the Christ, but Jesus
told him that he should see greater things, angels out of the open
heaven ascending and descending upon Him.

Nathanael became the fifth disciple.  His name was afterward called
Bartholomew.




CHAPTER IX.

THE FIRST MIRACLE.

Jesus and the five who had become His constant friends and disciples,
turned their faces toward home, for they were all from Galilee.  It was
Spring, and the land was beautiful with the fresh green of the trees
and the breaking forth of wild flowers among the grass.  On the Journey
the disciples scarcely saw the beauty around them, or felt weary from
the journey, for they were hearing the gracious words of their new
Friend concerning the coming in of the kingdom.

There was to be a marriage feast near Nazareth in the home of a friend.
Mary and her family were invited, and also the friends who had come
with Jesus.  It was at Cana, a village between Nazareth and the lake,
and they walked over the hills early to see the bride, crowned with
flowers and a white veil, married to the man to whom she had given
herself.  Then followed a feast at the house of the father of the
bridegroom.  There were joyful greetings, and garlands of flowers, and
wine--for Palestine was the land of vineyards, and they knew how to
prepare a harmless wine.  Before the feast was over they found that the
wine had given out, and those who served the feast were distressed.  It
was thought a disgrace to fail in hospitality at a wedding feast, and
so Mary came to Jesus for advice, saying,

"They have no wine."

[Illustration: The marriage at Cana]

"Woman," He said--and among the Jews this was a respectful manner of
speaking to a woman--"what have I to do with thee?  Mine hour is not
yet come."

He meant that He must act from the Divine Nature, and not from the
human nature that He had received from His mother.

"Whatsoever He saith unto you, do it," said Mary to the servants.

He told them to fill with water the six large water-pots of stone that
stood near, and they filled them to the brim.

"Draw out now, and bear to the governor of the feast," He said, and it
was served at the table, and the master of the feast called to the
bridegroom,

"Thou hast saved the good wine until now."

This was the beginning of miracles.

These were happy days for Mary, for she had her Son back again.  From
the wedding Jesus and His mother, and His brothers, and His disciples
went down to Capernaum by the lake for a few days.

Here Peter lived by the blue, beautiful lake that is walled by high
hills on one side, while on the other lies what once was the "garden of
Gennesaret" watered by streams, and rich with fruits, and grains, and
flowers.




CHAPTER X.

IN HIS FATHER'S HOUSE.

The feeling that Jesus had when a boy, that He must be about His
Father's business was now satisfied.  He had begun the work of His
ministry, though He had been doing all those silent years the
tremendous work of overcoming evil for us.  He met it in His own human
nature, and overcame it step by step without yielding to sin.  He was
to do this work until it should be finished upon the cross, but for
three years He was to teach the people the truths of the new kingdom,
and show by His life, and at last by the laying down of His life, that
love had come into the world to fill the old forms of the law full of
the new Spirit of Life.  He was to take away the sins of the world, and
in place of them give to the world eternal life.

It was time for the Passover Feast again, and Jesus with his disciples
joined the Capernaum company and started on the pleasant journey to
Jerusalem.  They sang the songs of Zion, and rejoiced when the towers
of Jerusalem and the Golden Temple came into view, and as they came
down the road over Olivet they probably made their camp there where
they could look across the valley to the Temple.  Everything was
moving.  Flocks of sheep and herds of oxen were being driven toward the
Temple, and crowds of people from near and far were filling the
streets, and also moving toward the Holy House.

When Jesus came into the Temple Court He saw something that stirred his
whole soul with sorrow and wrath.  The sellers of sheep, and oxen, and
doves, and the money-changers had brought their things into the great
court inside the marble pillars, and on the pavement of many-colored
marbles, and were buying and selling noisily, and turning the courts of
the Lord into a market.  The voices of men and animals must have
disturbed those who worshipped in the inner courts.  The priests
allowed it, perhaps they were paid for doing so, and Jesus, as a Son in
His Father's house where the servants had been unfaithful, began
clearing the court of all these things, and finding some cord on the
pavement He folded it into a short scourge of many strands and used it
to drive the cattle and sheep and their keepers out of court.  The
money-changers would not easily yield, but he poured out their money
and overturned their tables, and to those who sold doves he said,

"Take these things hence; make not my Father's house a house of
merchandise."

And the people wondered why they should obey this strange young man,
but they did.

It was the Divine light in the face of Jesus, and not the bit of cord
that drove them out.  They saw that He had a right to clear the Temple
courts.

Then the Jews wondered who had given Him this right, and they said to
Him,

"What sign showest Thou unto us, seeing Thou doest these things?"

And this was the sign He gave them: "Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up."

He knew that they would not understand this, but they would remember it
after they had crucified Him and He had risen from the dead, for He
spoke of His body.

The Jews turned scornfully away.  The Temple had been forty-six years
in building, and they thought His promise an idle boast, but they did
not forget it.  Three years after they helped to bring Him to the
cross, accusing Him in the High priests palace of saying these things.




CHAPTER XI.

A TALK ABOUT THE BREATH OF GOD.

Jesus was in the Temple most of the time during the Passover Feast.  He
taught the people standing among the marble pillars of the outer court.
He also did miracles among them, and many believed on Him because of
the miracles, but He, knowing their hearts, saw not one among them whom
He would call to be with Him in His work, for He could not wholly trust
them.  The Pharisees and Doctors of the Law also stood and listened to
Him, and among them was one whose heart turned toward Jesus.  He was
one of the highest of the Pharisees, but his heart was not so proud and
full of self-love as the hearts of most of the Pharisees.  His name was
Nicodemus.  He longed to talk with Jesus, but he was afraid of what the
other Pharisees would say.

He found out where the camp of the Galilean company was, and one night
went out of the city gate, across the Kedron bridge and up the slope of
the Mount of Olives and found Jesus.  There was no place to talk
quietly in the crowded tents, so they must have gone out under the
shadowy olive trees to talk.

"Master," he said--and it was much for the wise Pharisee to speak so
humbly to the young carpenter of Galilee--"Master, we know that Thou
art a teacher come from God, for no man can do these miracles that Thou
doest except God be with him."

Jesus looked through the heart of Nicodemus, though it was night, and
saw what he needed most, and so He made no reply about Himself or His
miracles, but said,

"Verily, I say unto you, except a man be born again he cannot see the
Kingdom of God."

Nicodemus could not understand how a man could be born when he is old,
so Jesus explained that it was a spiritual birth.  "That which is born
of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit."
And as the wind softly stirred the leaves of the olive trees above
their heads He said,

"The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof,
but canst not tell whence it cometh and whither it bloweth.  So is
every one that is born of the Spirit."

Nicodemus had always thought that religion was the keeping of the law
as all Jews were taught by the priests, so he was astonished, and said,

"How can these things be?"

"Art thou a master in Israel and knowest not these things?" said Jesus,
and then He spoke to the soul of Nicodemus of the things of the Spirit
of Heaven--The Heaven in which He already lived,--and of the new
kingdom that had begun on earth.

If you will find what Jesus said to Nicodemus in the third chapter of
John's Gospel you will find among other things these beautiful words,--

"For God so loved the world that he gave His only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life."

Nicodemus found out that life was the breath of God in man, and that by
it man lives.  Perhaps he felt it within him as he went down the valley
under the trees and heard the wind among the leaves; and as he came up
the steep way and through the city gate in the silence of the night,
perhaps he resolved to be a disciple of Jesus.




CHAPTER XII.

A TALK ABOUT THE WATER OF LIFE.

After the Passover there were many who had believed in Jesus who wished
to be baptized, and so they went down to Jordan with Jesus and the
disciples, and then the disciples baptized them.

John, who was also baptizing at another point by the river, was told
that Jesus was baptizing and that all men were going to Him.  John was
rejoiced at this.

"This my joy therefore is fulfilled," he said.  "He must increase, but
I must decrease.  He that cometh from heaven is above all."

After this Jesus went back to Galilee, and as He and His disciples went
through the country of Samaria, which lay between Judea and Galilee,
they came at noon near to the little village of Sychar among the hills.
It was the most difficult road to Galilee, and most persons followed
the Jordan road when going back and forth, for the Judeans and
Samaritans were not friendly, but it is written that Jesus "must needs
go through Samaria."

While the disciples went up into the village to buy some bread, Jesus
sat down by a deep well in the valley.  It was built round with stone,
and covered from the sun, for the people prized the well not only for
the clear, cold water, but because Jacob, the father of all the tribes
of Israel dug the well for his family and cattle and flocks hundreds of
years before.

While Jesus rested by the well a woman came down the path from the town
to draw water.  She drew the water with a strong cord that she fastened
around her earthen water-jar and was going to put it on her shoulder
and carry it away when Jesus asked her for a drink of water.  She had
not offered Him any for she thought a Jew would not ask even a drink of
water from a Samaritan, but Jesus said,

"If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee
'Give me to drink' thou wouldst have asked of Him and he would have
given thee living water."

[Illustration: Jesus by the well]

The woman did not understand His words about water any more than
Nicodemus did about the blowing of the wind.  Jesus was talking about
_life_ always and everywhere, but the people were slow to understand
Him.

The woman wondered where Jesus could get better water than this from
Jacob's well.

"Whosoever shall drink of this water," He said, "shall thirst again,
but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst.  But the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of
water springing up into everlasting life."

When the woman heard this she asked for it, that she might not be
thirsty and come to the well for water, but Jesus, seeing that she
could not understand His words began to speak of her life, and so truly
that she was amazed and said,

"Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet."  She talked of the mountain
near by which had been the place of worship of the Samaritans, and of
the Temple at Jerusalem where the Jews worshipped, for she did not want
to talk of her own life, which was not good.

Jesus then showed her that "God is a Spirit, and they that worship Him
must worship Him in spirit and in truth," and that the hour had come
when He wished people to worship him so in every place.

"I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ," she said,

"I that speak unto thee am He," He said.  Then the woman left her
water-jar and hurried away without a word to tell the people of the
town.

While she was away His disciples came and begged Jesus to eat, but His
spirit was filled with the thought of life, and he said,

"I have meat to eat that ye know not of."

And when they did not understand He said,

"My meat is to do the will of Him that sent me, and finish His work,"
and when he thought how great the work was that was before Him, it was
as if the harvest-time of gathering the people into the kingdom had
come.

As they looked out along the valley men were ploughing the fields to
sow wheat.

"Say ye not there are four months," He said, "and then cometh harvest?
Behold I say unto you, 'Lift up your eyes and look on the fields; for
they are white already to harvest.'"

While He stayed two days in Sychar many believed on him there.

"Now we believe," they said to the woman, "not because of thy saying
for we have heard Him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the
Christ, the Saviour of the world."




CHAPTER XIII.

JESUS IN THE SYNAGOGUE.

Jesus came back to Galilee through the Valley of Jenin and across the
plain of Jezreel to Cana, where His disciple Nathanael lived, and where
He had wrought His first miracle.  While He was in Cana a nobleman who
lived at Capernaum came riding into the little town in great haste to
asked Jesus to come down and heal his son who was near death.  To try
him, Jesus said,

"Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe."

The nobleman would not stop to talk of this, but besought Jesus, saying,

"Sir, come down ere my child die."

Jesus was glad to see his faith, and ready to meet it.

"Go thy way," He said, "thy son liveth," and the man went away
believing what Jesus had said.  On the way down to Capernaum by the
Lake, some glad-faced servants came hastening to meet him.

"Thy son liveth!" They cried--the very words that Jesus had used.  When
he asked them when the boy had taken a turn for the better they said,

"Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him."

Then the happy father knew that it was at the seventh hour--one
o'clock--that Jesus had said, "Thy son liveth."

There was joy in the house of the nobleman when the father and mother
and all the household gathered around the boy who had been healed, and
talked of the wonderful power of Jesus in speaking the word of healing.

From Cana Jesus went to Nazareth.  John the Baptist had been thrown
into a gloomy prison down by the Dead Sea by Herod Antipas because he
had rebuked the wickedness of that king, and Jesus knew that His own
work was now fully begun, since the prophet, who had come to prepare
His way, was laid aside.

While Jesus was at home with His mother and brothers and sisters He
went one Sabbath to the village church or synagogue, as He had always
done through His childhood and youth.  Perhaps His brothers and some of
His disciples were with Him, while His mother and sisters parted from
Him and entered by another door, as was the Jewish custom.  There were
many there who hoped that the young carpenter, who had become a
teacher, and as many believed, a prophet, would read from the Book of
the Law.

After the singing, and the prayers, and the reciting of the creeds, the
time came for the reading and teaching.  The first lesson had been
read, and the ruler of the synagogue took from the sacred place where
it was kept another parchment roll, and coming down the steps he handed
it to Jesus.  It was the roll of Isaiah, and as Jesus went up to the
reader's desk He opened and unrolled it until He came to these words,

"The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to
preach the gospel to the poor; He hath sent me to heal the broken
hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord."

[Illustration: Jesus in the synagogue]

When he had finished he rolled the book again and handed it to the
minister and sat down.  It was the custom of those who were teachers of
the people to sit down to teach, while the people all rose and stood
until he had finished.

"This day," said Jesus "is this scripture fulfilled in your ears."

The people were looking and listening so earnestly that it was very
still, and as Jesus told them simply that He was the very One whom
Isaiah had spoken of seven hundred years before, that He had brought
the good tidings, and had come to do the work the prophet had spoken
of, they looked at each other in amazement.  To be sure they had never
heard such words of grace and wisdom, but how could this be true?

"Is not this Joseph's son?" they asked each other.  Joseph had been
their neighbor and Jesus had grown up among them and played with their
children.  They thought some evil thing had entered into Him disturbing
His mind.  But when He began to tell them that no prophet was accepted
in his own country, and that the Lord was obliged to send them to
strangers, as He sent Elijah and Elisha, they were angry with Him.
Some of the men wished to teach Him a lesson, and they took Him by
force to the edge of a cliff, for Nazareth was built high up among the
hills, and were about to cast Him over among the limestone rocks below,
but turning away from them, Jesus walked quietly down the hill to the
path that led into the valley--and no one was able to lay a hand upon
Him to harm Him.  "He came unto His own, and His own received Him not,"
and He went away to preach the good tidings in other towns.  The heart
of Mary must have been full of sorrow when she saw her Son "despised
and rejected of men" as Isaiah prophesied, but she hid her sorrow, and
remembered the words of the Lord brought to her by the angel before her
Son was born.

And so Jesus went down to Capernaum where he had friends and disciples,
and afterward His mother and His brothers went to Him there, but
Nazareth knew him no more.

It was about this time that it is supposed that Jesus went alone to a
religious feast at Jerusalem, and while there cured a poor man who
could not walk.  He lay on his mat near a spring called Bethesda.  It
was covered by a roof, and had five porches.  Here the sick were
brought by their friends that they might, when they saw the waters
bubble up, step in and be cured.  They believed then an angel came down
and made the moving of the waters, but it was probably one of the kind
called intermittent springs.  There is one at Jerusalem now called the
"Fountain of the Virgin" which rises at certain times.

Jesus saw the poor friendless man who had waited for thirty-eight years
for the chance of stepping into the waters when they were moving, and
had been disappointed for others stepped in before him.  Looking at
him, He said,

"Wilt thou be made whole?"

The man explained why he could not be cured, for there was no man to
help him.  Then Jesus said,

"Rise, take up thy bed, and walk."

He rose at once, and walked, carrying the mat on which he lay.

The Jews were angry when they heard of it for the man had been cured on
the Sabbath, but Jesus told them that they were all refusing eternal
life because of their unbelief, saying,

"Ye will not come unto Me that yet might have life."




CHAPTER XIV.

AMONG THE FISHERMEN.

Capernaum was on the shore of the beautiful lake of Galilee.  There
were villages clustered around the lake then and all Galilee was
swarming with busy life, but now there are few inhabitants, and
Capernaum is only a heap of stones.  Some of these stones, which may
now be seen, are carved in such a way that we may know that they are a
part of an ancient synagogue.  This was the synagogue, perhaps, that a
good Centurion built whose servant Jesus cured when he was near death,
and here in Capernaum lived the nobleman whose son Jesus cured by a
word, and here lived His first disciples, Peter and Andrew, and James
and John, and here Matthew, who sat in his little office taking the
taxes that the people had to pay, may have seen Jesus pass, and may
have heard him speak before he became a disciple.

The beautiful plain of Gennesaret spreads out from one end of the lake,
and there is a white beach of shells there, while at other points on
the lake there are hills and great rocks close to the water.

On this white beach Jesus stood one spring morning teaching the people.
As the fisher-folks and others gathered close around to hear Him, He
was pushed so near the water that He stepped into Peter's boat, which
was near the shore, and asked him to push it out a little way into the
water, and there in the stern of the boat Jesus sat and taught the
people who stood thick upon the shore.

The boat of Zebedee, the father of James and John was near by, for they
were the partners of Peter and Andrew.  They had washed their nets and
had given up fishing until night again, for morning was not a good time
for fishing, but Jesus said to Peter and Andrew,--

"Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught."

The disciples were surprised at this, for it was not the hour for
fishing, and Peter said,

"Master, we have toiled all night and have taken nothing; nevertheless
at thy word I will let down the net."

[Illustration: Jesus among the fishermen]

When they had done this they found that their nets were filled with
fishes, so that they called to James and John to come and help them,
for their nets were breaking.  When they had emptied the nets into the
two boats they were filled so full that they began to sink.

Then Peter fell down at Jesus's knees and cried out,--

"Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord!" so wonderful did the
miracle seem to him.

But to Peter Jesus said,--

"Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men."  James and John He
also called, and showed them that the time had now come for them to
help Him in founding the Kingdom.

They did not wait to sell the great draught of fishes that they had
brought to land; and they did not wait to sell their fishing boats and
nets, but they forsook all and followed Jesus.  They did not know that
their names would be known forever as the founders of the Christian
Church with Him who was its divine Head.




CHAPTER XV.

THE HEALING HAND OF JESUS.

The Jewish church, or synagogue at Capernaum was very beautiful.  It
was of white marble, and richly carved, and was the gift of a Roman
officer to the Jews.

One Sabbath morning Jesus went in and sat among the learned Rabbis, for
He wished to speak to the people as He had near Nazareth.  The people
knew and loved him, and the place was crowded to hear Him speak.  He
sat there through the singing, and the prayers, and the reading.

The parchment rolls of the law and the prophets were in a case behind
Him; and there was the curtain, and the branched candlesticks.  Then He
went to the Teacher's seat, and while all the people stood He sat and
taught them.  People wondered, as they always did, at his words, for
they were not like the words of the Rabbis,--they were as if God
Himself were speaking through a man.

In the midst of it there was a loud cry from a man who looked like a
maniac.  He had followed the people in, and the words of Jesus had
disturbed the evil spirit that was in Him,

"Let us alone," it cried, "what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of
Nazareth.  Art thou come to destroy us?  I know thee who Thou art,--the
Holy One of God."

"Hold thy peace, and come out of Him," said Jesus, and the poor man
fell headlong on the marble floor, but in a moment he was free, for the
evil spirit had obeyed the word of Jesus, and this astonished the
people so much that they told it through all the town and the country
round about.

When He went home from the synagogue, for Peter's house was one of His
homes, He found the mother of Peter's wife very ill of fever, and they
brought Jesus to her bed.  He bent over her and said some words to that
which had caused the fever, and at once it was gone.

She seemed to be quite well again, and her first wish was to do
something for this wonderful man whom Peter had been following, and she
rose and helped to prepare food for Him.

The people did not dare to come to Jesus for healing while it was yet
the Sabbath, for the Rabbis said it was wrong to cure people on the
Sabbath day, but as soon as the sun had set the Sabbath ended, and then
the streets were filled with people who came for themselves, or
bringing their sick friends to be touched by the hand of Jesus.  All
around the little house of Peter they crowded, while He walked among
them looking at them with pitying love, and "He laid his hands on every
one of them, and healed them."




CHAPTER XVI.

FOLLOWING JESUS.

The next morning Jesus went out among the hills alone.  All day He was
pressed upon by the poor, the sick, the blind, and the lame, or those
who were hungry for the word, and so at night or early morning He went
out to be alone, to think of the great work he had come to do, and to
pray or talk to the Father, for Jesus and the Father were one.  But the
people followed Him, and begged him not to leave them.

"I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also," He said, "for
therefore am I sent."  And He took his disciples and started on a
journey from village to village through Galilee.  There were about two
hundred of these towns, and they were near together.  It was the
springtime, and the fields and hills between the villages were
beautiful with flowers and growing grain.  Sometimes He taught in their
churches, and sometimes under their trees or trellises, and wherever He
went the common people heard him gladly.

Once as He drew near a town a leper followed Him.  He followed Him into
the town, which was against the law, for the leper was not allowed to
live inside a town, or to come near the people, as the touch of a leper
would give the disease to another.  But so earnest was he to see Jesus
that he came through the crowd and fell on his face before Jesus,
saying,

"Lord if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean."

Jesus put forth His hand and touched him, saying, "I will; be thou
clean."

Suddenly the leprosy left the man, and his dead and filthy skin became
as healthy as a child's, and Jesus sent him to the priest to offer that
which the law commanded for the cleansing of lepers.  It was a long,
and often costly process that a leper must pass through to be cleansed
from his disease, but the word of Jesus was with power, and brought
divine life to take the place of death, for leprosy was a slow death.

[Illustration: Jesus healing the sick]

When the Lord came back to Capernaum the people thronged Him, and when
He rested in the shaded court of a friend's house it was soon filled
with the eager people who longed to hear His word, or be healed by His
touch.

Once it was so crowded in the court that some men, who were bringing a
friend to Jesus who was helpless with palsy, took him up by the outside
stairs to the housetop.  There, by taking up a few tiles, they made an
opening just over the place where Jesus sat, and the people soon saw
the man lying on his mat before Jesus, for they had let it down by
cords through the opening.

Jesus saw the faith of the four men who had let their sick friend down
at His feet, and it touched His heart.  He also saw the longing in the
soul of the sick man to be good and pure, and He said,

"Son, be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee."

The Scribes, who were always copying the Scriptures--for there was no
printing done in those days--were always watching to hear Jesus say
something contrary to the Law of Moses, that they might tell it to the
priests, and some who were sitting there looked at each other and said
in their hearts,

"Who can forgive sins but God only?"

Jesus heard their thoughts and asked them why they reasoned in this way
with themselves, and which seemed to them the easier, to forgive sins
or to heal the body.

But that they might know that He had power over the body as well as the
soul He said to the sick man,

"Arise; take up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house."

The man rose and rolled up his mat and carried it out, the people
falling back astonished to let him pass, for his palsy had left him and
he walked out strong and well.

"We have seen strange things to-day," the people said among themselves
for they could not understand how a man could forgive sins or heal
disease.

When Jesus left the house to go down to the sea-shore He passed the
Custom-house, where the tax-gatherers, or "publicans," gathered money
from the Jewish people to pay to their conquerors, the Romans.

The Romans were very hard in their dealings with the Jews, and made
themselves rich by taking money from the poor of their provinces.

The people did not like the tax-gatherer, and his was not a pleasant
office.

Levi, also called Matthew, was a rich tax-gatherer at Capernaum, and as
he sat in his office looking out upon the market-place he saw Jesus
passing by.  Perhaps he had often heard Jesus teach by the shore and in
the market-place, and longed to follow Him.  He saw the Teacher stop at
his open door, and heard Him say,

"Follow Me."

That was enough; Matthew left all, rose up and followed Jesus.  He had
a business that made him rich, but he was ready to leave it all to be a
disciple of Jesus.

He wanted all to know that he had chosen a new life, and so he gave a
great dinner to his friends, and invited Jesus and His five disciples
that he might confess before them all his faith in Jesus.

The Pharisees looked down upon the publicans and thought them a people
unfit to associate with, and when they passed by and saw Jesus sitting
in Matthew's house at the feast they asked His disciples as they went
in and out why their Master ate with "publicans and sinners," a thing
they felt themselves too good to do.

Jesus Himself answered them in words that have helped many sinful
people to come to Him since.

"They that are whole need not a physician, but they that are sick.  I
came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance."

And then He turned to talk with Matthew and his friends, who listened
to every word that fell from His lips, and did not try to find fault
with Him as the Pharisees did.

Matthew had made a rich feast, and his table was no doubt piled with
the beautiful fruits of the plain of Gennesaret, but the eyes of all
and the thoughts of all were fixed upon the wonderful Teacher, and
Matthew, the publican, who had become His disciple.




CHAPTER XVII.

FRIENDS OF JESUS.

Jesus had a good and true reason for choosing just twelve men to help
Him to begin to build the first Christian Church, or the Kingdom of
Heaven on the earth.  We cannot yet understand the reason for
everything He did, but quite enough to help us to believe in Him, and
to give us a place in His kingdom.  He had called half that number and
soon He called six more to join them, and named them apostles.

Before He called them He went up into a mountain to be alone.  He left
Capernaum and went up through a rocky vale to a high plain where the
grass lay thick and the wild flowers were coming up among it, for it
was spring-time.  Two hills, or peaks rose out of this plain, and there
was a grassy hollow between.  They were called the "Horns of Hattin."
From one of these hills Jesus could see the lake with its cities, and
the plain dotted with villages below, and beyond them the great Mount
Hermon crowned with snow.  Here Jesus stayed all night, and the next
morning came down into the grassy dale between the peaks where the
people were gathering.  The disciples went to meet Him, and He told
them that He had chosen twelve of them to be with Him in His work, and
to preach the Good Tidings to the people.

He called to His side Peter and Andrew, and James and John--the two
pairs of brothers who were His first friends; then Philip, of
Bethsaida.  Bartholomen, from Cana, and Matthew, the tax-gatherer of
Capernaum, who afterward wrote the first gospel.  He also chose Thomas,
of Galilee; James and Jude, two brothers from Capernaum; Simon, of
Galilee, and Judas Iscariot, who came from the country near Jerusalem.
Five of these, it is said, were His cousins.  More than half of them
were fisherman, and none of them were learned men, unless Bartholomew
might be called one.  How wonderful it must have been to see these
twelve earnest young men gathered around Jesus, ready to go where He
should send them, or follow Him to death.  No kings or emperors on
earth ever had so great honor given them as that which Jesus gave to
these men, for they became the Lord's spiritual brothers, and princes
in His spiritual kingdom.

Then Jesus came down among the people.  Some had brought sick friends
up the rocky gorge for Jesus to touch; or they had brought poor souls
possessed by devils for Him to set free, and He healed them all.

Then He sat down and taught the people.  The sayings of that wonderful
day are kept in the gospels, and are called the "Sermon on the Mount."
There was no choir, no organ, no church made with hands, but the words
are now read in every Christian church in the world.  The preacher sat
on a green hillock, His dark cloak thrown back showing His white tunic,
and the spring sunshine lay on His holy, beautiful face and flowing
hair.  All this the people saw, but they saw much more than this.  They
saw something divine in His face.  His form, and the light around Him,
and what they heard seemed to them to be the words of a Divine Man.  He
looked lovingly on the little group of disciples near Him, and blessed
them in beautiful words that we call the Beatitudes, or the Ten
Blessings.  He said to them and to us that the "blessed" (happy) are
the good, humble, pure souls who have little of this world's wealth and
friendship, but much faith and love.

[Illustration: Sermon on the Mount]

If you will read the fifth, sixth and seventh chapters of Matthew you
will know much that Jesus taught that heavenly day on Hattin Mount.  He
taught them the law of love and forgiveness; the law of purity and
truth.  He taught them to be humble and simple, especially in prayer,
and not like the Pharisees.  He gave them a wonderful prayer that we
call "the Lord's Prayer," though it is a prayer to the Lord, for all
Christians in all ages to bring to Him.  He told them that if they were
children of God they could not be worldly, loving themselves and the
world best; neither could they serve two masters.  Then He taught them
a beautiful lesson of trust in the Heavenly Father by pointing to the
birds that flew above them, and reminding them how they were fed and
cared for; and also by pointing to the wild field lilies that grew near
by, their scarlet petals shining in the sun.

"Consider the lilies of the field how they grow," he said, "they toil
not, neither do they spin, and yet I say unto you that even Solomon in
all his glory was not arrayed like one of these," and then He asked
them if God, who clothed the lilies, would not clothe His own children,
and told them to have no fear for the future, but to seek the Kingdom
of God first and always, and all needed things would be given to them.

Then He looked away from the birds and the lilies into the eyes of the
people and saw their need of love and truth, for he could read their
hearts.  He told them that they should not judge each other, or look
long upon each other's faults, but rather upon their own, and showed
them how they might ask God for love and truth, and it would surely be
given them, because the Heavenly Father is more just, and kind, and
loving than an earthly father can be.

And here is the Golden Rule of Christ, which, if we live by it, will
bring heaven down to earth.

"Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them."

He told them that the way of the world was wide, and many were crowding
into it, while the heavenly way was narrow in this life, and few were
finding it, though many talked much about it, and seemed to have found
it.  He said that it would be shown in the day when we all appear
before God who has truly followed Him.  He said that the true men were
like the wise man who built his house upon a rock, and when the winds,
the rain, and the flood came it stood fast, because it was founded on
the rock; and the false were like the foolish man who built his house
upon the sand, and when the winds, and the rain, and the floods came it
fell, and great was the fall of it.

The people went away from this great meeting among the hills to think
it over.  It was so new and so wonderful, not at all like the teaching
of the scribes, for the young carpenter of Nazareth spoke like a
Teacher of teachers.  Ever since that day when the Lord sat and taught
the truths of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the people stood upon the
grassy plain among the spring flowers and the wild thyme to hear his
words, the Sermon on the Mount has been known as the greatest sermon
the world has ever known.




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE LORD OF LIFE.

Jesus came down to Capernaum again and found the same crowds of needy
people, who were like sheep having no shepherd.  The rich as well as
the poor had their wants and their troubles.

A good Roman officer, called a Centurion, because he was captain over a
hundred men, had a servant who was so faithful to him that he was very
fond of him.  The servant was very sick, and when the Centurion heard
that Jesus was again in Capernaum he went to the chief men of the city
and asked them to get Jesus to come and cure his servant.  He feared to
ask the favor himself, for he thought Jesus was a Jew who would not
like to have dealings with the Romans.  So the Jews spoke to Jesus
about it saying that the Centurion was the good man who had built a
beautiful synagogue for them.  Jesus did not need to be urged to be
kind to a Roman for He loved all the people of the earth alike.

While He was on His way some friends of the Centurion came to meet Him
with a message.

"Lord, trouble not Thyself," he said, "for I am not worthy that Thou
shouldst enter under my roof; Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy
to come unto Thee; but say in a word and my servant shall be healed."

Jesus told the people who followed Him that He had not found such faith
as this among their own people.  And when the men returned to the
Centurion's house they found the servant cured of his sickness.

But some of the Jews were offended because Jesus had said that a pagan
Roman could have more faith than a Jew, and that they would enter the
Kingdom of Heaven while the Jews would be left out.

The next day Jesus and His disciples went to a little city called Nain,
set up among the hills, more than twenty miles away.  When they were
near the city gate they met a funeral procession coming out.  They were
going to the burying ground on a hillside not far away.  There were
hired mourners, as is the custom in that country, who made many doleful
noises, and behind them came a weeping woman--the mother of the young
man who had died.

His body was borne by friends and followed by many more, for all felt
sorry for the poor woman who had lost her only son.

As the procession passed Jesus said two little words to the
woman--"Weep not," and then He put forth His hand and touched the bier.
The men who bore it set it down before Jesus who looked down into the
face of the dead, saying,

"Young man, I say unto thee, arise!"

In a moment the young man opened his eyes, sat up, and began to speak,
and Jesus gave him back from the grave to his happy mother.

While Jesus was near Nain some of the disciples of John the Baptist
came to see Him.  John was in prison still, down in the low, hot
country by the Dead Sea.  He had heard strange stories about Jesus from
the disciples who came to see him, and because they were not settled in
their mind about Him, John sent them to find Him and to say,

"Art thou He that should come, or do we look for another?"

Jesus told them to go and tell John what they saw.

"The blind receive their sight and the lame walk, the lepers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have
the gospel preached to them, and blessed is he whosoever shall not be
offended in me."

Then Jesus taught the people who stood by, and the lesson ended with
these words which he speaks to the whole world,

"Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest; take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls; for my yoke is
easy and my burden is light."

This is the loving invitation of Jesus to every one of us to enter the
Kingdom of Heaven, and it is the King Himself who invites us.




CHAPTER XIX.

MARY OF MAGDALA.

There was a Pharisee named Simon, who was very curious to know what
Jesus taught, although he had no wish to be His disciple.  He was a
rich man and lived in a beautiful house with a court.  Beyond the court
was a banqueting room with couches on which guests sat leaning upon the
tables in the Eastern fashion.  There were other guests invited to hear
Jesus talk, the friends of Simon, and it is quite probable that when
they came the servants of Simon met them and took their sandals and
washed their feet and arranged their hair as was the custom, and were
also heartily welcomed by Simon.  When Jesus came He had no such
service or welcome given Him, for Simon did not love Him; he was only
curious about Him.

While they were at the tables a beautiful young woman came in through
the open door and passed swiftly by the couches on which the guests
were reclining until she came to the place where Jesus was.  No one
spoke to her or about her, for they all knew that she had been a sinful
woman.  But soon they saw that she bent weeping over the feet of Jesus
where He lay upon the couch, and soon they knew by the odor of costly
perfume that she was anointing His feet.  As her tears fell she wiped
His feet with her long hair, and kissed them again and again.

Simon looked at her severely, but said nothing, though he wondered in
his heart why Jesus did not know that a sinful woman was touching Him.
Then said Jesus,

"Simon, I have somewhat to say to thee."  And Simon replied, "Master,
say on."

Then Jesus told a little story of a man who had two debtors; one owed
him five hundred pence, and the other fifty; and when they had nothing
to pay he frankly forgave them both.  Then he asked which of them will
love Him most?

"I suppose that he to whom he forgave most," said Simon, and Jesus told
him that he was right.

Then He turned and pointed to the woman, saying,

"See'st thou this woman?" and the eyes of all were fixed on the weeping
Mary of Magdala.

When Jesus had told Simon that he had failed to bring water for His
feet, though she had washed them with her tears, and wiped them with
her hair; that he had given Him no kiss of welcome, and she had not
ceased to kiss His feet; that he had not anointed His head with oil,
but she had anointed His feet with costly ointment, He added,

"Her sins which are many are forgiven; for she loved much; but to whom
little is forgiven the same loveth little."  And turning to the woman
He said,

"Thy sins are forgiven; thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace."

As Jesus went through the villages of Galilee He found many friends and
many enemies.  The twelve were with Him, learning daily the wonderful
lessons He taught, and preparing to be preachers of the glad tidings
also.

Not only Mary of Magdala, but Susanna, and Joanna, the wife of King
Herod's steward who had been cured by Him, were His grateful friends.
Some priests came down from Jerusalem to watch Him, and to tell the
people that He was not a true teacher, and this pleased the Pharisees.
They saw that He did wonderful things that no man could do, but they
said that He did it by the power of the spirit of evil, and they asked
Him to show them a sign that he was from God.

The Lord spoke words to the Pharisees that must have burned like coals
of fire, for it showed how false and wicked their hearts were while
their outward life seemed to be very religious.

He told them that no sign should be given them except that of Jonah; as
he was three days and three nights in the great fish, so should the Son
of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth, and
though the men of Nineveh were wicked, yet they repented at the
preaching of Jonah, but the men of Jerusalem did not repent, though a
greater than Jonah was among them.

Mary and her sons had come from Nazareth hoping to take Jesus away from
the crowds, perhaps, for a rest among the hills, for the summer heat
was great down by the lake and along the Jordan.  Some one sent word to
Jesus, as He sat teaching within the court of a house, that His mother
and brothers were outside, and wished to speak with Him.  The crowd was
too great for them to enter.  Before Jesus rose to go out to his
mother, He paused a moment to teach the great lesson He had come to
bring to the world.  Looking at His disciples He said,

"My mother and my brethren are these which hear the Word of God and do
it."




CHAPTER XX.

STORIES TOLD BY THE LAKE.

Jesus was glad to go among the fishermen and teach the people by the
Lake, for their hearts were like the good ground into which the farmer
loves to drop his seed, while the hearts of the rich, proud Pharisees
were like the rock on which seed cannot grow.  Perhaps he was thinking
of this as He walked out one morning from Peter's house along the
pebbly shore and sat down to talk with the people.  The crowd always
grew large around him there, and He had to again enter a fishing boat
and sit a little out from the shore that the people might see and hear
Him more easily.  He taught them as no man had ever done before.  He
told them short stories, often taking the subject from something the
people could see.  Perhaps this morning as He looked over the lovely
plain of Gennesaret, He saw a sower casting seed into a brown and
furrowed field, for it was the time of the year for sowing the winter
wheat.  This is the story of "The Sower:"

"A sower went out to sow his seed," said Jesus, "and as he sowed, some
fell by the wayside, and it was trodden down, and the fowls of the air
devoured it.

"And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up it withered
away, because it lacked moisture.

"And some fell among thorns, and the thorns sprang up with it and
choked it.

"And other fell on good ground, and sprang up and bore fruit an hundred
fold."

And then He said, "He that hath ears to hear let him hear," for He knew
that some could understand with the heart that He was talking of the
Word of God, but there were many who could not.

[Illustration: Jesus teaching by the sea]

His disciples asked Him to make the story plain to all, and so He said,

"The seed is the Word of God.  Those by the wayside are they that hear;
then cometh the devil and taketh away the Word out of their hearts lest
they should believe and be saved.

"They on the rock are they which, when they hear, receive the Word with
joy, and these have no root, which for a while believe, and in time of
temptation fall away.

"And that which fell among thorns are they which, when they have heard,
go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of this
life, and bring no fruit to perfection.

"But that on the good ground are they which in an honest and good
heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience."

He also told them a story called "The Wheat and the Tares," of a man
who sowed good seed in a field, but when it sprung up and bore grain
there were weeds growing among it called tares, for an enemy had sowed
the seed at night and it had grown up with the wheat.  The man's
servants wished to pull out the tares, but the master of the field said
both should grow together until the harvest, that the wheat might not
be uprooted with the tares.  At the end of the harvest the tares would
be burned and the wheat gathered into the barn.  In this way he taught
them why good and evil are allowed to grow together in this world.

He also taught them in the story of "The Mustard Seed," that the growth
of the Lord's Kingdom in the heart is like a mustard seed sowed in a
field--which is the least of seeds--but which becomes a great plant, so
large that birds light on its branches.  He told them other stories
also that were to show them that the Kingdom of Heaven was life, and
not a written law, and that it grows in the hearts of people as a seed
grows in a field, one seed bearing many seeds, until the time when the
Lord's Kingdom shall fill the earth as the ripe wheat fills the field
in harvest.

One of the stories told that day was about "The Treasure."  He told
them of a man who, when digging in a field, found a treasure, a mine of
gold, perhaps, and went and sold all that he had to get money enough to
buy that field.  Another one was the story of "The Pearl," which a
pearl-hunter found.  It was so large and beautiful that he sold all he
had to be able to buy it.  Both these stories were to teach that heaven
in the heart is worth more to us, when once we find it, than all the
treasures or pleasures of this world.

He also told a story of a "Fishing Net," which caught fish of every
kind, but when it was drawn to shore the fishermen gathered the good
fish into baskets, but threw the bad away.  This story was something
like that of the "Wheat and the Tares," showing how good and evil are
at last separated.

This was a wonderful day by the blue waters of the Lake of Galilee.
The people went home thinking much about the new Teacher and His
stories of the Kingdom of Heaven.

The great Sower of the Seed had been dropping it into their hearts, and
He alone knew which hearts were "good ground."




CHAPTER XXI.

STILLING THE STORMS.

When Jesus was very tired from teaching the people and healing the sick
He used to cross the lake and go up among the rocks of Gadara, a wild
region where there were few villages.  After the last long day of
teaching by the shore Jesus needed rest, but neither at Peter's house,
nor any where on that side of the Lake could He get away from the
crowds that followed Him to hear Him, or to be healed by Him.

In the evening, when the people came back to Him, He took the large
fishing-boat with His disciples, and set out for the other side.
Several beside His disciples wished to go with Him.  A scribe wished to
follow Him, but Jesus told him that He had no home, no place to lay his
head, though the foxes had holes and the birds of the air had nests.
Perhaps Jesus saw that the scribe was not ready to leave all and follow
Him.  Another wished to go, but thought he ought first to bury his
father, but Jesus said to him,

"Follow me, and let the dead bury their dead."  This He said of the
Jews who were spiritually dead.

After they had gone far out upon the Lake a great wind storm rose.  It
came sweeping down upon them from the hills, rattling the ropes and
swelling the sails so that they had to bring them down and fasten them,
and then take the oars.  Every part of the little ship was covered with
spray from the rising waves, and the disciples began to feel afraid.

[Illustration: Jesus sleeping during the storm]

Where was Jesus?  He was asleep.  They had brought a cushion for His
head, and He had fallen asleep in the stern of the ship.  As a wave
fell upon them and they were in danger of sinking they woke Jesus
saying,

"Master, Master, we perish!"

Then He rose and spoke to the winds and waters, and the storm ceased,
and there was a great calm.

The fishermen had never seen anything so wonderful as this, and they
looked at each other, almost more afraid of Jesus than they had been of
the storm.

"What manner of man is this," they said, "that even the wind and the
sea obey Him!"

Jesus also wondered, and said,

"Why are ye so fearful?  How is it that ye have no faith?"

As soon as they had landed in Gadara a strange man came out of the rock
tombs to meet them.  He was naked and wounded, for he was always
wandering in the mountains and among the tombs, crying and cutting
himself.  Jesus was sorry for him for He knew that it was the evil
spirits within him that made him so unhappy.  The poor man tried to
worship Jesus, and the evil spirits only cried out the more, begging to
be let alone.

When Jesus asked "What is thy name," he answered, "My name is Legion,
for we are many."

Jesus made the poor man free by commanding the evil spirits to come out
of him.  They entered into a herd of swine near by, and the frightened
creatures ran down a steep place into the lake and were drowned.  The
men who kept them were afraid and ran away, telling all whom they met
of the thing that had happened.  Some people came to see for
themselves, and they found the wild man of the tombs clothed and
quietly sitting at the feet of Jesus listening to His word.  They were
afraid of Jesus and begged Him to go away.  They did not understand
that He wished to bless and not to harm them.

As He went back to the ship the man who had been cured of his insanity
begged to go with Him, but Jesus told him to go instead to his friends
at home and tell them what the Lord had done for him.

The next morning the people of Decapolis heard a strange story from the
wild man of the tombs, but was now a reasoning man again.

And so Jesus stilled the storm of wind on the Lake and the storm of
evil in a soul.




CHAPTER XXII.

CALLED BACK.

When Jesus came back to Capernaum He found the crowd of friends at the
little wharf full of concern about Him, and glad that no harm had come
to Him during the storm.  Among them was one who had watched anxiously
for the boat, for he had a little daughter at home very ill indeed, so
ill that she was "at the last breath."  His name was Jairus, and he was
a ruler of the synagogue.  He was so troubled that he fell at the feet
of Jesus, begging Him to come and lay His hand on his child that she
might live.

Jesus went with him, a throng of people with them, hoping to see Him do
a great work.

While He was on the way a woman who had been sick twelve years followed
close behind Him, and put forth her hand timidly toward Him.

"If I may touch but His clothes I shall be whole," she said to herself,
and she touched them with faith in her heart.

Jesus, who knew all hearts, turned straight around and said:

"Who touched My clothes?"

How the woman shrank back and trembled when she heard that, for she was
afraid she had done wrong.

The disciples thought it strange that He should ask this, as the people
thronged so close that they could not help touching Jesus  But the
woman knew what He meant and she came and fell down before Him, fearing
and trembling, and told Him all the truth.

Jesus did not look sternly at her as she thought He would do, but He
said gently,

"Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of
thy plague."

While the woman was still at His feet full of gratitude and love
because she felt herself cured, some friends came from the ruler's
house to bring sad news.

"Thy daughter is dead," they said, "why troublest thou the Master any
further?"

Jesus saw the looks of grief on the father's face and said quickly,

"Be not afraid, only believe."

So they went to the ruler's house, and into the inner room where the
little maid lay.  Many wished to press in after them to see what Jesus
would do, but he took only Peter and James and John with the father and
mother of the maiden into the quiet, darkened room.  As He went in He
said to some who were mourning noisily in the outer room,

"Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth."  Jesus loved to call death a
"sleep," for He knew that we never die.  Then He took the little maid
by the hand and called her.  She had not gone so far into the country
we cannot see that she could not hear a divine Voice calling to her,

"Talitha cumi!" ("Maiden, arise!")  At once she rose and walked.  She
was a little girl of twelve, and very dear to her father and mother,
and there was no doubt great joy as well as wonder in the house of the
ruler that bright morning after the storm.  In their joy and wonder
there was danger of forgetting to give her the food she was in need of,
and so Jesus gently reminded them, commanding that something should be
given her to eat, but he charged them not to talk about the return of
their little daughter.

[Illustration: Jesus curing the little maid]




CHAPTER XXIII.

TWO BY TWO.

Jesus had a desire to once more speak to the people of His own little
town of Nazareth, and so He came again to His own, but His own received
Him not.  Once more he went into the Nazareth Synagogue where He had
listened to the reading of the law all through His childhood and to
teach as He had done nine or ten months before.  They did not rise up
and thrust Him out as they did then, but they cast cold looks and
scornful words upon Him.  They could not understand His great power and
wisdom, but they would not believe in Him.

"Is not this the carpenter, the Son of Mary," they said, "the brother
of James and Joses, and of Juda and Simon?  And are not His sisters
here with us?"  They were offended with Him.  Jesus, knowing their
faults said,

"A prophet is not without honor, but in his own country, and among his
own kin, and in his own house."

He wondered why they were so unbelieving, when in His great love for
them He was ready to do works of mercy among them, and to tell them the
glad tidings of the Kingdom of Heaven, but He laid His hands on a few
sick folk and healed them, and that was all.

As He went away to come back no more, His heart turned toward the many
who were waiting for the tidings that His old friends had rejected, and
He called the twelve together to send them out, two by two, into the
world around them.  He gave them power to cast out evil spirits, and to
heal the sick; and He put the preaching power within them so that they
could tell to others the wonderful truths of the Kingdom of Heaven.  He
told them that they must take nothing for their journey, except a
staff, with which to walk over the steep mountain paths.  He told them
also to bless the house that sheltered them, and to leave the house or
the city that would not receive them.  He said that they would have
many trials, and that their lives would be sought by wicked men, but
that they need not fear, for the very hairs of their head were
numbered, and that even a sparrow could not fall to the ground without
their Father, and they were of more value than many sparrows.

He said many other words to them that gave them comfort and strength.
They had left all to follow Him, and He showed them how, in losing
their all in this life they were finding much more than that--even
eternal life.

So, two by two, they went forth and left Jesus alone.

That great and good man, John the Baptist, was still in the prison of
King Herod Antipas, down by the Dead Sea.  He had been there more than
a year, but no word came from the king saying that he was free.  Queen
Herodias wanted him to be put to death for he had spoken against her
marriage with King Herod.  She was a wicked woman, and the evil hate
the good.  Herod believed in his heart that John should go free, but
for the Queen's sake he kept him in prison, but allowed his friends to
see him, and sometimes sent for him secretly to hear him talk of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

On the king's birthday he gave a great feast to his lords and captains,
and when they had been served with dainty food in dishes of silver and
gold, and had tasted the rare fruits and the costly wines, the dancing
girls came in to flit over the polished marble floor, and wave their
airy scarfs to please the king and his guests.

At last a young girl came in and danced alone.  She was dressed like a
princess, and she was a princess.

Queen Herodias had sent her young daughter, Salome, where an innocent
girl and a queen's daughter should not have gone.

She pleased the king and his lords greatly, and when she had finished,
and had knelt before the king to hear what he had to say to her, he
cried,

"Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give it thee," and with an
oath he declared that he would certainly do it if she should ask the
half of his kingdom.

She did not decide for herself, but ran to her mother, saying,

"What shall I ask?"  And the cruel mother said,

"The head of John the Baptist."

King Herod did not expect this.  He thought she might ask for some
jewel of great price, or perhaps a royal palace for her very own, and
when he heard her request he was very sorry.  But an oath made before
his lords could not be broken.

He sent men to the prison, and the good prophet, who had never known
fear, went home to God, and they brought his head to the princess who
gave it to her mother.  The king's feast ended in gloom, and the poor
girl, who only obeyed her wicked mother, had nothing but a dreadful
memory to keep forever as the king's gift.

And the king himself--what trouble followed him during the rest of his
life!  Riches and honors were all taken from him, and he was sent out
of his own country, while John had gone to his Father's house in the
Heavenly Country to suffer no more forever.

John's disciples buried the body of their beloved master, and then went
and told Jesus.  Only Jesus can give real comfort in trouble.

The disciples--now called apostles, or teachers--who had been out
teaching among the villages, heard, perhaps, of the death of John the
Baptist, and came back to Jesus two by two, as they had gone out.  They
had been preaching, healing the sick, and casting out evil spirits.
They often said "The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand," and the people
wondered if it would not be best to rise up and make Jesus their king.

Herod heard of the work of Jesus and the apostles, and was afraid.  He
half believed that John whom he had killed had risen from the dead.  He
tried to see Jesus, but the One who had come to preach the gospel to
the poor had no time to give to Herod.

As Peter, and John, and Andrew and all the rest came back they were
full of stories of the wonderful things that had been done through the
power that the Lord had given them.  Many came with them to find Jesus.
He saw that they needed to come away from the crowds that were always
around them so that He could speak to them of their work, and so that
they could rest, and think, and pray.

They took a boat and crossed the Lake.  The shore was crowded with
people who wished to be with Jesus, and when they knew that He was
going to Bethsaida-Julias at the northern end of the Lake they resolved
to follow Him, for it was only a few miles away.

At the end of the Lake they entered the Jordan river, and sailing up a
little way to the landing-place they saw the people coming, some in
boats, and more in groups along the shore--men, women and children--and
Jesus, filled with love and pity for them, led them to a green hillside
where He sat down to teach them as He had often done before.

It was spring, and the grass was like a great green carpet sprinkled
with bright wild-flowers, while the river, lined with bushes flowed
below, and beyond lay the beautiful blue Lake.  The disciples stood
around their Master while He taught the people in simple language that
they could understand the greatest truths the world has ever heard.
All the afternoon He spoke to them, and when the sun was slowly going
down over the hills of Galilee they still wished to stay.  They were as
sheep having no shepherd.  The disciples were troubled about them, for
they were far from the villages where bread could be bought, and they
had nothing to eat.  They begged Jesus to send them away.

"Give ye them to eat," said Jesus.  Then the disciples were astonished,
for there were about five thousand men, beside the women and children.
"Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and give them to
eat?" said Philip.  Then Jesus, who knew what He would do, said, "How
many loaves have ye?  Go and see."

They went among the people, and Andrew came back, saying,

"There is a lad here which hath five barley loaves, and two small
fishes; but what are they among so many?"

Then Jesus told His disciples to seat all the people in order upon the
green grass, and soon there were little companies of fifty, and larger
ones of an hundred sitting all over the hillside with their faces
turned toward Jesus, who stood looking out upon them as a father would
look upon his children.  What were they waiting for?  No one knew, but
they saw Him take the little lad's basket of bread and the two little
fishes and look up to heaven, blessing them as He did so.  Then He
began to break the bread and divide the fishes.  As He broke the bread
and gave to the disciples they took it away to the people sitting on
the grass, and when they came back to Jesus there was still more
waiting for them.  In this way all the people were fed.

[Illustration: Feeding the five thousand]

When they were satisfied Jesus said to His disciples,

"Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost."

And they filled twelve baskets with the pieces of the barley loaves
that were left.

What a silent and wonderful supper of bread fresh from the hand of its
Creator!

At last they began saying to each other in a low voice,

"This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the world!" and
they began to ask each other if it would not be best to take Him at
once and make Him king whether he would or would not consent, but when
He saw what they wished to do, He slipped away and went farther up
among the hills to rest.

Evening had now come, and the people not finding Jesus, went away to
their homes, and the disciples in their little ship returned to
Capernaum.  The people could not understand, nor could His disciples,
that Jesus did not come to be an earthly king over the little nation of
the Jews.  Not until the Holy Spirit came to make all things clear did
they understand that He was to be the Spiritual King of all the world.




CHAPTER XXIV.

WALKING THE WAVES--THE TWO KINGDOMS.

While Jesus was alone on the mountain side the disciples were trying to
reach Capernaum in their fishing boat.  It was not a long sail, but a
contrary wind had risen and was blowing them out into the Lake away
from the landing place.

They had taken down their sail and were rowing, but by three o'clock in
the morning they were still out upon the Lake.

Jesus, who knew all things, saw them struggling with the oars, and
coming swiftly down the mountain side He went to them walking upon the
water.

The disciples saw a form through the darkness drawing near to them, and
strangely enough they did not think of Jesus, but cried out in terror,
saying,

"It is a spirit."  Then the clear sweet voice of their Master rose over
the sound of the wind and the waves, "Be of good cheer, it is I, be not
afraid."  And Peter, full of glad faith, cried out, "Lord, if it be
Thou, bid me come unto Thee on the water."

When Jesus said "Come," Peter climbed over the side of the boat and
began to walk toward Jesus, but when a strong wind drove the waves upon
him he lost sight of the Lord for a moment, and he was afraid.

"Lord, save me!" he cried, and began to sink.

Then Jesus stretched out His hand and caught Peter, saying, "O thou of
little faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?"

When they both entered the ship the wind ceased, and while the
disciples wondered and worshipped, saying, "Of a truth Thou art the Son
of God," they found themselves at the land not far from Capernaum.

It was on the white beach of pebbles and shells that bordered the plain
of Gennesaret where they moored the boat in the early morning, and as
soon as the people saw them they began bringing their sick friends to
Jesus.  Many were too ill to walk, and were brought on little beds or
mattresses and laid at Jesus's feet, and there they were healed if they
but touched the hem of His garment.

Many of those who brought the sick to Jesus had been with Him on the
mountain side, and had eaten of the wonderful bread of heaven that He
had broken for them.  They believed that He could do anything that He
would.

The people whose hearts were set upon making Jesus their king followed
Him wherever He went.  Some who had been with Him when He made bread
for the great company on the hillside at Bethsaida-Julias found Him
teaching in the synagogue at Capernaum.

"Teacher, when camest thou hither?" they said.  Jesus, knowing that
they cared more for His gifts than for His teaching, said, "Ye seek me,
not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves
and were filled," and told them that they should not labor for the food
that perishes, but for that which endures forever.

They still wished Him to do some wonder, or show them how to work
wonders, for they asked Him what they should do to work the works of
God.

"This is the work of God," He said, "That ye believe on Him whom He
hath sent."  Still they remembered the miracle of the bread.

"What sign showest Thou?" they said, "Our fathers did eat manna in the
desert."  Then He spoke plainly to them of Himself.

"The bread of God is He which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life
unto the world."  One more spiritual than the rest said reverently,
"Lord, evermore give us this bread."

Then Jesus spoke those words about Himself that turned many away from
Him.  He showed them that He could never be what they expected Him to
be--an earthly king.  He had only the things of the Spirit to give
them, and He called them to a kingdom that could be seen only with
spiritual sight.

"I am the bread of life," He said, "He that cometh to me shall never
hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.  All that the
Father giveth me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me I will in
no wise cast out."

The Jews were offended with Him because He had said, "I came down from
heaven."  "I am the living bread which came down from heaven," He said.
"If any man eat of this bread he shall live forever; and the bread that
I will give is my flesh which I will give for the life of the world."

Then the Jews were vexed and turned to talk among themselves.  They
could not understand what He meant, but they saw plainly that He was
not going to agree with their plan to make Him the King of the Jews,
who would lead them out of their bondage to the Romans, and establish
them forever as a nation.

They did not want to follow Him, but they wanted Him to follow their
plan.  And as for His talk about being the "bread of life,"--"This is
an hard saying," they said, "who can hear it?"

While they murmured Jesus said,

"Doth this offend you?  What and if you shall see the Son of Man
ascending where He was before?"

"_It is the Spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth nothing; the
words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are life._"

Then they knew that He meant something above what they could see, or
what they wanted, and many turned away from Him and went to their homes
disappointed.  He had said, "there are some of you that believe not,"
and it was true.  Jesus turned to the twelve who stood in silence near
Him,

"Will ye also go away?" He said.

Loving, impulsive Peter cried out,

"Lord, to whom shall we go?  Thou hast the words of eternal life, and
we believe and are sure that Thou art that Christ, the Son of the
living God."

"Did I not choose you twelve," said Jesus, "and one of you is a devil."

Already evil spirits had tried to turn Judas away from the Lord by
tempting him, and he had let them into his heart.  And Jesus, who knew
all men, saw them there.




CHAPTER XXV.

A JOURNEY WITH JESUS.

Jesus went away with His disciples into the "borders of Tyre and
Sidon."  He did not go to the Passover feast, for the anger of the Jews
had been growing more violent toward Him and His disciples, and he took
the twelve away from the crowded towns around the Lake into the parts
that bordered upon a heathen country.  He could do far more for the
simple-hearted heathen than for Jews who believed themselves to be wise
and religious.

When it was known that the young teacher of Nazareth was among them
some came to Him who were not Jews.  One was a Syrian woman whose
daughter was troubled by an evil spirit, and she begged Jesus to have
mercy upon her.  The disciples were not pleased to have her follow them
with strange cries in another language.  They believed that the works
of Jesus were for the Jews only, and so they begged Him to send her
away.  Jesus was silent, for He knew all hearts, and saw faith growing
in the heart of the poor woman.

He said, trying her faith,

"It is not meet to take the children's bread and cast it to dogs."

"Truth, Lord," she said, "yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall
from their master's table."

Then Jesus hid Himself no longer from her faith, but said,

"O woman, great is thy faith! be it unto thee even as thou wilt."  And
her daughter was cured that very hour.

Jesus did not go down by the great sea, though He could see it lying
like blue and silver across the west whenever He came to a hilltop as
they journeyed, but He went northward to the hills that lie around the
mountains of Lebanon.  Upon these mountains grew the cedars that
Solomon's servants cut down and carried to Jerusalem for the building
of the Holy House.  They stopped in the Lebanon villages, and came at
length to the foot of Mount Hermon, and to the Jordan, crossing over
and passing near the place where the great company who followed Jesus
had been fed.  As they came into Decapolis on the east side of the lake
of Gennesaret the people came to Him in crowds again for healing.
There He healed a man who could neither hear nor speak.

Coming to Gadara He found crowds coming with their sick for healing.
Eight months before He had healed a poor man in whom was a legion of
devils, casting them out into a herd of swine, and they had begged Him
to leave their coast for they were afraid of Him, but now they were
glad to come to Him for healing.  No doubt the man who had been healed
had told them of the gentleness of Jesus, and of His wonderful words,
and had brought many to Him.

It was in Bethsaida-Julias that Jesus once opened the eyes of a blind
man.  He did not see clearly at first, but when Jesus laid His hand a
second time upon his eyes he saw quite well, and was so grateful that
he wanted to go and tell all his friends about it, but Jesus told him
to go quietly home.

Two blind men followed Him also, crying, "Thou Son of David, have mercy
on us!"  They followed Him into a house and there Jesus asked, "Believe
ye that I am able to do this?"  "Yea, Lord," they said.

"According to your faith be it unto you," He said, touching their eyes,
and their eyes were opened at once.

Though Jesus had said, "See that no man know it," yet they told it
through all that country.




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE CHRISTIAN SABBATH--PETER'S CONFESSION OF FAITH.

Jesus was walking with His disciples one Sabbath day and talking of the
Kingdom of Heaven when they came to a field of ripe grain.  They had
been gathering food for their souls from the teachings of Jesus, and
had forgotten to take food for their bodies until they saw the ripe
grain and knew that they were hungry.  Some of them began to take the
heads of wheat (or barley), to rub them in their hands to separate the
grain from the chaff, and eat the kernels of wheat.

[Illustration: Jesus in the wheat fields]

Following close after them were some men who had been told to watch
Jesus and His disciples, and see if anything could be brought against
them.

They held very strict views about keeping the Sabbath, as all Pharisees
did, and here they saw something that might be called breaking the
Sabbath, for were they not really reaping the wheat, and sifting it
through their hands?

"Behold thy disciples do that which is not lawful to do upon the
Sabbath day," they said.  "The Son of Man," said Jesus, "is Lord even
of the Sabbath day."

Another Sabbath He entered into a synagogue and taught.  Among the
people stood a man who had a helpless and withered hand.  The same
Pharisees who had followed Jesus as spies when He walked through the
grain-fields were watching Him in the Synagogue to see if He would heal
on the Sabbath.  He knew their thoughts, and called the man, saying,
"Rise up and stand forth in the midst."

The man rose, and while he stood waiting, Jesus turned to the Pharisees
who were eagerly watching to see if Jesus would do something that was
forbidden in their law, and said,

"Is it lawful on the Sabbath days to do good, or to do evil?  To save
life or to destroy it?"  The Pharisees dared not answer, and Jesus,
looking round upon them all, said to the man, "Stretch forth thy hand."

The man obeyed.  Although he had not been able to raise his hand, he
stretched it forth, and it became as whole and as strong as the other.

The Pharisees went away very angry, and tried to make a plan among
themselves for bringing Jesus into trouble.

Jesus came to fill the law about the Sabbath full of the spirit of
heaven; to teach love and service to the neighbor, as well as the love
and worship of God, but they could not understand Him.

Jesus was near the end of His ministry to the people east of the Jordan
in the country called Decapolis.  They were not like the Galilean Jews,
they were half heathen people who lived among the wild, rocky hills of
that region.  They were poor and ignorant, yet they were more ready to
accept the gospel than the wise and wicked Pharisees had been.

He had been kind to them in their sickness and poverty, and they
followed Him with their sick, and lame, and deaf, and blind, leaving
them at His feet until they arose praising God that they had been saved
from their sufferings.

Jesus had been teaching in the wild mountain country, and the people
would not leave Him to go away to their homes.  After three days Jesus
said to His disciples, "I have compassion on the multitude because they
continue with me now three days and have nothing to eat, and I will not
send them away fasting lest they faint by the way."

The disciples did not remember the Lord's power to create bread, and
wondered where they should find it in the wilderness to feed such a
great multitude.

But when Jesus knew that they had seven loves of barley bread and a few
little fishes He told the people to sit down on the ground, and after
giving thanks over the loaves and the fishes, He divided them and gave
to His disciples, and the disciples gave to the people.  There were
four thousand men beside women and children who took the bread that
came from the Lord's hands.  After all had eaten and were filled they
took up seven baskets of the food that was left.

Jesus, though He could create food for the people, taught them to use
it wisely and waste nothing.

When the people had been sent to their homes, Jesus, with His
disciples, took a fishing boat and crossed the Lake only to find the
Pharisees there ready to question Him, and to tempt Him to show them
some great sign from heaven.

He told them that they could read the signs of the coming weather in
the sky, but they could not see the signs of the times.

Only a wicked people look for a sign, He said, and no sign should be
given except the sign that Jonah gave to the Ninevites--a call to
repentance.

Then He left them, for He saw the hardness of their hearts.

Again they took their journey in the little ship to the northern end of
the Lake, and after landing, followed the east side of Jordan until
they passed near the place where the five thousand had been fed by a
miracle as they sat on the green hillside.

The disciples found that they had forgotten to bring bread with them.
They remembered, perhaps, that they had here eaten the bread that the
Lord had created; but the heart of Jesus was heavy with the thought of
the unbelief of the people He had come to save, and He said,

"Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees."

The disciples did not understand Him, and wondered if He spoke thus
because they had not brought bread.

Then Jesus, seeing that they had but little faith, reminded them of the
supper on the hillside, when more than five thousand were fed, and of
that later meal among the rocky hills of Decapolis, when four thousand
and more were fed, and that they did not need to be concerned about
food for the body so much as to beware of the false teaching of the
Pharisees and of the Sadducees.

They walked still further north, directly toward that beautiful
mountain that lifts its head, white with the glistening snow, high
above the hills that lead up to it, so that it may be seen over the
larger part of Palestine.

They came to Caesarea Philippi, one of the most beautiful places in the
world.  It lay in the green lap of Mount Hermon high above the sea, and
shut in by cliffs and forests.  The upper springs of the Jordan are
here.  They leap out of a great cavern in the side of the mountain--a
river of clear, cold water.

The old Greeks loved the place, and built there a temple to the god of
nature, but after the Romans came it was named for the Emperor and
Philip the Tetrarch.  Here there were more Gentiles than Jews, for it
was a gay town in the summer, and people from other towns came to this
city of palaces, temples, baths, theatres, and statues.  These people
did not wish to hear the words of Jesus, but the coolness and beauty of
the country around this birthplace of the Jordan made it a fit place to
bring His disciples where they could talk over the things of the
kingdom without being disturbed by the Pharisees.  Here He was able to
pray alone, and once, after prayer, He questioned His disciples about
Himself.

"Whom say the people that I am?" He asked.  They remembered their talks
with the people and said, "John the Baptist, but some say Elias, and
others say that one of the old prophets is risen again."  "But whom say
ye that I am?" He asked.  Then Peter, the believing disciple, made his
confession of faith,--

"Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God."  Jesus was glad to
hear this, for many had come to doubt Him, and many had gone away from
Him since they knew that He would not be an earthly king.

"Blessed art thou Simon, son of Jonas," He said, "for flesh and blood
hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven."

He saw that Peter's faith in the truth was like his name, which means
"a rock," and so He said,

"Thou art Peter, and on this rock will I build my church, and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it."

Peter's faith in the truth was also in the hearts of the other
disciples for whom He spoke, and Jesus saw that they could now bear
what he had to say to them without going away.

He told them that He must soon go to Jerusalem and suffer many things
from the chief priests and the scribes and the elders, and that He
should be killed by them, and rise again from the dead the third day.

Even Peter's faith was shaken by this.  How could the Son of God be
killed?  He could not believe His Master meant it so.

"Be it far from thee, Lord," he said, "this shall not be unto thee."

Jesus saw the spirit of fear and unbelief rising up in Peter, and to
this--not to Peter himself--Jesus said,

"Get thee behind me, Satan; thou art an offence unto me; for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men."

Then He plainly told them what they must be ready to meet if they
followed Him.  They must not hope for any earthly honors or riches, and
they must put aside their own wishes and obey the Lord alone.

He told them that whoever wished to live for this world alone would
lose all, but whoever was willing to lose all for His sake should find
eternal life.

"For what is a man profited," He said, "if he shall gain the whole
world and lose his own soul, or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul?"




CHAPTER XXVII.

"AND WE BEHELD HIS GLORY"--A FATHER'S FAITH.

Jesus stayed near Caesarea Philippi with His disciples for a week.  The
villagers were cutting the ripe grain, the vineyards were rich with
clusters of the rich grapes that grew on the Lebanon hills, and the
olives were ripening for the time when they would be put in the presses
to make the delicious "oil olive."  In that week He must have had many
wonderful talks with the villagers.

One evening, as they had come over the lower hills of Hermon, Jesus
left the disciples to wait for Him below, taking only Peter and the
brothers James and John with Him up the mount.  They did not go to the
very top but rested on one of the lower peaks.  While Jesus went a
little distance from them to pray, the three disciples, wrapped in
their thick mantles, lay down to wait for Him.  In that high clear air
they seemed very near heaven.  The stars seemed almost as near as the
lights in the villages below.  They were tired, and watching their
Master in prayer, they fell asleep.  While they slept they seemed to
see a change in the face of Jesus as He prayed.  It grew light with a
strange inward glory, and all His garments became white and glistening
like the snows of Hermon in the sun.  They also saw two men with Him
whom they seemed to know were Moses and Elias, who had gone to heaven
centuries before.

They also heard them talking with Jesus, and they spoke of the same
thing that had troubled Peter when Jesus had spoken of it--that He
should die at Jerusalem.

They awoke out of sleep, but the vision did not pass away like a dream,
they still saw it all.

But as it began to melt away, Peter said, hardly knowing what he said,

"Master, it is good for us to be here, and let us make three
tabernacles, one for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias."

Then the glory around Jesus grew until it seemed like a bright cloud at
sunset, and it came and wrapt them around in its soft brightness, and
they were afraid.

In the silence they heard a Divine voice, saying,

"This is My beloved Son; hear Him."

When the voice was passed they looked up and saw Jesus there alone.  He
was bending over them, touching them tenderly, and saying,

"Arise, and be not afraid."

As they came down the mountain He told them to tell no one of the
vision until after He had risen from the dead.

It seemed to the disciples, no doubt, like coming down from heaven to
earth when after a long walk and talk with Jesus in the summer morning
they came near the village they had left, and found the people--among
them some Jewish lawyers--disputing with the group of disciples there.
As soon as they saw Jesus they all ran to Him, and greeted Him.

One of the men explained what they were disputing about.

"Master," he said, "I have brought unto thee my son which hath a dumb
spirit," and he described the frightful state into which it had brought
his boy, and added that the disciples could not cast it out.

"Bring him to me," said Jesus, and they brought him, the evil spirit
within him throwing him into convulsions as they laid him at Jesus'
feet.

"How long is it ago since this came to him?" said Jesus.

"Of a child," said the father, "and ofttimes it hath cast him into the
fire and into the waters to destroy him, but if thou canst do anything,
have compassion on us, and help us."  Jesus said,

"If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth."

Then the poor father cried out with tears, "Lord, I believe; help thou
mine unbelief!"

The Lord did not wait for greater faith than this.  He charged the evil
spirit to come out of the boy, and after a great struggle it left him
as one dead, but Jesus took him by the hand and he arose.

"Why could not we cast him out?" said the disciples afterward.

"This kind," said Jesus, "can come forth by nothing but by prayer and
fasting."

As they turned their steps toward home--the Lake side in Galilee--Jesus
again spoke of the work that lay before Him.  The disciples listened
sadly, but could not understand why He should speak of being killed,
and of rising again from the dead, and they dared not ask Him questions
about it.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

THE LORD AND THE LITTLE ONES--LEAVING GALILEE.

As the Lord and His disciples walked over the hills into Galilee some
of them fell behind wondering among themselves what He could mean when
He spoke of being killed and of rising again.  Perhaps they thought it
only a sadness that would pass away, and so full of faith in His power
were they that they could not believe that One who could raise the dead
could Himself die.

"He will be a King," they thought, and began to wonder who among them
would be chosen to be greatest in His Kingdom, and even to quarrel
about it.

After they had reached Capernaum, and were at home again--probably in
Peter's house--Jesus said to them,

"What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?"

There was no word from any one of them, for they were ashamed.  Then
the Lord sat down, and calling the twelve around Him, said gently,

"If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and
servant of all."

A little child stood near listening, and wishing, perhaps, that he
might be a grown man so that he also could be a disciple.

Making room for him in the midst of them all, He called the child,
Peter's child, perhaps, who came joyfully to Him.  Taking Him tenderly
in His arms He said,

"Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name receiveth me,
and whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not me, but Him that sent me."

And He taught His disciples to be humble as a little child in these
beautiful words:

"Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven."

"Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones, for I say unto
you that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father
which is in heaven."

[Illustration: The little ones]

He also told them of the love of the Father in seeking His lost
children.  That if a shepherd had but lost one of his hundred sheep, he
would leave all the others to go out into the wild mountains to look
for the lost sheep.  How much more would the Father do for His own, and
especially for His little ones.

"Even so," He said, "it is not the will of your Father, which is in
heaven, that one of these little ones should perish."

Before going to the Feast at Jerusalem the Lord Jesus said many things
to His disciples that would help them to be loving and forgiving toward
each other and all the world, for they were very soon going to meet
trouble which would try their love and their faith.  He told them to
deal gently with those who had done wrong, that they might win them
back to the right way.  He told them that they should have help from
heaven when they asked for it, even if there should be only two to ask.

"For where two or three are gathered together in my name," He said,
"there am I in the midst of them."

"How oft shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him?" asked
Peter, "till seven times?"

"Until seventy times seven," said Jesus, and He did not mean that we
should even count the number of times that we forgive.

Then He told them a story of a forgiving king and an unforgiving
servant that you may read in the eighteenth chapter of Matthew.

At the time of the Feast of Tabernacles, the people went up to
Jerusalem to offer gifts in the golden Temple for the harvest that the
Lord had given them, and to join in a praise service there.

They brought oil, and wine, and wheat, and barley; dates, pomegranates,
and figs--something of all they had gathered, and while they marched
toward the holy city they sang joyful songs that David had written long
before.  When they reached Jerusalem they built bowers of branches cut
from the trees and lived in them for a week.

Even in the city the people came out of their houses and lived in
bowers on the streets and public squares, or upon the flat roofs of the
houses, and the hillsides round were covered with the green booths.

The brothers of Jesus came down to Capernaum on their way to the Feast
at Jerusalem, and they asked their elder Brother to go also into Judea
and show Himself to the world, that His miracles might be seen of all,
for they did not believe in Him yet.  But Jesus said,

"My time is not yet come, but your time is always ready."

So they went on their journey, and Jesus stayed in Galilee.

After a few days He set His face toward Jerusalem, taking the shortest
way through Samaria.  The Samaritans were not friendly to the Jews, and
the disciples, who had been sent on before to find lodging for the
company in a village, were not allowed to bring their Master there.

The gentle John and his brother James were angry that unkindness was
shown to Jesus, and wished to call down fire from heaven to destroy the
villagers, but Jesus said,

"Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of, for the Son of Man has
not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them."

And they went to another village.  On the way they found men who wished
to follow Jesus as the disciples did but while some were ready to leave
all, others wished to first bid their friends farewell, or bury their
dead, but Jesus saw something in their hearts that showed that they
were not fit for the Kingdom of God.

There were many beside the twelve who fully believed in Jesus, and were
ready to tell others of the coming kingdom, so He sent them out to all
the places where he intended to go, until there were seventy of them
preaching the good news.  They went, saying, "The Kingdom of God is
come unto you," and they healed the sick in Jesus' name.  When they
returned they were full of joy, saying,

"Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through Thy name."  But
Jesus said, "Rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto you, but
rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven."




CHAPTER XXIX.

AT THE HOUSE OF MARTHA--THE GOOD SHEPHERD.

While Jesus was on His way to Jerusalem a lawyer came and asked Him
questions.  He did not want to be a disciple, yet he asked what he
should do to have eternal life.

Jesus asked him what the commandments said about it, and the lawyer
repeated the two great commandments concerning love to the Lord and to
the neighbor.

"Thou hast answered right," Jesus replied.  "This do and thou shalt
live."

"And who is my neighbor?" said the lawyer.

Then Jesus told a story of a man who went down to Jericho, and was
nearly killed by thieves.  A priest came that way and when he saw a man
who needed help he passed by on the other side of the road.  So did a
Levite, one of the helpers in the temple worship, but a Samaritan (and
the Samaritans were despised by the Jews) came that way, and he stopped
in pity for the poor man, dressed his wounds, set him upon his own
beast and brought him to an inn and took care of him.  When he left the
inn he also left money for his care, with the promise of more if it
should be needed.  Then Jesus asked the lawyer which of these three men
was neighbor to him who fell among thieves.

[Illustration: The good Samaritan]

"He that showed mercy on him," said the lawyer.  Then said Jesus unto
him,

"Go thou and do likewise."

As Jesus came near to Jerusalem He passed through Bethany, a little
town at the foot of the Mount of Olives, where perhaps some of His
disciples had been preaching the new gospel before Him.  There He was
gladly received into the house of Martha, who prepared the table with
her own hands to offer the best in her house to her honored Guest.  She
had a brother named Lazarus, who was probably at the feast in
Jerusalem, and a younger sister named Mary who loved to listen to every
word that Jesus spoke.  As every family built a bower of branches
during this feast to remind them that for forty years they lived in
such houses in the wilderness while coming out of Egypt, there must
have been one in the court of Martha's house, and there, perhaps, Jesus
rested while Mary sat at His feet and heard His word.

[Illustration: Jesus in the house at Bethany]

Martha was very busy serving her honored guest, and thought Mary ought
to help her in the house, but Jesus said, "Martha, Martha, thou art
careful and troubled about many things; but one thing is needful, and
Mary hath chosen that good part which shall not be taken away from her."

When the Feast of Tabernacles was at its height Jesus came up to the
Temple at Jerusalem.  The people had been looking for Him, and as soon
as the noble, earnest-faced young Teacher was seen walking in the
marble court of the Temple they thronged around Him to hear Him teach,
or to see if He would do any miracle.

Some wondered at His wisdom and His doctrine, and asked where it came
from, "My doctrine is not mine," He said, "but His that sent me.  If
any man will do His will he shall know of the doctrine."

He taught them many things that day, and hinted at the same thing that
had troubled His disciples, and these were His words,

"Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go unto Him that sent me.
Ye shall seek me and shall not find me, and where I am thither ye
cannot come."

The priests, the scribes, and the Pharisees were listening, and He knew
that their hearts were too full of pride and self-love to receive His
word.  They could not go to Him, for they would not let Him come into
their hearts.

On the last day, the great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried to
the people who were about to go back to their homes.  His great heart
was breaking to bring them into the Kingdom of Heaven, and He knew that
they would be scattered as sheep having no shepherd.

"If any man thirst," He cried, "let him come unto me and drink."  And
He then promised to such as believe the Holy Spirit to dwell in them,
and to flow out toward all the world like rivers of living water.

So wonderfully did He preach that many said, "Of a truth this is a
prophet," and others said, "This is the Christ," while others were
filled with anger and wished to arrest Him.  Indeed, when the priests
and Pharisees urged the officers to take Him, they said,

"Never man spake like this man," and they would not lay hands on Him.

But Nicodemus, a learned doctor of the law, was a friend of Jesus.  He
it was who had a talk with Him one night under the olive trees about
the Spirit--the breath of God, and he with wise words turned the hatred
of the Jews away from Jesus for the time, and they went to their own
houses.

Jesus taught in the Temple again the next day, and all the people came
to listen.

It was here, perhaps, that the wicked Scribes and Pharisees brought to
Him a poor woman who had sinned.  They told Him that according to the
law she ought to be stoned, and asked what He would say about it.  He
did not answer, but seemed to be writing on the ground before Him as
though He did not hear them.  At last, because they would have an
answer He looked at them saying,

"He that is without sin among you, let him cast the first stone," and
He wrote again on the ground.  No one answered Jesus, but one by one
they went away too much ashamed to speak.  "Hath no man condemned
thee?" asked Jesus of the woman standing sorrowful and alone.

"No man, Lord," she said.

"Neither do I condemn thee," He said, "go and sin no more."

Then Jesus sitting in the Treasury of the Temple said,

"I am the light of the world.  He that followeth me shall not walk in
darkness but shall have the light of life."

Many other things He said that His enemies tried to turn against Him,
and the healing on the Sabbath day of a man who had been born blind
stirred the anger of the Jews against Him, so that they sought by much
questioning to accuse Jesus of sin, not knowing that they were
themselves spiritually blind.

But He turned from them to call to the people again as He did on the
last day of the Feast, for in His love and pity He longed to bring the
lost children of Israel to Himself that He might bless them, as a
shepherd brings back the sheep that stray from the fold.

"I am the Good Shepherd; and I know my own, and my own know me," said
Jesus, "even as the Father knoweth me, and I know the Father; and I lay
down my life for the sheep, and other sheep I have which are not of
this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and
they shall become one flock, one Shepherd."

Other beautiful and blessed words He said about the Shepherd and His
flock which are written in the tenth chapter of the Gospel of John, but
the learned Jews would not listen to Him, and thrice tried to kill Him
by stoning Him, but they could not harm Him, for His time had not come.

Then he went away beyond Jordan, where John first baptized, and many
believed on Him there.




CHAPTER XXX.

THE LESSON STORIES OF JESUS.

When Jesus was at prayer His disciples stood reverently apart from Him,
and one day a disciple came near when he had ceased and said,

"Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples."

Then the Lord taught them the beautiful prayer that is now said daily
all around the world, and known to every one of us, beginning, "Our
Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy name."

And He told them how pleased God is to have His children ask Him for
what they need, or come to Him in trouble.

"Ask, and it shall be given you," He said; "seek, and ye shall find;
knock and it shall be opened unto you."

"If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he give
him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a
serpent?"

"If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give good gifts to
them that ask Him?"

It was while the Lord was teaching in the country called Peraea, east
of Jordan, that He told many things that His disciples remembered and
wrote in a book afterward, when the Holy Spirit had come to "bring all
things to their remembrance," as He had promised.

He had been teaching three years, and was thirty-three years of age.

Some of the people who lived, at Bethabara, by Jordan, were present
when He was baptized by John, and they were glad to have him stay among
them and teach, for they were a kindly people, and though not learned
like the men who were often to be found in the Temple courts and in the
Synagogues, they were the common people who, hearing the word and
loving it, were wiser than the Pharisees.

The Lord told many stories that these people would remember, and
afterward understand by the teaching of His Spirit which He said would
be given to them.  You will read all of them in the Gospels, but here
we cannot tell them all.

The story of "The Fig-tree in the Vineyard," "The Great Supper," and
"The Foolish Rich Man" were stories of warning to those who were
turning away from the things of heaven to the things of the world, and
they were meant for all who should read them in the ages of the world.

So were the three stories--they are called "parables" in the
Gospels--of the lost things; "The lost sheep," "The lost piece of
money," and "The lost son."  They were given to us to show the great
love of the Heavenly Father for His children, and His constant care in
seeking for them when they are wandering away from Him.  These stories
are the voice of the Father always and everywhere calling His children
home, and many a poor soul has turned homeward with tears of repentance
after reading them.

One of these stories of lost things will be told here, but it is far
more beautiful in the language of the Scriptures.

There was once a rich man who had two sons, and the younger one came to
him and said,

"Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me."

And so the father divided his property, and gave the younger brother
his share.  In a few days he had gathered it all together and settled
his affairs so that he could go away.  He went into a distant country,
and there he spent all that he had among bad people who seemed to be
his friends, but were really his worst enemies.

When all that he had was spent there came a time of great trouble.
There was very little food in the land, for there was a famine, and he
was obliged to go to work for the little he could get.  It was not easy
to find work, for the only thing he could do was to hire himself to a
man who kept pigs.  His work was to stay in the fields and feed them
with husks, the hard pods of the carob tree.  Sometimes he was so
hungry that he would have been glad to eat even these, but "no man gave
unto him."  Then the young man "came to himself."

"How many hired servants of my father have bread enough and to spare,"
he said, "and I perish with hunger!"

"I will arise and go to my father, and I will say to him, 'Father, I
have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy son: make me as one of thy hired servants.'"

The father must have been watching for his lost boy, for while he was
yet a great way off he saw him, and ran to meet him.  He put his arms
around him and kissed him without once speaking of his sins, and he
called his servants to bring the best robe and put it on him, and a
ring for his hand, and shoes for his feet, and then to kill the fatted
calf to make a feast for all,

"For," he said "this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost,
and is found."

The elder son had been away in the field but when he came home heard
music and dancing, and called to a servant to ask what these things
meant.  When he had heard he was very angry, and would not go in.  His
father came out to beg him to come in and greet his brother, but he
said,

"Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any
time thy commandment, and yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might
make merry with my friends."  But the father said,

"Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine.  It was meet
that we should make merry and be glad, for this thy brother was dead,
and is alive again, and was lost and is found."

[Illustration: The return of the prodigal]

There are other stories told by Jesus while in Peraea, which you will
find in the gospel by Luke, the beloved physician.  One is about the
"Unjust Steward," and another is the story of the "Unjust Judge."
Still another is called "Dives and Lazarus," or the "Rich man and the
Beggar."

The parable of "The Pharisee and the Publican," describes two men who
went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a
publican.

[Illustration: The Pharisee and the publican]

The Pharisee prayed with _himself_, thus, "God, I thank thee that I am
not as other men are, or even as this publican.  I fast twice a week.
I give tithes of all I possess."

And the publican, standing afar off, dared not even lift his eyes to
heaven, but smote upon his breast, saying, "God be merciful to me a
sinner!"

"This man," said Jesus, "went down to his house justified rather than
the other; for every one that exalteth himself shall be abased, and he
that humbleth himself shall be exalted."




CHAPTER XXXI.

THE VOICE THAT WAKED THE DEAD--THE CHILDREN OF THE KINGDOM.

While Jesus and His disciples were still east of the Jordan trouble
fell upon the happy home in Bethany where Jesus had been an honored
guest.  A messenger was sent to Jesus in great haste, saying,

"Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick."

It was from Mary and Martha concerning their brother Lazarus.

Jesus sent the messenger back with this message,

"This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the
Son of God might be glorified thereby," and He remained two days longer
where He was.  Then He said,

"Let us go into Judea again."

The disciples reminded Him that the Jews there had tried to take His
life.

"Our friend Lazarus sleepeth," said Jesus, "but I go that I may awaken
him out of sleep."

The disciples thought that if he slept he was doing very well, until
Jesus told them plainly,

"Lazarus is dead."

Then Thomas was full of sorrow and said,

"Let us also go that we may die with him."

Bethany was not far from Jerusalem, and when they reached the house of
Martha, Lazarus had been dead four days, and was placed in a rock tomb.
Many Jews from Jerusalem had come out to Bethany to comfort Mary and
Martha, and to mourn for their friend Lazarus.

When Martha heard that Jesus was coming she ran to meet Him, but Mary
sat still in the house.  She thought, perhaps, that He had come too
late, and the same thought may have been in Martha's mind when she said,

"Lord, if thou hadst been here my brother had not died, but I know that
even now whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee."

"Thy brother shall rise again," said Jesus.

"I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day,"
she said.

Then Jesus spoke those heavenly words that have been the comfort of the
sorrowful ever since,

"I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in me
shall never die.  Believest thou this?"

"Yea, Lord," answered Martha, "I believe that thou art the Christ, the
Son of God which should come into the world."

Then she called Mary quietly, so that the people who were noisily
wailing should not hear.

"The Master is come and calleth for thee," she said.

Then Mary rose quickly and went to meet Jesus  The people who were
trying to comfort her followed her, for they thought she was going to
the tomb to weep there; but they saw her go to meet Jesus and fall at
His feet saying, as Martha did,

"Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died."

When Jesus saw the tears of Mary and her sister and their friends He
wept also, not for Lazarus, but His heart was moved for them, and He
shared their sorrow.

They brought Him to the tomb--a cave with a stone lying upon it.  When
He asked them to take away the stone Martha's faith began to fail; but
the stone was rolled away, and when Jesus had prayed He called with a
loud voice,

"Lazarus, come forth!"

And all who were bending forward toward the low, dark door of the tomb
saw a man wrapped in linen come forth from the darkness and try to
ascend the stone steps.

"Loose him and let him go," said Jesus.  And then there was a scene so
full of sacred joy that John, the disciple, who tells the story, does
not show it to us.

After this many believed in Jesus, but others went and told the
Pharisees all about it.

It was spring in Peraea, and the valley of the Jordan was full of the
singing of birds and the color of blooming trees and wild flowers,
while in the fields the young wheat was growing.  The people thronged
to Jesus in crowds, for He taught them in the open air.  The disciples
were busy with the people, explaining to the dull, listening to those
who wished to ask something of the Master, or keeping back the curious.
This had to be done in every village through which they passed.  There
were many mothers with their children around them who came out of their
low white houses to follow Jesus in the way, and to listen when He sat
down to teach.

The mothers loved to have the Rabbi's bless their children, for since
the days of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the blessing of a good man means
much to the Israelite.

One day some mothers brought their little ones to Jesus, and begged Him
to bless them.  The disciples told the mothers to stand back, and not
trouble the Master while he was teaching.  Jesus knew what they were
saying, and He called them unto Him and said,

"Suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of
such is the Kingdom of God.  Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not
receive the Kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter
therein."

In this way he made it clear to His disciples, to the mothers, and to
all who have read His word since that day, that every child is a
citizen of the Lord's Kingdom, and dear to the heart of the King.

Perhaps the mothers had heard that the Lord was about to leave the
country east of Jordan to go up to Jerusalem, and they longed to have
their little ones share in the blessing they had received while sitting
at the feet of the great Teacher and learning of Him, for soon after He
crossed the Jordan, and, teaching as he went, set His face toward
Jerusalem.




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE YOUNG MAN THAT JESUS LOVED.

A rich young ruler came running after Jesus one day, saying,

"Good Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?"

So eager was he to know that he knelt before Jesus by the road side.

Jesus spoke gently to him telling him that God alone is good, and that
he knew the commandments that God had given.

"All these have I kept from my youth up," said the young man.

As Jesus looked upon him He saw that he was really trying to be good,
and hoping that he could do some great and good act that would give him
a certain entrance into heaven.  He had been taught by the Rabbis that
men were saved by keeping the law and doing outward works of
righteousness.  He did not know that heaven must begin in his own heart.

Jesus, reading his heart, loved him, and longed to have him know the
truth.

"Yet lackest thou one thing," he said, "sell all that thou hast and
distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven; and
come, follow me."

When he heard these words the young man turned away and lost the eager
look with which he had come to the Lord's feet.  He was very sorrowful,
for he was very rich, and he found that he loved his riches more than
he loved anything else.

"How hardly," said Jesus, "shall they that have riches enter into the
Kingdom of God!  For it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's
eye than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God."

"Who then can be saved?" asked one.

"The things which are impossible with men, are possible with God," He
said.

"Lo, we have left all," said Peter, "and followed Thee," and then the
Lord gave to His disciples that promise that has been proven true by
millions of His children for ages past,--

"There is no man who hath left house or parents, or brethren, or wife,
or children for the Kingdom of God's sake, who shall not receive
manifold more in this present time, and in the world to come life
everlasting."




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE LAST JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM.

When Jesus and His disciples were finally on the way to Jerusalem Jesus
went before them, and the shadow of the great trial He was about to
suffer cast its shadow upon Him.  The disciples saw it, and Mark says
that "they were amazed; and as they followed, they were afraid."  He
told them all about the trial and the death that lay before Him, but so
unwilling were they to believe it, and so sure were they that He would
be made king of the Jews, that two of them brought their mother to
Jesus to ask that her two sons might sit next to Him when He should
come to the throne.

"Ye know not what ye ask," He said, "can ye drink of the cup that I
drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?"
and they said,

"We can," not knowing that He spoke of suffering and death.

He told them that though they would indeed drink of His cup, He had no
honors to give them.

Then, when the others were vexed with James and John for their foolish
request, He talked to them all tenderly about the grace of humility.

"Whosoever of you who will be chiefest," He said, "shall be servant of
all.  For even the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give His life a ransom for many."

It was the time of the Passover Feast at Jerusalem, and as they crossed
at the Fords of Jordan and went over the Jericho plain they must have
joined some of the groups of joyful people who were going up to the
Feast, some on camels and asses, and some walking beside the beasts
bearing tents or merchandise.  The valley of the Jordan was bright with
the freshness of spring, and as they came near Jericho with its
rose-gardens, and orchards, and feathery palms, it looked like the
gardens of Paradise.  It was sometimes called Jericho "the perfumed"
because of its great gardens of roses, and its balsam plantations from
which they made perfumes that were sold in all the East.  It was warm
even in winter there, and no frosts destroyed its tropical fruits and
flowers.  The rich plain was made fertile by two springs that sent
their waters through trenches all through these gardens and orchards.
One is called the "Elisha Spring," because the prophet made its
poisonous waters pure by casting salt into them.

And so the Passover pilgrims entered Jericho.

There was in Jericho a man named Zaccheus, who, like Matthew of
Capernaum, was a rich tax-gatherer.  He wanted to see Jesus as He
passed, but the crowd was great, and he was a small man, so he ran
before the people and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see Him.

As Jesus passed the tree He looked up and said,

"Zaccheus, make haste and come down, for to-day I must abide at thy
house."

Zaccheus came down in great haste, and was full of joy to be able to
entertain Jesus, though some complained that a sinner should have the
honor of taking the Master into his house.

Zaccheus must have heard these cruel remarks, for he said humbly,

"Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor; and if I have
taken anything from any man by false accusation, I restore him
fourfold."

Then Jesus said heartily, "This day is salvation come to this house,
forsomuch as he also is a son of Abraham.  For the Son of Man is come
to seek and to save that which was lost."

It was just outside of Jericho that the bands going out toward
Jerusalem passed a blind beggar who cried,

"Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me!"

The Lord heard the cry and called him, and there by the roadside He
opened the eyes of Bartimeus to see the beauty all around him, and the
kind face of Jesus looking at him.  And he followed Him.

The pilgrims came up the steep, rocky road from Jericho to Jerusalem,
and they were fortunate who could ride, for the heat was great, and the
road hard to climb.  Jesus and His friends walked, for they were poor
men, as riches are counted in this world.

It was a six hours' journey, and when they reached the green heights of
the Mount of Olives they turned aside to the village of Bethany, and
there Jesus rested in the house of Mary and Martha and the brother whom
He had called back from the grave.  The disciples were lodged in the
town, no doubt, among their friends, and so grateful and happy were
they of Bethany to have the Lord once more among them that they made a
supper to show their joy at His coming.  It was at the house of Simon,
who had been a leper, and cured, perhaps, by Jesus, and Lazarus sat at
the table with Jesus, and Mary and Martha served.

It was a holy, happy time, yet shadowed with sadness because of the
words of Jesus concerning His death, which the disciples could not
believe.

In the midst of the supper Mary brought an alabaster box of very
precious and costly perfume, and poured it upon the head of Jesus and
also upon His feet, wiping them with her long hair.  Judas, one of the
twelve, frowned upon her, and said it was a waste, for the perfume
might have been sold for money to give to the poor.

But Jesus knew what Mary did.

"Let her alone," He said, "against the day of my burying hath she kept
this; for the poor always ye have with you; but me ye have not always."

"She hath done what she could."

"Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world,
this also that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her."




CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE PRINCE OF PEACE.

It was in the lovely spring time of a land that scarcely knows winter
that a strange and beautiful scene made Jerusalem still more beautiful.
Over the Mount of Olives, where the olive and the fig-trees were in
tender leaf, came a procession of people crying,

"Hosanna; blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the name of the
Lord!"

The road was crowded with people who with lifted faces and songs of
praise waved branches of palm as they walked before and beside Jesus,
who was riding toward Jerusalem, seated upon a young ass, after the
manner of the kings and prophets of ancient Israel.

After Jesus and His friends had left Bethany to go to Jerusalem He had
sent two of His disciples to a village near by to bring to Him an ass,
with its colt, that they would find tied there, and they were to say to
the owner of the asses, "The Lord hath need of them," that the words of
the prophet might be fulfilled,

"Tell ye the daughter of Zion, 'Behold thy king cometh unto thee, meek,
and sitting upon an ass, and a colt, the foal of an ass.'"

While the Lord and His friends were coming up the Mount of Olives, many
people from Jerusalem who knew that He was on His way came to meet Him,
and when the two disciples brought to Jesus the ass upon which He was
to ride they placed Him upon it, and spreading their garments in the
way, and with waving palms and singing they came over the ridge of the
Mount of Olives from which they could see Mount Zion shining before
them.  The Pharisees had come out to see what it meant and were angry.
"See--the world is gone after Him!" they said, but Jesus, when they
asked Him to stop the praises of the people, told them that the very
stones would cry out if the people should hold their peace.  As they
came to a point in the road where from a smooth rocky height they could
see the great city with its temple before them, the whole company
stopped, and Jesus, beholding it, wept over it saying,

"If thou hadst known, even thou, in this thy day, the things which
belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes!"

[Illustration: Jesus entering Jerusalem]

And He spoke of the days when enemies should surround the Holy City,
and lay it even with the ground, because they knew not the time of
their visitation.  Fifty years after the Romans took the Holy City and
burned the beautiful Temple, and put uncounted people to death.  And so
Jesus went down through the valley of the Kedron and up through the
city gates with the great procession that grew at every step until He
came to His Father's House--the Temple.  Then He looked about and saw
the buyers and sellers again making the Temple a market, but He went
silently away with His friends to Bethany again.  He had entered the
city as the Prince of Peace, not as a Roman Emperor would do, with
sound of trumpet and the tread of armed legions, and they knew not the
time of their visitation.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE CHILDREN IN THE TEMPLE.

The next morning Jesus went early with His disciples to the Temple.  It
was on the way as they went over the Mount of Olives that they passed a
barren fig-tree--one that bore nothing but leaves.  It was like the
Pharisees, who outwardly seemed to be religious, but were inwardly
evil, and bore none of the fruits of a religious life.

"Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward forever," said Jesus, and it
withered away.  When the disciples wondered, Jesus said,

"If ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is
done to the fig-tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, 'Be
thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea,' it shall be done.  And
all things whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall
receive."  When Jesus came again to the Temple He drove out the buyers
and sellers and the money-changers, as He had done before.

"It is written," He said, "'My house is the house of prayer, but ye
have made it a den of thieves.'"

When they had been driven out, the people who had been waiting for
Jesus, and the blind and the lame came to Him, and He healed all who
came.  The Pharisees looked on with hatred in their hearts, and talked
with the priests of arresting Him then and there, but a clear, sweet
sound of young voices singing came floating through the temple courts,
and they saw bands of children who were crying, "Hosanna to the Son of
David!" and it rang like heavenly music through all the place.

"Hearest thou what these say?" cried the angry Pharisees, and Jesus
answered, "Yea; have ye never read, 'Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings thou hast perfected praise?'"  Then He left them and went
again to Bethany to rest in the house of His faithful friends, Martha,
and Mary, and Lazarus.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

THE LAST DAY IN THE TEMPLE.

It was on a Tuesday that Jesus came again early to the Temple.  It was
the last day of His teaching there and He filled it with wonderful
sayings that have been taught in thousands of Christian temples for
nearly two thousand years.  The chief priests and elders, who were full
of anger because He had acted as if He had a right to say who should
come into the Temple courts, came to Him as He was teaching and said,

"By what authority doest thou these things? and who gave thee this
authority?"  Jesus answered them by asking a question, "The baptism of
John, whence was it? from heaven, or of men?"  They could not answer,
for they said in their own minds, "If we shall say 'From heaven,' He
will say, 'Why did you not then believe him;' but if we shall say 'Of
men,' we fear the people, for all men hold John as a prophet."  And so
they said, "We cannot tell."

And Jesus answered, "Neither tell I you by what authority I do these
things."  They could not find what they wanted--something to accuse Him
of before the Jewish Council and so they tried to lead Him to say
something that would turn the Romans against Him.  They came to Him
with flattering words, saying that they knew that He taught the way of
God truly, and would He tell them if it was lawful to give tribute to
Caesar or not?  He saw their deceit and cunning, and said, "Why tempt
ye me?  Show me a penny.  Whose image and superscription is this?"
They told Him it was Caesar's.  "Render therefore," He said, "unto
Caesar the things which be Caesar's, and to God the things which be
God's."

[Illustration: Showing the penny]

They wondered much at the wisdom of His answer, and could find nothing
whereof to accuse Him, but perhaps they never knew what He really meant
to say to them--and to us also--that His Kingdom was not of this world.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE LAST WORDS IN THE TEMPLE.

On this day also, as Jesus sat near the treasury of the Temple and saw
the rich, and the self-righteous casting their money into the boxes
placed there, He saw a poor widow come with her mourning dress showing
that she was the poorest of the poor--a pauper--and yet she had
something to give: she dropped two "mites" into one of the boxes under
the marble colonnade that surrounded the court of the women.  Taken
together these two coins were worth much less than a penny, but they
were "all her living" and though the Lord did not speak to her, as far
as we know, He saw her faith, and His blessing must have reached her in
ways that we know nothing about.  To those who stood about Him He said,
"Of a truth I say unto you that this poor widow hath cast in more than
they all; for all these have of their abundance cast into the offerings
of God; but she of her penury hath cast in all the living that she had."

[Illustration: The two mites]

Jesus, who "spake as never man spake," preached the new Gospel of the
Kingdom by means of stories, or parables, and on one long day of
teaching in the Temple He told several stories that the people never
forgot.  Two of them were stories of the vineyard.  One of them was of
a man who sent his two sons into his vineyard to work.  One answered "I
will not," but afterward repented and went, while the other, who had
said "I go, sir," went not.  Jesus taught in this that real sinners who
at first refuse to enter God's kingdom but afterward repent and enter,
are better than the heartless hypocrites who talk much of their
religion but are inwardly evil.

The other story was of a certain householder who owned a vineyard and
let it out to some men while he took a journey into a far country.
When the time of the fruit drew near he sent his servants to the men
who had rented the vineyard, that they might receive the fruits of it,
but the men beat one servant, and stoned another, and killed another.
When the owner sent other servants they treated them in the same way.
Then he sent his son saying, "They will reverence my son," but the men
determined to kill the heir and take the vineyard for themselves, and
they cast out the son of the lord of the vineyard and killed him.  In
this story He spoke of His own death, as well as that of the prophets
and John the Baptist before Him.

The chief priests and Pharisees, when they heard this parable knew that
the Lord spoke of them, and they tried again to take Him by force, but
feared the people.

Another story told in the Temple that day was of the "Marriage of the
King's Son" which you will find in the twenty-second chapter of
Matthew.  It shows first how the Jews were asked into the Kingdom of
Christ, but refused to come, and their city was given over to their
enemies to destroy.  In the second part of the parable the call of all
nations to come into Christ's kingdom is described, and the man who was
found at the feast without a wedding garment, describes those who come
into the church without real faith in the Lord Jesus, and are not
prepared to enter heaven.  "For many are called," said Jesus, "but few
are chosen."

Knowing the wickedness of the priests and Pharisees, who stood before
the people as more holy than others, the Lord ended His last day in the
Temple with words to them that must have been sharper than a sword, and
more burning than flames of fire.  These words are in the twenty-third
chapter of Matthew, and may no child who reads them ever live to
deserve to hear them for himself.  To the hypocrite alone the Lord was
stern and severe, but to the sinner who truly repented He was full of
forgiving love.  After telling them of the sorrows and desolations that
must fall upon the Holy City because of the sins of those who should be
true and faithful teachers of their holy religion, He sent forth these
last words of love and sorrow through the Temple courts,

"O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not!  Behold your house is left unto you desolate,
for I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth till ye shall say,
'Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.'"   And He went out
of the Temple to return no more.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

AN EVENING ON THE MOUNT OF OLIVES.

Jesus and His friends went out from the Temple and Jerusalem to the
Mount of Olives, and as they looked back upon the beautiful buildings
of marble and gold that made the Temple seem like a great jewel shining
in the sunset, the disciples turned to Jesus and spoke of it, but He
said,

"There shall not be left here one stone that shall not be thrown down."

They sat down on the slope of Olivet where the olive and fig-trees were
putting forth their new leaves, and in that quiet time Peter, and
James, and John, and Andrew drew close about their beloved Master, and
said, "Tell us, when shall these things be, and what shall be the sign
of thy coming, and the end of the world?"  He told them many things
hard to be understood; of the sorrows of Israel when their city should
be destroyed, and the people scattered; of the end of the age, when
they should turn to the Lord they had rejected, and of His coming to
the whole world.

"Watch, therefore," He said, "for ye know not what hour your Lord doth
come," and He told them of the faithful and the unfaithful servants;
that the one was found doing his duty when his lord returned, and was
made ruler over all his goods, but the other, unfaithful in all things,
was surprised by his lord's coming and cast out.

He told them another beautiful "watching" story of the Ten Virgins who
went forth with their little lamps to meet the bridegroom on his way to
the marriage feast.  Five of them took oil to fill their lamps, and
five took no oil with them.  The bridegroom was long in coming, and
they all fell asleep; but at midnight there was a cry, "Behold the
bridegroom cometh! go ye out to meet him!"  Then they all arose and
trimmed their lamps, but five of the lamps had gone out, and the
foolish maids who brought no oil to fill them begged it of the others,
but they were told that they must go and buy it of those who had it to
sell.  While they went to buy the bridegroom came, and they that were
ready went in with him to the marriage, and the door was shut.
Afterward, when the five thoughtless ones came to the door crying,
"Lord, Lord, open to us!" they only heard the answer, "I know you not."

After this He told them the story of the Talents, which you may read in
the twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew.  It is the Lord's teaching to all
disciples about making the most of the life He gives us.

His last story was a picture of the gathering of the nations, and the
separation of the good and the true from the false and the evil.  The
King's call to the good, "Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world," carried
with it a strange reason.  "For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat;
I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me
in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me."

Then the good whom He had called were astonished, and cried, "Lord,
when saw we thee an hungered and fed thee? or thirsty, a stranger,
sick, or in prison?" and He answered, "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me."  To
the false and the evil He could not say these things, but quite the
opposite; and when they wondered when they had seen the Lord hungry, or
thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and had not
ministered unto Him, He said, "Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the
least of these, ye did it not to me."  Those by a life of love and
service had chosen eternal life, but these by a life of selfishness had
chosen death.




CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE HOLY SUPPER.

There were two more days before the Passover Feast when Jesus would eat
the Paschal Supper with His disciples.  He spent the time with them
trying to help them to bear the great trial that was before them, and
which would shake their faith in Him to the utmost.  They still
believed that some great miracle would break around them like light in
the darkness, and that Jesus would be acknowledged as the Messiah for
whom the whole nation was waiting and yet the shadow grew deeper.  The
faith of one had failed.  Judas had secretly hoped that Jesus would be
made king, and that His disciples would be honored with riches and
power, but little by little this hope had been dying, and little by
little his heart had been turning away from his Master and his
brethren, until, with the resolve to forsake the Lord, he opened the
door of his heart to Satan, who began to enter in and possess him.

The high priest and the elders were plotting against Jesus in their
council, and Judas, leaving Bethany and the company of the Lord and His
disciples, went over the road he had so often walked with Jesus with a
thought from Satan burning in his heart.  He loved money more than
everything else, and there was but one thing that would bring it now
since all hope of Jesus becoming a king was past.

He went to the Temple and asked to be taken before the rulers, and he
said to them, "What will ye give me, and I will deliver Him unto you?"
There was a bargain made at once, and out of the Temple treasury they
weighed him thirty pieces of silver, and he carried them away with the
promise that he would watch Jesus, and tell them when and where they
could take Him.  He did not remember that five hundred years before the
prophet Zechariah had written, "So they weighed for my price thirty
pieces of silver."

On Thursday morning, the first day of the Feast, Jesus sent Peter and
John to prepare a place where He should hold the Paschal Supper with
His disciples in the evening.  He told them to go into the city, and
there they would meet a man bearing a pitcher of water, and if they
would follow him he would show them a large upper room furnished.
There they were to make ready the Passover.

[Illustration: The Passover supper]

They found it as He had said, and when the lamb had been slain at the
Temple, the feast prepared, and the hour was come, the Lord sat down
with the twelve.  It was the last time that He would break the bread of
the Passover with them before He suffered, and it was to be the first
Holy Supper of the Christian Church.  "With desire I have desired to
eat this Passover with you before I suffer;" He said, "for I say unto
you that I will not any more eat thereof until it be fulfilled in the
Kingdom of God."  Before Him were the cakes of unleavened bread, the
wine, the water and the herbs, while the Paschal Lamb was on a side
table.  After the blessing and the thanks, the Lord filled a cup with
wine and water, and blessing and tasting it passed it to His disciples.
It was the custom for the master of the feast to wash his hands at this
point, and Jesus rose, and laid aside His tunic, and tying a long towel
around His waist, poured water into a large basin and going to His
disciples knelt down to wash their feet.  They had been contending as
to who should sit nearest to the Lord, and so be accounted greatest,
and He thus taught them a lesson of humility.  He told them that they
were not to be among those who hold authority.  "But he that is
greatest among you let him be as the younger," He said, "and he that is
chief as he that doth serve."  The disciples looked on astonished and
distressed, for their Master was doing the work that slaves were in the
habit of doing, and Peter cried, "Lord, dost thou wash my feet?"  Jesus
said gently, "What I do thou knowest not now, but thou shalt know
hereafter."  "Thou shalt never wash my feet;" said the loving,
impulsive Peter, and Jesus answered, "If I wash thee not thou hast no
part with me."  "Lord, not my feet only," the humbled disciple said,
"but also my hands and my head!"  When He sat down with them again He
talked tenderly to them of serving each other as He had served them,
adding, "If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them."  With a
troubled spirit He said, "Behold, the hand of him that betrayeth me is
with me on the table."  Then the disciples began to inquire sorrowfully
among themselves who it could be, and to ask the Lord in turn, "Is it
I?"  Even Judas, close beside Him, asked the same question, but the
disciples did not hear the Lord's reply.  Peter, beckoning to John,
signed to him to ask the Master, for John sat next the Lord, and leaned
upon His breast.  When he asked, "Lord, who is it?" Jesus said, perhaps
in a whisper to John,

"He it is to whom I shall give a sop when I have dipped it," and He
gave it to Judas Iscariot.  Then Satan entered fully into the angry,
covetous heart of Judas, and when Jesus said to him in a low voice,
"That thou doest do quickly," he rose and went out into the night.
Alone with His faithful friends, the Lord took bread and blessed it and
broke it, and gave to them, saying, "Take, eat, this is my body; this
do in remembrance of me."  And He took the cup, saying, "Drink ye all
of it, for this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for
many for the remission of sins."

And so the Lord founded the Holy Supper of His Church, the mystery and
the holiness of which you will know more and more as you grow in the
heavenly life, and receive through His Spirit the new wine of the
Kingdom.  John, the beloved disciple, kept for us the wonderful and
precious words that the Lord spoke after the Holy Supper.  They are
full of a love for His children so deep and wide that we can never hope
to measure it.  They are written in the fourteenth, fifteenth,
sixteenth, and seventeenth chapters of John's Gospel, and every child
should hide them in his memory and heart before he is grown, and in
after life they will be bread in time of spiritual famine.  Looking
around upon their troubled faces at the table the Lord said to His
disciples, "Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe
also in me.  In my Father's house are many mansions.  I go to prepare a
place for you.  And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again and receive you unto myself, that when I am there ye may be
also."  He answered their questions, and He promised them the
Comforter--the Holy Spirit of Truth, who would teach them all things,
and make all the dark things clear.  He also promised certainly to come
back to them and not leave them orphans.

After they had sung a psalm they arose from the table, but they
lingered for the Lord's last words and His prayer.  He charged them to
be steadfast and live from Him, as a branch lives from the vine, for He
was the true spiritual Vine, and without Him they could do nothing.  He
told them of His great love for them, and that they must love one
another through all the suffering and persecution that was before them,
and trust to the Spirit of Truth, who would guide them in all things,
and teach them the things He would say to them, but which they were not
yet able to bear.  And He promised that whatever they should ask the
Father in His name should be given them.  Then lifting up His eyes to
heaven He prayed for His disciples, and for all disciples who should
believe on Him through their word, that they might be one with each
other and with Him as He was one with the Father, and, being made clean
from the evil that is in the world that they should be with Him forever
in heaven.  After the prayer they went out of the city, and over the
brook Kedron into a garden where Jesus had often sat with His disciples.




CHAPTER XL.

THE NIGHT OF THE BETRAYAL.

As they went out through the darkness down the valley and over the
Kedron, Jesus still talked with His disciples.  To Peter's question,
"Lord, where goest thou?" He said, "Whither I go thou canst not follow
me now, but thou shalt follow me afterwards."  "Lord, why cannot I
follow thee now?" said Peter.  "I will lay down my life for thy sake."

"Verily, verily I say unto thee, the cock shall not crow till thou hast
denied me thrice," said Jesus.

"Simon, Simon, behold Satan hath desired to have you that he may sift
you as wheat; but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not; and
when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren."

"All ye shall be offended because of me this night; for it is written,
'I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be
scattered abroad.'"

[Illustration: Gethsemane]

Jesus and his friends had reached the olive trees of Gethsemane when He
asked them to sit there while He went away a little distance to pray.
He took Peter and James and John with Him; and began to be very
sorrowful, and He said,

"My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here and
watch with me."  He went a little farther, and fell on His face and
prayed, saying, "O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from
me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt."  He found His
disciples sleeping for sorrow, and He said to Peter, "What! could ye
not watch with me one hour?  Watch and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation."  Again He prayed, "O my Father, if this cup may not pass
away from me except I drink it, Thy will be done."  And there appeared
an angel unto Him from heaven, strengthening Him.  Then there was the
sound of the tread of many feet, and the light of torches moving among
the olive trees, and Judas, leading a band of priests, elders and
captains of the Temple came toward the little group, and kissed Jesus
as a sign that He was the One whom they sought.  Jesus turned to him
saying, "Judas, betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?"  And to the
others, "Whom seek ye?"

[Illustration: Jesus betrayed by Judas]

"Jesus of Nazareth," they answered.  And when Jesus had said to them,
"I am He," they fell backward at the sight of His face.  "When I was
daily with you in the Temple," He said, "ye stretched forth no hands
against me; but this is your hour and the power of darkness."  Peter
drew a sword and struck at the high priest's servant in defence of his
Master, but Jesus said gently,

"Suffer ye thus far," and touched his ear and healed him.  "Put up thy
sword into the sheath," He added.  "The cup which my Father hath given
me, shall I not drink it?"

Then they took Jesus and bound Him to lead Him away, and the disciples
forsook Him and fled, as had been written in the prophets.  But John,
the loving and beloved, came back and followed Jesus.  So did Peter,
remembering his vow, but he followed Him afar off.




CHAPTER XLI.

DESPISED AND REJECTED OF MEN.

Jesus was first taken to Annas, the old High-Priest, who sent Him bound
to Caiaphas, who was his son-in-law, and High-Priest that year.

John went in with Jesus to the palace of the High-Priest, but Peter
stood outside the door, shivering with the chill of the night, but more
with fear.

A servant girl at the door said, when John came out to bring him in,

"Art not thou also one of this man's disciples?"

And Peter said, "I am not."

Restless and unhappy, he walked about, or warmed himself by the fire,
until three had accused him of being a follower of Jesus, and three
times he had denied his Lord.  Then there came a sound that struck him
through--he heard through the open windows the crowing of a cock.  It
had crowed once before, but he did not think then of what the Lord had
said, but now his memory and conscience were wide awake, for, as he
looked over the heads of the people towards Jesus standing bound and
alone before the High-Priest, the Lord turned and looked upon Peter.
That look broke Peter's heart, and he rushed out of the place, and wept
bitterly.

[Illustration: The sin of Peter]

There was a mock trial which would pain the heart of a child to dwell
upon, and which we will not describe at length.  It is enough to know
that the Lamb of God, who had come to take away the sins of the world,
was willingly in the power of His enemies, and going down to death.  A
wonderful description of the trial and death of the Messiah may be
found in the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, which was fulfilled in the
trial and death of Jesus.  The hatred of the priests, the scoffings,
the blows, and the cruel words of the people we will not describe.  "He
was oppressed, and He was afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth.  He
is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her
shearers is dumb, so He opened not His mouth."  Finally Caiaphas cried,

"I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou be the
Christ, the Son of God!" Jesus said,

"I am; and ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of heaven."

Then the High Priest rent his garments as if shocked at such profanity,
and said,

"Ye have heard the blasphemy; what think ye?"  And they all condemned
Him to be guilty of death.

There was another gathering of the priests in the morning as the day
began to dawn.  There were more cruel words and blows for the Divine
Man who was bearing the sins of the world, and He was taken away to
Pilate.

And where was the wretched man who had sold his Master into the hands
of His enemies!

He could not have thought that he was bringing death on His Master; but
when at last he saw the Lord coming, pale, suffering and bound, down
the marble steps, and heard "Death! death!" on every side, he became
terrified.  He had no one to turn to, for he had not a friend among
men.  He ran to the Temple and, finding some priests, begged them take
back the money they had given him, saying, "I have sinned, in that I
have betrayed the innocent blood."

"What is that to us," said the heartless priests.  "See thou to that."

Then Judas cast the thirty pieces of silver over the marble floor, and
fled from the place.  Afterward he was found outside the city, where he
had hanged himself.  The priests could not put the price of blood in
the Lord's treasury, and so they bought with it a field in which to
bury strangers.




CHAPTER XLII.

THE KING OF HEAVEN AT THE BAR OF PILATE.

Pilate, the Roman Governor, who had come up from Caesarea by the sea to
keep order in Jerusalem during the Passover, was in his fine palace
called "The Praetorium."  Adjoining was "The Hall of Judgment," where
cases were brought to the Governor to be judged, and just outside this
Hall was a place called "The Pavement."  It was a broad floor of
many-colored marbles, open toward the city, and having an ivory
judgment-seat.

While the morning was lighting the gold of the Temple roof to splendor,
there was a deep shadow over the friends of Jesus.  Their Lord was
being led through the streets of Jerusalem by Roman guards, condemned
to die.  His mother and the women who believed in Him were in the city
and saw Him, perhaps, as He was hurried by, pale and weak from the
cruelty of wicked men.  The priests would not go into the Judgment Hall
for fear of defilement at the time of their Feast, so Pilate came out
to "The Pavement" and sat down upon the ivory judgment seat.  He was a
stern, proud man wearing a white toga with a rich purple border--the
robe of a Roman ruler.

"What accusation do you bring against this man," asked Pilate, looking
at the pure, pallid face of the Divine Man, and turning to the dark and
evil faces of His accusers.  To their complaining remark, "If he were
not a malefactor we would not have delivered him up unto thee," Pilate
replied,

"Take ye him and judge him according to your law."

When they replied that (under Roman rule) it was not lawful for them to
put any man to death.  Pilate did not wish to condemn that just One of
whom he had known nothing but good, for he had heard of His miracles,
and had doubtless heard his wife speak of the young Rabbi.  He rose and
went into the Hall, ordering the guards to bring Jesus to him.  Then he
questioned Him,

"Art thou the King of the Jews?" he asked.

"My Kingdom is not of this world," said Jesus.  "If my Kingdom was of
this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be
delivered to the Jews; but now my Kingdom is not from hence."

"Art thou a king then?" said Pilate.

"Thou sayest that I am a king.  To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.
Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice."

"What is truth?" said Pilate, wondering, perhaps, what kingdom of truth
this harmless man was dreaming of, and then he rose and went forth to
the people on "The Pavement" who were saying that this man was stirring
up the people from Galilee to Jerusalem.

Pilate, hearing that Jesus was a Galilean, sent him to the palace of
Herod Antipas, who ruled over that province, and who was now in
Jerusalem, but He was sent back to Pilate crowned with thorns and
wearing a faded purple robe.  The Roman soldiers had jested about His
kingship, and Antipas had cruelly carried it out in returning Him in
this dress to Pilate, through the streets of the city.  He had been
tried the fourth time and now Pilate made another effort to set Him
free, He questioned Him again and heard the complaints of the Jews, but
Jesus would not defend Himself.

[Illustration: Jesus crowned with thorns]

"Hearest thou not how many things, they witness against thee?" said
Pilate.  "Answerest thou nothing?"  If Jesus would only defend Himself!

Then Pilate thought he would scourge Jesus to satisfy His enemies, and
let Him go.

"Ye have brought this man unto me," he said to the chief priests, "as
one that perverteth the people, and behold, I, having examined him
before you, have found no fault in this man.  No, nor yet Herod.  I
will therefore chastise him and release him."

[Illustration: Jesus before Pilate]

The cry of "Crucify him! crucify him!" rose again.

A message was sent to Pilate from his wife, which deepened the shadow
on his face.  "Have thou nothing to do with that just man," she said,
"for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him."

The people had been persuaded by the priests to ask for Barabbas, and
when Pilate asked which of the two he should release to them, they
cried,

"Barabbas!"

"What shall I do with Jesus, which is called Christ?" and all cried,

"Let him be crucified!"

"Why, what evil hath he done?" asked Pilate, but the cry was so great
he could bear it no longer, and calling a slave to bring water, he
washed his hands before them as a sign that he took no blame for the
act, and said,

"I am innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it," but
they cried,

"His blood be upon us, and upon our children."  And when Pilate had
given the order to scourge and crucify Jesus, he went into his palace.




CHAPTER XLIII.

LOVE AND DEATH.

Jesus had been meeting and conquering evil all His life, and in the
last hour of it the last enemy was overcome.  There were no children at
the cross when Jesus laid down His life for us all, and we will not
lead you there to point out all the means used by evil men to increase
the suffering of our Lord.  It was greatest within the great Heart of
Love which broke for the sins of the world, and when you have learned
the nature of Spirit you will be able to understand that Jesus chose to
pass through an earthly life of poverty and temptation, and die a
painful and shameful death, that He might be the Brother of the poor,
the tempted, the suffering and the dying.  "He was taken from prison
and from judgment:" "He poured out His soul unto death, and was
numbered with the transgressors;" "He bore the sins of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors."  So Isaiah wrote of the coming
Messiah seven hundred years before.  But so blind were the Jews that
they could not see that the Redeemer had come to Zion, "He came unto
His own and His own received Him not."

Bearing His cross He went forth meekly to death, and when He fell
beneath the heavy cross, the Roman soldiers forced a passing stranger
to carry it.  All along the street women wept for pity as He passed,
and there was sorrow in many hearts for the Man whom they had believed
in as the One who was to deliver their nation.

[Illustration: Jesus bearing the Cross]

But the eleven disciples--where were they?  In deep grief somewhere;
but only one--John the Beloved--followed his Master down to death.
With the suffering mother of Jesus and the faithful women disciples he
kept near his Lord.  They saw the rough soldiers as they took the
Lord's garments and divided them among themselves, and when they put
His body upon the cross they heard Him pray,

"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do!"

Two robbers were crucified with Jesus, upon His right hand and on His
left.  One begged Him to save him, and reviled Him because He did not;
but the other said, "Lord, remember me when Thou comest into Thy
Kingdom."  And Jesus said, "Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou
be with me in Paradise."

His dying eyes also beheld His mother standing by the cross with the
beloved John and the faithful women who had been His friends.  The hour
had come spoken of by Simeon in the Temple when he said, "Yea a sword
shall pierce through thy own soul also."  Jesus, looking at His mother
supported by John said,

"Woman, behold thy son!"  And to the disciple He said, "Son, behold thy
mother!"  And from that hour John took her to his own home to love and
care for her through the rest of her life.

We will not look at the darkness that rolled over the sky, shutting out
the light of the sun, or the sights and sounds of that day on Calvary.
Jesus, thinking of the redemption He had wrought out for us, bowed His
head and said,

"It is finished!  Father, into Thy hands I commend my spirit."  Then
the great veil before the Holy Place in the Temple was torn in two from
the top to the bottom, as a sign that the Lord Jesus by His death had
opened the way for us into life eternal.




CHAPTER XLIV.

LOVE AND LIFE.

There was a good man of Arimathea named Joseph who was a disciple of
Jesus, but not a fearless one.  He had not followed Jesus with the
twelve, but he had loved Him, and when he knew that his Master, who had
not where to lay His head in life, had not a place of burial in death,
he lost all fear and went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus.  This
Pilate willingly gave him, and he, bringing helpers, took the body from
the cross and tenderly brought it to his own garden in which was a new
tomb hewn out of the rock.  In this peaceful garden-room for the dead
they laid Him, wrapped Him in fine linen and spices, for another
disciple who had not dared to follow Jesus openly had come with a
mixture of myrrh and aloes of a hundred pounds weight to embalm the
body of Jesus.  This was Nicodemus who had a talk with Jesus by night
among the olive trees about the breath of God in man.  So these two
rich men buried Jesus, and a prophecy was fulfilled.

[Illustration: The descent from the Cross]

We do not know that any of the eleven disciples helped to bury Jesus,
but, while John took the mother of Jesus to a place of rest and safety,
his own mother, Salome, and Mary, the mother of James, and Mary
Magdalene stood looking on afar off.  There were other women also, who
helped to guard the body of the crucified Lord when it seemed to be
forsaken of all men.  They marked the place where He lay and went away,
for the hours of "preparation" and the Sabbath were before them.  On
the eve of Friday they prepared spices and ointments, and rested the
Sabbath day (seventh day) according to the commandment.  But Roman
soldiers came and set a seal upon the tomb, and watched it night and
day.  On the first day of the week (now the Christian Sabbath) very
early in the morning, while the streets were still, and there lay only
a faint streak of rose in the purple east, Mary Magdalene hastened out
of the city to the tomb in the garden, bearing her spices.  When she
reached the place she saw no guards there, and the heavy stone was
rolled away from the door of the tomb.  A great fear fell upon the
woman who "loved much," and she ran to find Peter and John.  "They have
taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre," she said, "and we know not
where they have laid Him."

Then Peter and John ran, and John the loving ran faster than Peter the
believing, and was the first to reach the tomb.  The other women also
had gone to the tomb early bearing their spices for the embalming,
wondering on the way who should roll away for them the great stone that
stood at the door of the tomb.  But they found the stone rolled past
the door, and entering the low vestibule they saw a vision of an angel,
in a long white garment, and were afraid.

[Illustration: The angel of the Resurrection]

"Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth which was crucified," he said; "He is risen;
He is not here: behold the place where they laid Him.  But go your way,
tell His disciples and Peter that He goeth before you into Galilee;
there shall ye see Him, as He said unto you."

The Lord had left a special message for Peter who had denied Him so
cruelly and had repented so thoroughly!  As they looked to "behold the
place where they laid Him," they saw another angel shining white
through the gloom, "one at the head, and the other at the feet where
the body of Jesus had lain."  They also ran, glad, yet half afraid, to
tell the disciples what they had seen and heard.

Peter and John found the linen that had wrapped the Lord's body laid
carefully aside.  They did not yet remember the prophecy concerning His
resurrection from the dead, but they believed He had risen, and they
went away, hoping perhaps, that He was seeking them.

Mary Magdalene could not leave the empty tomb until she had learned
something more about the Lord.  Weeping and desolate she stood at the
low door of the cave-tomb, and stooping to look in again she saw the
vision of angels that the other women had seen, "one at the head and
the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain."

"Why weepest thou?" they asked, and she answered,

"Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid Him."  As she turned to go out into the garden she saw one
standing there who said,

"Woman why weepest thou?  Whom seekest thou?"

She thought as she looked through her tears that it must be the man who
kept the garden, so she said,

"Sir, if thou have borne Him hence tell me where thou hast laid Him,
and I will take Him away."

"Mary!"

It was the voice of Jesus--the same that once said to her, "Thy sins
are forgiven," and she spread her arms to clasp His feet, crying.

"_Rabboni!_--my Master!"

"Touch me not," He said, "for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but
go to my brethren and say unto them, 'I ascend unto my Father and your
Father: and to my God and your God.'"

It was while Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James, were still in
the garden, perhaps, that Jesus met them and said,

"All hail!" and they fell at His feet and worshipped Him.

"Be not afraid," He said, "go tell my brethren that they go into
Galilee and there shall they see me."

When the women told all these things to the apostles who had come
together to mourn for their dead Master, they could not believe.  But
the first Easter had risen upon the world, and though the joy of it
filled all heaven, only a few women knew the blessed secret on earth,
and were saying over and over, "The Lord is risen! the Lord is risen
indeed!"




CHAPTER XLV.

THE EVENING OF EASTER.

It was the afternoon of the same day in which the women had brought
such strange stories from the tomb of the buried Christ, that two
disciples went out to their home at Emmaus, a village about eight miles
from Jerusalem.  They had been in the upper room where they often
gathered, and had heard the stories of Mary Magdalene, and of Peter and
John, and they knew not what to believe.

As Cleopas and his companion (Luke, perhaps) went westward over the
hills they talked of all these strange things with bowed heads and sad
hearts, for Jesus, the One whom they had trusted was the Redeemer of
Israel, was crucified, dead and buried, and as for the words of these
women, they seemed like idle tales; but what if they should be true?

Another step seemed to fall beside theirs, and looking up they saw a
noble looking young Stranger who was following the same road.  He
greeted them and said,

"What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another as
ye walk, and are sad?"

"Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem," Cleopas said, "and hast not
known the things that are come to pass there in these days?"

"What things?" asked the Stranger, and they said, "Concerning Jesus of
Nazareth, which was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and
all the people, and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered Him
to be condemned to death, and have crucified Him.  But we trusted that
it had been He which should have redeemed Israel: and besides all this
to-day is the third day since these things were done."

Cleopas also told the story of the women who had come from the
sepulchre that morning talking of a vision of angels, with that of
Peter and John, who had gone also, and found it even as the women had
said.

Then the Stranger began to speak to them of many things, and in words
so full of wisdom and love and faith that their hearts were drawn with
Him to believe that Jesus had risen from the dead.  He told them that
they were very foolish and slow of heart to believe all that the
prophets had spoken.  "Ought not Christ to have suffered these things,"
He said, "and to enter into His glory;" and He explained to them all
the Scriptures that foretold the coming, the suffering, and the death
of the Messiah, until the two hours' walk seemed as nothing.

[Illustration: The walk to Emmaus]

As they came to the village where they lived, and the Stranger was
passing on, they urged Him to come with them into the low white house
near by which was the house of one of them.  "Abide with us," they
said, "for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent."  And He
went with them, and sat down with them to their evening meal.

Then another and strange beautiful vision was given at the sunset of
the first Easter Day, like that which was given to the women at its
dawn.  The Stranger took bread and blessed it and broke it, and as He
handed it to each disciple their eyes were opened, and they knew Him.
It was the Lord!  But in a moment He had vanished from their sight, and
they could only wonder and believe.  They began to recall His words.
"Did not our hearts burn within us while He talked with us by the way,
and while He opened to us the Scriptures?"

Perhaps they ate the bread that He had broken as they would take the
sacrament, and then rose, though the day was fading over the hills of
Ephraim and hurried back to Jerusalem to the friend's house where the
disciples met.  There in the upper room, the doors closed and guarded
for fear of the Jews, they told the story of the Stranger to the eager
disciples, and found that the Lord had also appeared to Peter.

In the midst of the joy and the wonder there fell a strange hush over
the little company, for suddenly the Lord was seen standing in the
midst and they heard the greeting so dear and familiar to them all,

"Peace be unto you!" and to them all He spread His hands having the
print of the nails in them, and showed them His side that bore the mark
of the Roman spear.  That they might be still more sure He was the Lord
and Master they had loved and followed (for they were afraid), He asked
them to touch him; and as they had been at supper together He asked to
share their meal, and He ate of the broiled fish and of the honey-comb
before them.  After this He talked lovingly with them of Himself--of
the fulfillment of the prophecies concerning Him and of the work of the
kingdom that was before them.  Again he blessed them, and breathed on
them, saying, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost."  And so ended the day of the
Lord's resurrection from the dead--the first Easter of the Christian
Church.




CHAPTER XLVI.

THE LORD'S LAST DAYS WITH HIS DISCIPLES.

On Easter evening, when the Lord's friends were gathered in the upper
room where He appeared to them, one of the eleven was absent.  There
were others beside the apostles--Cleopas and his companion, and
probably the women of Galilee, as well as Mary, and Martha, and Lazarus
of Bethany, but Thomas was not there.  The others had told him that the
Lord had shown Himself to them and had broken bread with them, but he
could not believe.  He believed, perhaps, in a vision, but not in the
return of the crucified Jesus.  He declared,

"Except I shall see in His hands the print of the nails, and put my
finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into His side, I
will not believe."

A week passed, and the disciples were again gathered in the upper room,
and Thomas was with them.  The doors were shut and guarded as before,
but, as before the Lord suddenly stood in the midst, saying,

"Peace be unto you."  Then He turned to Thomas with gentle rebuke,

"Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands; and reach hither thy
hand and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but believing."
Thomas did not wait to touch the Lord, but cried,

"My Lord and my God!"

"Thomas," He said, "because thou hast seen me thou hast believed;
blessed are they that have not seen and have believed."

Soon after this the apostles went away into Galilee, as the Lord had
commanded them to do.  There by the Lake where He had called them from
their nets to follow Him they waited for Him.  Peter, and James, and
John were there, with Thomas, and Nathanael, and two others of His
disciples.  The old love for the Lake came back to Peter, and he said,

"I go a fishing," and the others said,

"We also go with thee," and they went out for a night with the nets on
the Lake, but they caught nothing.  In the morning as they drew a
little nearer land they saw a dim figure on the shore and heard a voice
saying to them,

"Children, have ye any meat?"  They answered "No," and then the clear
voice came across the water saying,

"Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find."  This
they did, and so heavy did the net become with fishes that they were
not able to draw it.  Perhaps John remembered another day on the Lake
when the nets broke with the weight of the fishes, and looking at the
figure standing on the shore in the sunrise, he said to Peter,

"It is the Lord!"

Peter did not wait to reply, but tying his fisher's coat around him he
threw himself into the Lake to swim towards His Master on the shore.
The others followed in the ship dragging the net with them, and when
they had landed they found a fire of coals there, with fish laid upon
it and bread, and the Lord Himself standing there as one who served.

"Bring of the fish ye have now caught," He said.  And Peter, first to
obey, drew the net to land full of great fishes--one hundred and
fifty-three--and the net was not broken.  While they were silent for
joy and wonder, knowing that it was the Lord, and yet not daring to
question Him, He said, "Come and dine."  And there upon the sands the
Lord for the third time since He rose from the dead, broke bread with
his disciples.  John, the beloved disciple was there, but it is not
recorded that Jesus spoke to him personally.  His heart was wholly with
his Lord, and he did not need the loving help that was given to
doubting Thomas, and self-confident, wavering Peter.  To Simon Peter He
said after they had finished their simple meal,

"Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?"

Peter must have remembered that he had vehemently declared, "Although
all shall be offended, yet will not I.  If I should die with Thee yet I
will not deny Thee in any wise," and had straightway forsaken and
denied Him.  Now he said simply and humbly,

"Yea, Lord: Thou knowest that I love Thee."  And the Lord answered,
"Feed my lambs."

Again the Lord asked him the same question, and Peter gave the same
reply.  And the Lord said, "Feed my sheep."

When the Lord had asked this question the third time, Peter, full of
love and grief cried,

"Lord, Thou knowest all things: Thou knowest that I love thee."  And
the Lord answered again, "Feed my sheep."

By this Peter knew that the Lord trusted him to be an apostle, and
teach the gospel of the kingdom to all men, but that he must have a
steadfast love and faith.  The Lord also said, "When thou wast young
thou guidedst thyself, and walkest whither thou wouldest; but when thou
shalt be old thou shalt stretch forth thy hands and another shall guide
thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not."  Afterward Peter was
crucified as his Lord had been, and then John remembered these words of
the Lord about him.  As the Lord said to Peter, "Follow me," Peter saw
John following also, and he said, wondering, perhaps, why the Lord had
no word of counsel, of rebuke, or of prophecy for John,

"Lord, and what shall this man do?"  And Jesus replied, "If I will that
he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?  Follow thou me."  And they
went away from the Lake, following the Lord, as they had done three
years before when He called them to be "fishers of men."




CHAPTER XLVII.

"HE ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN."

Once more the Lord met His little company of followers and gave the
apostles authority to found the Kingdom of God among men.  "All power
has been given to me," He said, "in heaven and on earth."

And this was the work that He gave them to do: "Go ye therefore and
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you."

And this was His true word of promise to them: "Lo I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world.  And, behold, I send the
promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem
until ye be endued with power from on high."

It was about six weeks after His death that the disciples were again in
Jerusalem where the Lord had told them to go and wait for the coming of
His Spirit.  He led them out over the Mount of Olives as far as
Bethany, where the house of Martha had been a place of rest and
refreshment for the homeless Man of Sorrows while He was founding His
Kingdom of Heaven on the earth.

As they ascended a hill just above Bethany, the Lord could see spread
out before Him the Hebron hills toward Bethlehem where He was born: the
great city with its golden Temple where He had taught and had been
rejected; Gethsemane, where He had suffered, and had been betrayed; and
beyond the western walls the place where He had been crucified.  Not
far from Golgotha was the garden and the tomb in which He had been
buried, and from which He had risen.

He was about to leave the little group that He had made the founders of
His Kingdom, and one of them ventured a question,

"Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel?"
And the Lord replied,

"It is not for you to know the time and the seasons, which the Father
hath put in His own power.  But ye shall be witnesses unto me both in
Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost
parts of the earth."

Then He blessed them, and while they were looking at Him He was lifted
above them, and a cloud seemed to come between them and their Divine
Master.

[Illustration: The Ascension]

While they still gazed toward heaven hoping perhaps to see Him again,
two men in white garments stood by them and said,

"Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven?  This same
Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like
manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven."

Then they worshipped their ascended Lord, and returned to Jerusalem
full of joy and praise, to meet the other disciples in the upper room,
to tell them of what they had seen, and to wait for the Promise of the
Father.




CHAPTER XLVIII.

THE PROMISE OF THE FATHER.

While the disciples of Jesus waited in Jerusalem for the gift of the
Holy Spirit--the Comforter--who was to come and teach them all things,
and bring all the Lord's words to their remembrance, they were much in
prayer, and looked to the Lord for direction about the things of the
Kingdom.

Peter did much to help the others, for his faith had grown stronger,
and he was no longer afraid.  Many who had partly believed in Jesus
before His crucifixion, and who had come to believe in the risen Lord,
joined the little band, until they numbered one hundred and twenty at
one of their meetings, and the mother of Jesus was among them.  At this
meeting Peter proposed that some disciple who could be a witness with
them to the Lord's resurrection should be appointed to the place that
Judas once held in the circle of the twelve.  The ten disciples agreed
with Peter, and two were chosen--Joseph and Matthias.  Then they prayed
that the Lord Himself would show them which of these two He wished to
be an Apostle, and when they cast lots the lot fell upon Matthias.

When the upper room became too small they went to a larger one that was
more public, and did not try to guard their doors, for the priests had
become afraid of the people as well as of the signs at the time of the
Lord's death, when the sky was darkened, the rocks rent by an
earthquake, and the Temple veil by an unseen Hand.

The Feast of the Weeks came on, and at the end of May--the day of
Pentecost (the fiftieth after the second day of the Passover), the
Lord's little church had gathered in their large public room to pray
and wait for the Promise.  Suddenly there came a sound from the heavens
like the rushing of a mighty wind, and with it came a flash of fire
which was not lightning, but which divided into many, and sat above the
brow of each like a soft, bright tongue of flame.

Then the silence was broken, and they all began to praise God in other
languages, as the Spirit gave them utterance, for the Promise of the
Father had been given, and the Lord Himself had come to dwell in His
people--not only in these, but in all who should believe on Him through
their word.

There were some good Jews present who had come from foreign countries
to the Feast, and spoke other languages, and when each heard his own
language spoken by these unlearned men they were astonished.  The news
spread and many came to hear.  "Are not all these which speak
Galileans?" they asked, "and how hear we every man in our own tongue
wherein we were born?  What meaneth this?"  Others made light of it
all, and said that they were full of new wine.

Then Peter, strong in the power of the Holy Spirit, stood up and spoke
to the people.  You will find Peter's sermon in the second chapter of
Acts, and his text was a wonderful saying of the prophet Joel,
beginning, as Peter gave it,--

"And it shall come to pass in the last days I will pour out of my
Spirit upon all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,
and your young men shall dream dreams; and on my servants, and on my
handmaidens I will pour out in those days of my Spirit; and they shall
prophesy.  And it shall came to pass that whosoever shall call on the
name of the Lord shall be saved."

Peter did not spare the enemies of our Lord in his sermon, nor did he
fear them.  He preached to them of Jesus of Nazareth, and whom they had
taken and by wicked hands had crucified and slain: and whom God had
raised up, having loosed the pains of death, because it was not
possible that He should be holden of it.  He closed by telling them
that God had made that same Jesus whom they had crucified both Lord and
Christ.

There were many among the people gathered there who were pricked in
their hearts because of Peter's words, which had the power of the Holy
Spirit in them.  They looked at each other and said,

"Men and brethren, what shall we do?"

Peter encouraged them to repentance and baptism in the name of Jesus
Christ, telling them that the promise was to them and to their
children, and to all that were afar off.

It was a wonderful day for the Church of Jesus Christ, and for His
Kingdom on the earth, for there were about three thousand who that day
received baptism, and joined the little despised company of the
followers of Jesus of Nazareth.  And all that believed were drawn
together by the love of the Lord Jesus, and no longer lived for
themselves, but for each other.  That there might be no rich and no
poor among them, they sold their possessions and parted them to all, as
every one had need.  In the Temple, in each other's houses breaking
bread together, wherever they were they were happy and strong in their
new faith and in favor with all the people.  Though great trials and
persecutions came after awhile, they bore them as seeing their
invisible Lord, and they joyfully met the loss of all things--even that
of life itself with a smile, remembering the Father's House with its
many mansions, and their spiritual Elder Brother who had gone to
prepare a place for them.




AN AFTERWORD.


_Dear Child_:--God's Book is a Book of Ages, a Book of Races, and a
Book of Nations; but it is far more, it is a Book through which God
Himself speaks to the soul of man.  We begin to read it thinking that
He is speaking to the mind; afterward, when our conscience wakes, we
believe He speaks to the heart, but at last we find that He speaks to
the inmost spirit--the immortal soul.  Then all that had seemed to be
history, poetry, biography, philosophy, begins to be to us the voice of
God in the inmost of the soul, speaking of the life of the spirit.

We, find at last, too, that One has walked beside us all the way,
teaching us by His Spirit as He taught the people on the hill-side, or
by the lake-side in Galilee: the One who said, "Before Abraham was, I
am"--the Child of Bethlehem, whose name was called "Wonderful,
Counsellor, The Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, The Prince of
Peace."  That you, dear child, may find Him walking close beside your
way, be in the habit of walking daily with Him in the paths of His
Word, and He will reveal Himself to you there.











End of Project Gutenberg's Child's Story of the Bible, by Mary A. Lathbury

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHILD'S STORY OF THE BIBLE ***

***** This file should be named 25309.txt or 25309.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/3/0/25309/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
