The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Manx Nation - 1891, by Hall Caine

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Little Manx Nation - 1891

Author: Hall Caine

Release Date: May 23, 2008 [EBook #25571]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE MANX NATION - 1891 ***




Produced by David Widger





THE LITTLE MANX NATION

By Hall Caine

Published by William Heinemann - 1891


To the REVEREND T. S. BROWN, M.A.

You see what I send you--my lectures at the Royal Institution in the
Spring. In making a little book of them I have thought it best to
leave them as they were delivered, with all the colloquialisms that are
natural to spoken words frankly exposed to cold print. This does not
help them to any particular distinction as literature, but perhaps it
lends them an ease and familiarity which may partly atone to you and to
all good souls for their plentiful lack of dignity. I have said so often
that I am not an historian, that I ought to add that whatever history
lies hidden here belongs to Train, our only accredited chronicler,
and, even at the risk of bowing too low, I must needs protest, in our
north-country homespun, that he shall have the pudding if he will
also take the pudding-bag. You know what I mean. At some points our
history--especially our early history--is still so vague, so dubious,
so full of mystery. It is all the fault of little Mannanan, our ancient
Manx magician, who enshrouded our island in mist. Or should I say it
is to his credit, for has he not left us through all time some shadowy
figures to fight about, like "rael, thrue, reg'lar" Manxmen. As for the
stories, the "yarns" that lie like flies--like blue-bottles, like bees,
I trust not like wasps--in the amber of the history, you will see that
they are mainly my own. On second thought it occurs to me that maybe
they are mainly yours. Let us say that they are both yours and mine,
or perhaps, if the world finds anything good in them, any humour, any
pathos, any racy touches of our rugged people, you will permit me to
determine their ownership in the way of this paraphrase of Coleridge's
doggerel version of the two Latin hexameters--

"They're mine and they are likewise yours, But an if that will not do,
Let them be mine, good friend! for I Am the poorer of the two."

Hawthorns, Keswick, June 1891.




CONTENTS

THE STORY OF THE MANX KINGS

Islanders--Our Island--The Name of our Island--Our History--King
Orry--The Tynwald--The Lost Saga--The Manx Macbeth--The Manx
Glo'ster--Scotch and English Dominion--The Stanley Dynasty--Iliam
Dhoan--The Athol Dynasty--Smuggling and Wrecking--The Revestment--Home
Rule--Orry's Sons


THE STORY OF THE MANX BISHOPS

The Druids--Conversion to Christianity--The Early Bishops of
Man--Bishops of the Welsh Dynasty--Bishops of the Norse Dynasty--Sodor
and Man--The Early Bishops of the House of Stanley--Tithes in
Kind--The Gambling Bishop--The Deemsters--The Bishopric Vacant--Bishop
Wilson--Bishop Wilson's Censures--The Great Corn Famine--The Bishop at
Court--Stories of Bishop Wilson--Quarrels of Church and State--Some
Old Ordeals--The Herring Fishery--The Fishermen's Service--Some Old
Laws--Katherine Kinrade--Bishop Wilson's last Days--The Athol Bishops.


THE STORY OF THE MANX PEOPLE

The Manx Language--Manx Names--Manx imagination--Manx Proverbs--Manx
Ballads--Manx Carols--Decay of the Manx Language--Manx
Superstitions--Manx Stories--Manx "Characters"--Manx
Characteristics--Manx Types--Literary Associations--Manx
Progress--Conclusion




THE LITTLE MANX NATION




THE STORY OF THE MANX KINGS

There are just two ideas which are associated in the popular imagination
with the first thought of the Isle of Man. The one is that Manxmen have
three legs, and the other that Manx cats have no tails. But whatever
the popular conception, or misconception, of Man and its people, I shall
assume that what you ask from me is that simple knowledge of simple
things which has come to me by the accident of my parentage. I must
confess to you at the outset that I am not much of a hand at grave
history. Facts and figures I cannot expound with authority. But I know
the history of the Isle of Man, can see it clear, can see it whole, and
perhaps it will content you if I can show you the soul of it and make
it to live before you. In attempting to traverse the history I feel like
one who carries a dark lantern through ten dark centuries. I turn the
bull's eye on this incident and that, take a peep here and there, a
white light now, and then a blank darkness. Those ten centuries are
full of lusty fights, victories, vanquishments, quarrels, peacemaking,
shindies big and little, rumpus solemn and ridiculous, clouds of dust,
regal dust, political dust, and religious dust--you know the way of it.
But beneath it all and behind it all lies the real, true, living human
heart of Manxland. I want to show it to you, if you will allow me to
spare the needful time from facts and figures. It will get you close to
Man and its people, and it is not to be found in the history books.


ISLANDERS

And now, first, we Manxmen are islanders. It is not everybody who lives
on an island that is an islander. You know what I mean. I mean by an
islander one whose daily life is affected by the constant presence of
the sea. This is possible in a big island if it is far enough away from
the rest of the world, Iceland, for example, but it is inevitable in a
little one. The sea is always present with Manxmen. Everything they do,
everything they say, gets the colour and shimmer of the sea. The sea
goes into their bones, it comes out at their skin. Their talk is full of
it. They buy by it, they sell by it, they quarrel by it, they fight by
it, they swear by it, they pray by it. Of course they are not conscious
of this. Only their degenerate son, myself to wit, a chiel among them
takin' notes, knows how the sea exudes from the Manxmen. Say you ask if
the Governor is at home. If he is not, what is the answer? "He's not on
the island, sir." You inquire for the best hotel. "So-and-so is the
best hotel on the island, sir." You go to a Manx fair and hear a farmer
selling a cow. "Aw," says he, "she's a ter'ble gran' craythuer for
milkin', sir, and for butter maybe there isn' the lek of her on the
island, sir." Coming out of church you listen to the talk of two old
Manxwomen discussing the preacher. "Well, well, ma'am, well, well! Aw,
the voice at him! and the prayers! and the beautiful texes! There isn'
the lek of him on the island at all, at all!" Always the island, the
island, the island, or else the boats, and going out to the herrings.
The sea is always present. You feel it, you hear it, you see it, you can
never forget it. It dominates you. Manxmen are all sea-folk.

You will think this implies that Manxmen stick close to their island.
They do more than that. I will tell you a story. Five years ago I went
up into the mountains to seek an old Manx bard, last of a race of whom I
shall have something to tell you in their turn. All his life he had been
a poet. I did not gather that he had read any poetry except his own. Up
to seventy he had been a bachelor. Then this good Boaz had lit on his
Ruth and married, and had many children. I found him in a lonely glen,
peopled only in story, and then by fairies. A bare hill side, not a bush
in sight, a dead stretch of sea in front, rarely brightened by a sail. I
had come through a blinding hail-storm. The old man was sitting in the
chimney nook, a little red shawl round his head and knotted under his
chin. Within this aureole his face was as strong as Savonarola's, long
and gaunt, and with skin stretched over it like parchment. He was no
hermit, but a farmer, and had lived on that land, man and boy, nearly
ninety years. He had never been off the island, and had strange notions
of the rest of the world. Talked of England, London, theatres, palaces,
king's entertainments, evening parties. He saw them all through the
mists of rumour, and by the light of his Bible. He had strange notions,
some of them bad shots for the truth, some of them startlingly true. I
dare not tell you what they were. A Royal Institution audience would
be aghast. They had, as a whole, a strong smell of sulphur. But the old
bard was not merely an islander, he belonged to his land more than his
land belonged to him. The fishing town nearest to his farm was Peel, the
great fishing centre on the west coast. It was only five miles away.
I asked how long it was since he had been there? "Fifteen years," he
answered. The next nearest town was the old capital, on the east coast,
Castletown, the home of the Governor, of the last of the Manx lords, the
place of the Castle, the Court, the prison, the garrison, the College.
It was just six miles away. How long was it since he had been there?
"Twenty years." The new capital, Douglas, the heart of the island, its
point of touch with the world, was nine miles away. How long since he
had been in Douglas? "Sixty years," said the old bard. God bless him,
the sweet, dear old soul! Untaught, narrow, self-centred, bred on his
byre like his bullocks, but keeping his soul alive for all that, caring
not a ha'porth for the things of the world, he was a true Manxman, and
I'm proud of him. One thing I have to thank him for. But for him, and
the like of him, we should not be here to-day. It is not the cultured
Manxman, the Manxman that goes to the ends of the earth, that makes the
Manx nation valuable to study. Our race is what it is by virtue of
the Manxman who has had no life outside Man, and so has kept alive our
language, our customs, our laws and our patriarchal Constitution.


OUR ISLAND

It lies in the middle of the Irish Sea, at about equal distances from
England, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales. Seen from the sea it is a lovely
thing to look upon. It never fails to bring me a thrill of the heart as
it comes out of the distance. It lies like a bird on the waters. You
see it from end to end, and from water's edge to topmost peak, often
enshrouded in mists, a dim ghost on a grey sea; sometimes purple against
the setting sun. Then as you sail up to it, a rugged rocky coast, grand
in its beetling heights on the south and west, and broken into the
sweetest bays everywhere. The water clear as crystal and blue as the sky
in summer. You can see the shingle and the moss through many fathoms.
Then mountains within, not in peaks, but round foreheads. The colour of
the island is green and gold; its flavour is that of a nut. Both colour
and flavour come of the gorse. This covers the mountains and moorlands,
for, except on the north, the island has next to no trees. But O, the
beauty and delight of it in the Spring! Long, broad stretches glittering
under the sun with the gold of the gorse, and all the air full of the
nutty perfume. There is nothing like it in the world. Then the glens,
such fairy spots, deep, solemn, musical with the slumberous waters, clad
in dark mosses, brightened by the red fuchsia. The fuchsia is everywhere
where the gorse is not. At the cottage doors, by the waysides, in the
gardens. If the gorse should fail the fuchsia might even take its place
on the mountains. Such is Man, but I am partly conscious that it is Man
as seen by a Manxman. You want a drop of Manx blood in you to see it
aright. Then you may go the earth over and see grander things a thousand
times, things more sublime and beautiful, but you will come back to
Manxland and tramp the Mull Hills in May, long hour in, and long hour
out, and look at the flowering gorse and sniff its flavour, or lie by
the chasms and listen to the screams of the sea-birds, as they whirl and
dip and dart and skim over the Sugar-loaf Rock, and you'll say after
all that God has smiled on our little island, and that it is the fairest
spot in His beautiful world, and, above all, that it is _ours_.


THE NAME OF OUR ISLAND

This is a matter in dispute among philologists, and I am no authority.
Some say that Caesar meant the Isle of Man when he spoke of Mona; others
say he meant Anglesea. The present name is modern. So is Elian Vannin,
its Manx equivalent. In the Icelandic Sagas the island is called Mon.
Elsewhere it is called Eubonia. One historian thinks the island derives
its name from Mannin--in being an old Celtic word for island, therefore
Meadhon-in (pronounced Mannin) would signify: The middle island. That
definition requires that the Manxman had no hand in naming Man. He would
never think of describing its geographical situation on the sea.
Manxmen say the island got its name from a mythical personage called
Mannanan-Beg-Mac-y-Learr, Little Mannanan, son of Learr. This man was
a sort of Prospero, a magician, and the island's first ruler. The story
goes that if he dreaded an enemy he would enshroud the island in mist,
"and that by art magic." Happy island, where such faith could ever
exist! Modern science knows that mist, and where it comes from.


OUR HISTORY

It falls into three periods, first, a period of Celtic rule, second of
Norse rule, third of English dominion. Manx history is the history of
surrounding nations. We have no Sagas of our own heroes. The Sagas are
all of our conquerors. Save for our first three hundred recorded years
we have never been masters in our own house. The first chapter of our
history has yet to be written. We know we were Celts to begin with, but
how we came we have never learnt, whether we walked dry-shod from Wales
or sailed in boats from Ireland. To find out the facts of our early
history would be like digging up the island of Prospero. Perhaps we had
better leave it alone. Ten to one we were a gang of political exiles.
Perhaps we left our country for our country's good. Be it so. It was the
first and last time that it could be said of us.


KING ORRY

Early in the sixth century Man became subject to the kings and princes
of Wales, who ruled from Anglesea. There were twelve of them in
succession, and the last of them fell in the tenth century. We know next
to nothing about them but their names. Then came the Vikings. The young
bloods of Scandinavia had newly established their Norse kingdom in
Iceland, and were huckstering and sea roving about the Baltic and among
the British Isles. They had been to the Orkneys and Shetlands, and
Faroes, perhaps to Ireland, certainly to the coast of Cumberland, making
Scandinavian settlements everywhere. So they came to Moen early in the
tenth century, led by one Orry, or Gorree. Some say this man was
nothing but a common sea-rover. Others say he was a son of the Danish or
Norwegian monarch. It does not matter much. Orry had a better claim to
regard than that of the son of a great king. He was himself a great
man. The story of his first landing is a stirring thing. It was night,
a clear, brilliant, starry night, all the dark heavens lit up. Orry's
ships were at anchor behind him; and with his men he had touched the
beach, when down came the Celts to face him, and to challenge him. They
demanded to know where he came from. Then the red-haired sea-warrior
pointed to the milky way going off towards the North. "That is the way
of my country," he answered. The Celts went down like one man in awe
before him. He was their born king. It is what the actors call a fine
moment. Still, nobody has ever told us how Orry and the Celts understood
one another, speaking different tongues. Let us not ask.

King Orry had come to stay, and sea-warriors do not usually bring their
women over tempestuous seas. So the Norsemen married the Celtic women,
and from that union came the Manx people. Thus the Manxman to begin with
was half Norse, half Celt. He is much the same still. Manxmen usually
marry Manx women, and when they do not, they often marry Cumberland
women. As the Norseman settled in Cumberland as well as in Man the race
is not seriously affected either way. So the Manxman, such as he is,
taken all the centuries through, is thoroughbred.

Now what King Orry did in the Isle of Man was the greatest work that
ever was done there. He established our Constitution. It was on the
model of the Constitution just established in Iceland. The government
was representative and patriarchal. The Manx people being sea-folk,
living by the sea, a race of fishermen and sea-rovers, he divided the
island into six ship-shires, now called Sheadings. Each ship-shire
elected four men to an assemblage of law-makers. This assemblage,
equivalent to the Icelandic Logretta, was called the House of Keys.
There is no saying what the word means. Prof. Rhys thinks it is derived
from the Manx name _Kiare-as-Feed_, meaning the four-and-twenty. Train
says the representatives were called Taxiaxi, signifying pledges or
hostages, and consequently were styled Keys. Vigfusson's theory was
that Keys is from the Norse word _Keise_, or chosen men. The common Manx
notion, the idea familiar to my own boyhood, is, that the twenty-four
members of the House of Keys are the twenty-four material keys whereby
the closed doors of the law are unlocked. But besides the sea-folk of
the ship-shires King Orry remembered the Church. He found it on the
island at his coming, left it where he found it, and gave it a voice
in the government. He established a Tynwald Court, equivalent to
the Icelandic All Moot, where Church and State sat together. Then he
appointed two law-men, called Deemsters, one for the north and the other
for the south. These were equivalent to his Icelandic Loegsoegumadur,
speaker of the law and judge of all offences. Finally, he caused to
be built an artificial Mount of Laws, similar in its features to the
Icelandic Logberg at Thingvellir. Such was the machinery of the Norse
Constitution which King Orry established in Man. The working of it was
very simple. The House of Keys, the people's delegates, discussed all
questions of interest to the people, and sent up its desires to the
Tynwald Court. This assembly of people and Church in joint session
assented, and the desires of the people became Acts of Tynwald. These
Acts were submitted to the King. Having obtained the King's sanction
they were promulgated on the Tynwald Hill on the national day in the
presence of the nation. The scene of that promulgation of the laws was
stirring and impressive. Let me describe it.


THE TYNWALD

Perhaps there were two Tynwald Hills in King Orry's time, but I shall
assume that there was one only. It stood somewhere about midway in
the island. In the heart of a wide range of hill and dale, with a long
valley to the south, a hill to the north, a table-land to the east, and
to the west the broad Irish Sea. Not, of course, a place to be compared
with the grand and gloomy valley of the Logberg, where in a vast
amphitheatre of dark hills and great joekulls tipped with snow, with deep
chasms and yawning black pits, one's heart stands still. But the place
of the Manx Tynwald was an impressive spot. The Hill itself was a
circular mount cut into broad steps, the apex being only a few feet in
diameter. About it was a flat grass plot. Near it, just a hundred and
forty yards away, connected with the mount by a beaten path, was a
chapel. All around was bare and solitary, perhaps as bleak and stark as
the lonely plains of Thingvellir.

Such was the scene. Hither came the King and his people on Tynwald
Day. It fell on the 24th of June, the first of the seven days of the
Icelandic gathering of the Althing. What occurred in Iceland occurred
also in Man. The King with his Keys and his clergy gathered in the
chapel. Thence they passed in procession to the law-rock. On the top
round of the Tynwald the King sat on a chair and faced to the east. His
sword was held before him, point upwards. His barons and beneficed men,
his deemsters, knights, esquires, coroners, and yeomen, stood on the
lower steps of the mount. On the grass plot beyond the people were
gathered in crowds. Then the work of the day began. The coroners
proclaimed a warning. No man should make disturbance at Tynwald on pain
of death. Then the Acts of Tynwald were read or recited aloud by the
deemsters; first in the language of the laws, and next in the language
of the people. After other formalities the procession of the King
returned to the chapel, where the laws were signed and attested, and so
the annual Tynwald ended.

Now this primitive ceremonial, begun by King Orry early in the tenth
century, is observed to this day. On Midsummer-day of this year of grace
a ceremony similar in all its essentials will be observed by the present
Governor, his Keys, clergy, deemsters, coroners, and people, on or near
the same spot. It is the old Icelandic ordinance, but it has gone
from Iceland. The year 1800 saw the last of it on the lava law-rock of
Thingvellir. It is gone from every other Norse kingdom founded by the
old sea-rovers among the Western Isles. Manxmen alone have held on to
it. Shall we also let it go? Shall we laugh at it as a bit of mummery
that is useless in an age of books and newspapers, and foolish and
pompous in days of frock-coats and chimney-pot hats? I think not. We
cannot afford to lose it. Remember, it is the last visible sign of our
independence as a nation. It is our hand-grasp with the past. Our little
nation is the only Norse nation now on earth that can shake hands with
the days of the Sagas, and the Sea-Kings. Then let him who will laugh at
our primitive ceremonial. It is the badge of our ancient liberty, and we
need not envy the man who can look on it unmoved.


THE LOST SAGA

Of King Orry himself we learn very little. He was not only the first of
our kings, but also the greatest. We may be sure of that; first, by what
we know; and next, by what we do not know. He was a conqueror, and yet
we do not learn that he ever attempted to curtail the liberties of his
subjects. He found us free men, and did not try to make us slaves. On
the contrary, he gave us a representative Constitution, which has
lasted a thousand years. We might call him our Manx King Alfred, if the
indirections of history did not rather tempt us to christen him our Manx
King Lear. His Saga has never been written, or else it is lost. Would
that we could recover it! Oh, that imagination had the authority of
history to vitalise the old man and his times! I seem to see him as he
lived. There are hints of his character in his laws, that are as stage
directions, telling of the entrances and exits of his people, though the
drama of their day is gone. For example, in that preliminary warning
of the coroner at Tynwald, there is a clause which says that none shall
"bawl or quarrel or lye or lounge or sit." Do you not see what that
implies? Again, there is another clause which forbids any man, "on paine
of life and lyme," to make disturbance or stir in the time of Tynwald,
or any murmur or rising in the king's presence. Can you not read between
the lines of that edict? Once more, no inquest of a deemster, no judge
or jury, was necessary to the death-sentence of a man who rose against
the king or his governor on his seat on Tynwald. Nobody can miss the
meaning of that. Once again, it was a common right of the people to
present petitions at Tynwald, a common privilege of persons unjustly
punished to appeal against judgment, and a common prerogative of outlaws
to ask at the foot of the Tynwald Mount on Tynwald Day for the removal
of their outlawry. All these old rights and regulations came from
Iceland, and by the help of the Sagas it needs no special imagination
to make the scenes of their action live again. I seem to see King Orry
sitting on his chair on the Tynwald with his face towards the east. He
has long given up sea-roving.

His long red hair is become grey or white. But the old lion has the
muscles and fiery eye of the warrior still. His deemsters and barons
are about him, and his people are on the sward below. They are free
men; they mean to have their rights, both from him and from each other.
Disputes run high, there are loud voices, mighty oaths, sometimes blows,
fights, and terrific hurly-burlies. Then old Orry comes down with a
great voice and a sword, and ploughs a way through the fighters and
scatters them. No man dare lift his hand on the king. Peace is restored,
and the king goes back to his seat.

Then up from the valley comes a woe-begone man in tatters, grim and
gaunt and dirty, a famished and hunted wolf. He is an outlaw, has killed
a man, is pursued in a blood-feud, and asks for relief of his outlawry.
And so on and so on, a scene of rugged, lusty passions, hate and
revenge, but also love and brotherhood; drinking, laughing, swearing,
fighting, savage vices but also savage virtues, noble contempt of death,
and magnificent self-sacrifice.

The chapter is lost, but we know what it must have been. King Orry was
its hero. Our Manx Alfred, our Manx Arthur, our Manx Lear. Then room for
him among our heroes! he must stand high.


THE MANX MACBETH

The line of Orry came to an end at the beginning of the eleventh
century. Scotland was then under the sway of the tyrant Macbeth, and,
oddly enough, a parallel tragedy to that of Duncan and his kinsman was
being enacted in Man. A son of Harold the Black, of Iceland, Goddard
Crovan, a mighty soldier, conquered the island and took the crown by
treachery, coming first as a guest of the Manx king. Treachery breeds
treachery, duplicity is a bad seed to sow for loyalty, and the Manx
people were divided in their allegiance. About twenty years after
Crovan's conquest the people of the south of the island took up arms
against the people of the north, and the story goes that, when victory
wavered, the women of the north rushed out to the help of their
husbands, and so won the fight. For that day's work, the northern wives
were given the right to half of all their husband's goods immovable,
while the wives of the south had only a third. The last of the line of
Goddard Crovan died in 1265, and so ended the dynasty of the Norsemen in
Man. They had been three hundred years there. They found us a people
of the race and language of the people of Ireland, and they left us
Manxmen. They were our only true Manx kings, and when they fell, our
independence as a nation ceased.


THE MANX GLO'STER

Then the first pretender to the throne was one Ivar, a murderer, a sort
of Richard III., not all bad, but nearly all; said to possess virtues
enough to save the island and vices enough to ruin it. The island
was surrendered to Scotland by treaty with Norway. The Manx hated the
Scotch. They knew them as a race of pirates. Some three centuries later
there was one Cutlar MacCullock, whose name was a terror, so merciless
were his ravages. Over the cradles of their infants the Manx mothers
sang this song:--

     God keep the good corn, the sheep and the bullocks,
     From Satan, from sin and from Cutlar MacCullock.

Bad as Ivar was, the Scotch threatened to be worse.

So the Manx, fearing that their kingdom might become a part of the
kingdom of Scotland, supported Ivar. They were beaten. Ivar was a brave
tiger, and died fighting.


SCOTCH AND ENGLISH DOMINION

Man was conquered, and the King of Scotland appointed a lieutenant to
rule the island. But the Manx loved the Scotch no better as masters than
as pirates, and they petitioned the English king, Edward I., to take
them under his protection. He came, and the Scotch were driven out. But
King Robert Bruce reconquered the island for the Scotch. Yet again the
island fell to English dominion. This was in the time of Henry IV. It is
a sorry story. Henry gave the island to the Earl of Salisbury. Salisbury
sold it to one Sir William le Scroop. A copy of the deed of sale exists.
It puts a Manxman's teeth on edge. "With all the right of being crowned
with a golden crown." Scroop was beheaded by Henry, who confiscated his
estate, and gave the island to the Earl of Northumberland. It is a silly
inventory, but let us get through with it. Northumberland was banished,
and finally Henry made a grant of the island to Sir John de Stanley.
This was in 1407. Thus there had been four Kings of Man--not one of whom
had, so far as I know, set foot on its soil--three grants of the island,
and one miserable sale. Where the carcase is, there will the eagles be
gathered together.


THE STANLEY DYNASTY

When the crown came to Sir John Stanley he was in no hurry to put it on.
He paid no heed to his Manx subjects, and never saw his Manx kingdom. I
dare say he thought the gift horse was something of a white elephant. No
wonder if he did, for words could not exaggerate the wretched condition
of the island and its people. The houses of the poor were hovels built
of sod, with floors of clay, and sooty rafters of briar and straw and
dried gorse. The people were hardly better fed than their beasts.
So Stanley left the island alone. It will be interesting to mark how
different was the mood of his children, and his children's children. The
second Stanley went over to Man and did good work there. He promulgated
our laws, and had them written down for the first time--they had
hitherto been locked in the breasts of the deemsters in imitation of the
practice of the Druids. The line of the Stanleys lasted more than three
hundred years. Their rule was good for the island. They gave the tenants
security of tenure, and the landowners an act of settlement. They lifted
the material condition of our people, gave us the enjoyment of our
venerable laws, and ratified our patriarchal Constitution. Honour to the
Stanleys of the Manx dynasty! They have left a good mark on Man.


ILIAM DHOAN

And now I come to the one incident in modern Manx history which shares,
with the three legs of Man and the Manx cat, the consciousness of
everybody who knows anything about our island and its people. This is
the incident of the betrayal of Man and the Stanleys to the Parliament
in the time of Cromwell. It was a stirring drama, and though the curtain
has long fallen on it, the dark stage is still haunted by the ghosts
of its characters. Chief among these was William Christian, the Manxman
called Iliam Dhoan, Brown William, a familiar name that seems to hint
of a fine type of man. You will find him in "Peveril of the Peak." He is
there mixed up with Edward Christian, a very different person, just as
Peel Castle is mixed up with Castle Rushen, consciously no doubt, and
with an eye to imaginative effects, for Scott had a brother in the Isle
of Man who could have kept him from error if fact had been of any great
consequence in the novelist's reckoning.

Christian was Receiver-General, a sort of Chancellor of the Exchequer,
for the great Earl of Derby. The Earl had faith in him, and put nearly
everything under his command that fell within the province of his
lordship. Then came the struggle with Rigby at Latham House, and the
imprisonment of the Earl's six children by Fairfax. The Manx were
against the Parliament, and subscribed L500, probably the best part of
the money in the island, in support of the king. Then the Earl of Derby
left the island with a body of volunteers, and in going away committed
his wife to the care of Christian. You know what happened to him. He
was taken prisoner in Lancashire, charged with bearing arms for Charles
Stuart and holding the Isle of Man against the Commons, condemned, and
executed at Bolton.

With the forfeiture of the Earl the lordship of the island was granted
by Parliament to Lord Fairfax. He sent an army to take possession, but
the Countess-Dowager still held the island. Christian commanded the Manx
militia. At this moment the Manx people showed signs of disaffection.
They suddenly remembered two grievances, one was a grievance of
land tenure, the other was that a troop of soldiers was kept at free
quarterage. I cannot but wish they had bethought them of both a little
earlier. They formed an association, and broke into rebellion against
the Countess-Dowager within eight days of the Earl's execution. Perhaps
they did not know of the Earl's death, for news travelled slowly over
sea in those days. But at least they knew of his absence. As a Manxman I
am not proud of them.

During these eight days Mr. Receiver-General had begun to trim his
sails. He had a lively wit, and saw which way things were going. Rumour
says he was at the root of the secret association. Be that as it may, he
carried the demands of the people to the Countess. She had no choice but
to yield. The troops were disbanded. It was a bad victory.

A fortnight before, when her husband lay under his death sentence, the
Countess had offered the island in exchange for his life. So now Mr.
Receiver-General used this act of love against her. He seized some of
the forts, saying the Countess was selling the island to the Parliament.
Then the army of the Parliament landed, and Christian straightway
delivered the island up to it, protesting that he had taken the forts
on its behalf. Some say the Countess was imprisoned in the vaults of the
Castle. Others say she had a free pass to England. So ended act one.

When the act-drop rose on act two, Mr. Receiver-General was in office
under the Parliament. From the place of Receiver-General he was promoted
to the place of Governor. He had then the money of the island under his
control, and he used it badly. Deficits were found in his accounts.
He fled to London, was arrested for a large debt, and clapped into the
Fleet. Then the Commonwealth fell, the Dowager Countess went upstairs
again, and Charles II. restored the son of the great Earl to the
lordship of Man. After that came the Act of Indemnity, a general pardon
for all who had taken part against the royal cause. Thereupon Christian
went back to the Isle of Man, was arrested on a charge of treason to
the Countess-Dowager of Derby, pleaded the royal act of general pardon
against all proceedings libelled against him, was tried by the House of
Keys, and condemned to death. So ended act two.

Christian had a nephew, Edward Christian, who was one of the two
deemsters. This man dissented from the voice of the court, and hastened
to London to petition the king. Charles is said to have heard his plea,
and to have sent an order to suspend sentence. Some say the order came
too late; some say the Governor had it early enough and ignored it.
At all events Christian was shot. He protested that he had never been
anything but a faithful servant to the Derbys, and made a brave end.
The place of his execution was Hango Hill, a bleak, bare stretch of
land with the broad sea Under it. The soldiers wished to bind Christian.
"Trouble not yourselves for me," he said, "for I that dare face death
in whatever shape he comes, will not start at your fire and bullets."
He pinned a piece of white paper on his breast, and said: "Hit this, and
you do your own work and mine." Then he stretched forth his arms as a
signal, was shot through the heart, and fell. Such was the end of Brown
William. He may have been a traitor, but he was no coward.

When the chief actor in the tragedy had fallen, King Charles appeared,
as Fortinbras appears in "Hamlet," to make a review and a reckoning, and
to take the spoils. He ordered the Governor, the remaining Deemsters,
and three of the Keys to be brought before him, pronounced the execution
of Christian to be a violation of his general pardon, and imposed severe
penalties of fine and imprisonment. "The rest" in this drama has not
been "silence." One long clamour has followed. Christian's guilt has
been questioned, the legality of his trial has been disputed, the
validity of Charles's censure of the judges has been denied. The case
is a mass of tangle, as every case must be that stands between the two
stools of the Royal cause and the Commonwealth. But I shall make bold to
summarise the truth in a very few words:

First, that Christian was untrue to the house of Derby is as clear as
noonday. If he had been their loyal servant he could never have taken
office under the Parliament.

Second, though untrue to the Countess-Dowager, Christian could not be
guilty of treason to her, because she had ceased to be the sovereign
when her husband was executed. Fairfax was then the Lord of Man, and
Christian was guilty of no treason to him.

Third, whether true or untrue to the Countess-Dowager, the act of pardon
had nothing on earth to do with Christian, who was not charged with
treason to King Charles, but to the Manx reigning family. The Isle of
Man was not a dominion of England, and if Charles's order had arrived
before Christian's execution, the Governor, Keys, and Deemster would
have been fully justified in shooting the man in defiance of the king.

I feel some diffidence in offering this opinion, but I can have none
whatever in saying what I think of Christian. My fellow Manxmen are
for the most part his ardent supporters. They affirm his innocence, and
protest that he was a martyr-hero, declaring that at least he met his
fate by asserting the rights of his countrymen. I shall not hesitate to
say that I read the facts another way. This is how I see the man:

First, he was a servant of the Derbys, honoured, empowered, entrusted
with the care of his mistress, the Countess, when his master, the Earl,
left the island to fight for the king. Second, eight days after his
master's fate, he rose in rebellion against his mistress and seized some
of the forts of defence. Third, he delivered the island to the army of
the Parliament, and continued to hold his office under it. Fourth, he
robbed the treasury of the island and fled from his new masters, the
Parliament. Fifth, when the new master fell he chopped round, became a
king's man once more, and returned to the island on the strength of the
general pardon. Sixth, when he was condemned to death he, who had held
office under the Parliament, protested that he had never been anything
but a faithful servant to the Derbys.

Such is Christian. _He_ a hero! No, but a poor, sorry, knock-kneed
time-server. A thing of rags and patches. A Manx Vicar of Bray. Let us
talk of him as little as we may, and boast of him not at all. Man and
Manxmen have no need ol him. No, thank God, we can tell of better men.
Let us turn his picture to the wall.


THE ATHOL DYNASTY

The last of the Stanleys of the Manx dynasty died childless in 1735, and
then the lordship of Man devolved by the female line on the second Duke
of Athol by right of his grandmother, who was a daughter of the great
Earl of Derby. There is little that is good to say of the Lords of the
House of Athol except that they sold the island. Almost the first, and
quite the best, thing they did on coming to Man, was to try to get out
of it. Let us make no disguise of the clear truth. The Manx Athols were
bad, and nearly everything about them was bad. Never was the condition
of the island so abject as during their day. Never were the poor so
poor. Never was the name of Manxman so deservedly a badge of disgrace.
The chief dishonour was that of the Athols. They kept a swashbuckler
court in their little Manx kingdom. Gentlemen of the type of Barry
Lyndon overran it. Captain Macheaths, Jonathan Wilds, and worse, were
masters of the island, which was now a refuge for debtors and felons.
Roystering, philandering, gambling, fighting, such was the order of
things.

What days they had! What nights! His Grace of Athol was himself in the
thick of it all. He kept a deal of company, chiefly rogues and rascals.
For example, among his "lord captains" was one Captain Fletcher. This
Blue Beard had a magnificent horse, to which, when he was merry, he made
his wife, who was a religious woman, kneel down and say her prayers. The
mother of my friend, the Reverend T. E. Brown, came upon the dead body
of one of these Barry Lyndons, who had fallen in a duel, and the blue
mark was on the white forehead, where the pistol shot had been. I
remember to have heard of another Sir Lucius O'Trigger, whose body lay
exposed in the hold of a fishing-smack, while a parson read the burial
service from the quay. This was some artifice to prevent seizure for
debt. Oh, these good old times, with their soiled and dirty splendours!
There was no lively chronicler, no Pepys, no Walpole then, to give us a
picture of the Court of these Kings of Man. What a picture it must
have been! Can you not see it? The troops of gentlemen debtors from
the Coffee Houses of London, with their periwigs, their canes, and
fine linen; down on their luck, but still beruffled, besnuffed, and
red-heeled. I can see them strutting with noses up, through old Douglas
market-place on market morning, past the Manx folk in their homespun,
their curranes and undyed stockings. Then out at Mount Murray, the home
of the Athols, their imitations of Vauxhall, torches, dancings, bows and
conges, bankrupt shows, perhaps, but the bankrupt Barrys making the
best of them--one seems to see it all. And then again, their genteel
quarrels--quarrels were easily bred in that atmosphere. "Sir, I have the
honour to tell you that you are a pimp, lately escaped from the Fleet."
"My lord, permit me to say that you lie, that you are the son of a lady,
and were born in a sponging-house." Then out leapt the weapons, and
presently two men were crossing swords under the trees, and by-and-by
one of them was left under the moonlight, with the shadow of the leaves
playing on his white face.

Poor gay dogs, they are dead! The page of their history is lost. Perhaps
that is just as well. It must have been a dark page, maybe a little red
too, even as blood runs red. You can see the scene of their revelries.
It is an inn now. The walls seem to echo to their voices. But the tables
they ate at are like themselves--worm-eaten.

Good-bye to them! They have gone over the Styx.


SMUGGLING AND WRECKING

Meanwhile, what of the Manx people? Their condition was pitiful. An
author who wrote fifty years after the advent of the Athols gives a
description of such misery that one's flesh creeps as one reads it.
Badly housed, badly clad, badly fed, and hardly taught at all, the very
poor were in a state of abjectness unfit for dogs. Treat men as dogs and
they speedily acquire the habits of dogs, the vices of dogs, and none of
their virtues. That was what happened to a part of the Manx people; they
developed the instincts of dogs, while their masters, the other dogs,
the gay dogs, were playing their bad game together. Smuggling became
common on the coasts of Man. Spirits and tobacco were the goods chiefly
smuggled, and the illicit trade rose to a great height. There was no
way to check it. The island was an independent kingdom. My lord of Athol
swept in the ill-gotten gains, and his people got what they could. It
was a game of grab. Meantime the trade of the surrounding countries,
England, Wales, and Ireland, was suffering grievously. The name of the
island must have smelt strong in those days.

But there was a fouler odour than that of smuggling. Wrecking was not
unknown. The island lent itself naturally to that evil work. The mists
of Little Mannanan, son of Lear, did not forsake our island when Saint
Patrick swept him out of it. They continued to come up from the south,
and to conspire with the rapid currents from the north to drive ships on
to our rocks. Our coasts were badly lighted, or lighted not at all. An
open flare stuck out from a pole at the end of a pier was often all
that a dangerous headland had to keep vessels away from it. Nothing was
easier than for a fishing smack to run down pole and flare together, as
if by accident, on returning to harbour. But there was a worse danger
than bad lights, and that was false lights. It was so easy to set them.
Sometimes they were there of themselves, without evil intention of any
human soul, luring sailors to their destruction. Then when ships came
ashore it was so easy to juggle with one's conscience and say it was the
will of God, and no bad doings of any man's. The poor sea-going men were
at the bottom of the sea by this time, and their cargo was drifting up
with the tide, so there was nothing to do but to take it. Such was the
way of things. The Manxman could find his excuses. He was miserably
poor, he had bad masters, smuggling was his best occupation, his coasts
were indifferently lighted, ships came ashore of themselves--what was he
to do? That the name of Manxman did not become a curse, an execration,
and a reproach in these evil days of the Athols seems to say that
behind all this wicked work there were splendid virtues doing noble duty
somewhere. The real sap, the true human heart of Manxland, was somehow
kept alive. Besides cut-throats in ruffles, and wreckers in homespun,
there were true, sweet, simple-hearted people who would not sell their
souls to fill their mouths.

Does it surprise you that some of all this comes within the memory of
men still living? I am myself well within the period of middle life,
and, though too young to touch these evil days, I can remember men
and women who must have been in the thick of them. On the north of the
island is Kirk Maughold Head, a bold, rugged headland going far out into
the sea. Within this rocky foreland lie two bays, sweet coverlets of
blue waters, washing a shingly shore under shelter of dark cliffs. One
of these bays is called Port-y-Vullin, and just outside of it,
between the mainland and the head, is a rock, known as the Carrick, a
treacherous grey reef, visible at low water, and hidden at flood-tide.
On the low _brews_ of Port-y-Vullin stood two houses, the one a mill,
worked by the waters coming down from the near mountain of Barrule,
the other a weaver's cottage. Three weavers lived together there, all
bachelors, and all old, and never a woman or child among them--Jemmy of
eighty years, Danny of seventy, and Billy of sixty something. Year in,
year out, they worked at their looms, and early or late, whenever you
passed on the road behind, you heard the click of them. Fishermen coming
back to harbour late at night always looked for the light of their
windows. "Yander's Jemmy-Danny-Billy's," they would say, and steer home
by that landmark. But the light which guided the native seamen misled
the stranger, and many a ship in the old days was torn to pieces on the
jagged teeth of that sea-lion, the Carrick. Then, hearing loud human
cries above the shrieks of wind and wave, the three helpless old men
would come tottering down to the beach, like three innocent witches,
trembling and wailing, holding each other's hands like little children,
and never once dreaming of what bad work the candles over their looms
had done.

But there were those who were not so guileless. Among them was a sad old
salt, whom I shall call Hommy-Billy-mooar, Tommy, son of big Billy. Did
I know him, or do I only imagine him as I have heard of him? I cannot
say, but nevertheless I see him plainly. One of his eyes was gone, and
the other was badly damaged. His face was of stained mahogany, one side
of his mouth turned up, the other side turned down, he could laugh and
cry together. He was half landsman, tilling his own croft, half seaman,
going out with the boats to the herrings. In his youth he had sailed
on a smuggler, running in from Whitehaven with spirits. The joy of "the
trade," as they called smuggling, was that a man could buy spirits at
two shillings a gallon for sale on the island, and drink as much as he
"plazed abooard for nothin'." When Hommy married, he lived in a house
near the church, the venerable St. Maughold away on the headland, with
its lonely churchyard within sound of the sea.

There on tempestuous nights the old eagle looked out from his eyrie on
the doings of the sea, over the back of the cottage of the old weavers
to the Carrick. If anything came ashore he awakened his boys, scurried
over to the bay, seized all they could carry, stole back home, hid his
treasures in the thatch of the roof, or among the straw of the loft,
went off to bed, and rose in the morning with an innocent look, and
listened to the story of last night's doings with a face full of
surprise. They say that Hommy carried on this work for years, and though
many suspected, none detected him, not even his wife, who was a good
Methodist. The poor woman found him out at last, and, being troubled
with a conscience, she died, and Hommy buried her in Kirk Maughold
churchyard, and put a stone over her with a good inscription. Then he
went on as before. But one morning there was a mighty hue and cry. A
ship had been wrecked on the Carrick, and the crew who were saved had
seen some rascals carrying off in the darkness certain rolls of Irish
cloth which they had thrown overboard. Suspicion lit on Hommy and his
boys. Hommy was quite hurt. "Wrecking was it? Lord a-massy! To think,
to think!" Revenue officers were to come to-morrow to search his house.
Those rolls of Irish cloth were under the thatch, above the dry gorse
stored up on the "lath" in his cowhouse. That night he carried them off
to the churchyard, took up the stone from over his wife's grave, dug the
grave open and put in the cloth. Next day his one eye wept a good deal
while the officers of revenue made their fruitless search. "Aw well,
well, did they think because a man was poor he had no feelings?"
Afterwards he pretended to become a Methodist, and then he removed the
cloth from his wife's grave because he had doubts about how she could
rise in the resurrection with such a weight on her coffin. Poor old
Hommy, he came to a bad end. He spent his last days in jail in Castle
Rushen. A one-eyed mate of his told me he saw him there. Hommy was
unhappy. He said "Castle Rushen wasn't no place for a poor man when he
was gettin' anyways ould."


THE REVESTMENT

It is hardly a matter for much surprise that the British Government did
what it could to curb the smuggling that was rife in Man in the days of
the Athols. The bad work had begun in the days of the Derbys, when an
Act was passed which authorised the Earl of Derby to dispose of his
royalty and revenue in the island, and empowered the Lords of the
Treasury to treat with him for the sale of it. The Earl would not sell,
and when the Duke of Athol was asked to do so, he tried to put matters
off. But the evil had by this time grown so grievously that the British
Government threatened to strip the Duke without remuneration. Then he
agreed to accept L70,000 as compensation for the absolute surrender of
the island. He was also to have L2000 out of the Irish revenue, which,
as well as the English revenue, was to benefit by the suppression of the
clandestine trade. This was in exchange for some L6000 a year which
was the Duke's Manx revenue, much of it from duties and customs paid
in goods which were afterwards smuggled into England, Ireland, and
Scotland. So much for his Grace of Athol. Of course the Manx people got
nothing. The thief was punished, the receiver was enriched; it is the
way of the world.

In our history of Man, we call this sweet transaction, which occurred in
1765, "The Revestment," meaning the revesting of the island in the
crown of England. Our Manx people did not like it at all. I have heard a
rugged old song on the subject sung at Manx inns:

     For the babes unborn shall rue the day
     When the Isle of Man was sold away;
     And there's ne'er an old wife that loves a dram
     But she will lament for the Isle of Man.

Clearly drams became scarce when "the trade" was put down. But, indeed,
the Manx had the most strange fears and ludicrous sorrows. The one came
of their anxiety about the fate of their ancient Constitution, the other
came of their foolish generosity. They dreaded that the government of
the island would be merged into that of England, and they imagined that
because the Duke of Athol had been compelled to surrender, he had been
badly treated. Their patriotism was satisfied when the Duke of Athol was
made Governor-in-Chief under the English crown, for then it was clear
that they were to be left alone; but their sympathy was moved to see him
come back as servant who had once been lord. They had disliked the Duke
of Athol down to that hour, but they forgot their hatred in sight of his
humiliation, and when he landed in his new character, they received
him with acclamations. I am touched by the thought of my countrymen's
unselfish conduct in that hour; but I thank God I was not alive to
witness it.

I should have shrieked with laughter. The absurdity of the situation
passes the limits even of a farce. A certain Duke, who had received
L6000 a year, whereof a large part came of an immoral trade, had been
to London and sold his interest in it for L70,000, because if he had
not taken that, he would probably have got nothing. With thirteen
years' purchase of his insecure revenue in his pocket, and L2000 a year
promised, and his salary as Governor-in-Chief besides, he returns to the
island where half the people are impoverished by his sale of the island,
and nobody else has received a copper coin, and everybody is doomed to
pay back interest on what the Duke has received! What is the picture?
The Duke lands at the old jetty, and there his carriage is waiting to
take him to the house, where he and his have kept swashbuckler courts,
with troops of fine gentlemen debtors from London. The Manxmen forget
everything except that his dignity is reduced. They unyoke his horses,
get into his shafts, drag him through the streets, toss up their caps
and cry hurrah! hurrah! One seems to see the Duke sitting there with
his arms folded, and his head on his breast. He can't help laughing. The
thing is too ridiculous. Oh, if Swift had been there to see it, what a
scorching satire we should have had!

But the Athols soon spirited away their popularity. First they clamoured
for a further sum on account of the lost revenues, and they got it. Then
they tried to appropriate part of the income of the clergy. Again, they
put members of their family into the bishopric, and one of them sold his
tithes to a factor who tried to extort them by strong measures, which
led to green crop riots. In the end, their gross selfishness, which
thought of their own losses but forgot the losses of the people, raised
such open marks of aversion in the island that they finally signified to
the king their desire to sell all their remaining rights, their land
and manorial rights. This they did in 1829, receiving altogether, for
custom, revenue, tithes, patronage of the bishopric, and quit rents,
the sum of L416,000. Such was the value to the last of the Athols of the
Manx dynasty, of that little hungry island of the Irish Sea, which Henry
IV. gave to the Stanleys, and Sir John de Stanley did not think worth
while to look at. So there was an end of the House of Athol. Exit the
House of Athol! The play goes on without them.


HOME RULE

It might be said that with the final sale of 1829 the history of the
Isle of Man came to a close. Since then we have been in the happy
condition of the nation without a history. Man is now a dependency of
the English crown. The crown is represented by a Lieutenant-Governor.
Our old Norse Constitution remains. We have Home Rule, and it works
well. The Manx people are attached to the throne of England, and her
Majesty has not more loyal subjects in her dominions. We are deeply
interested in Imperial affairs, but we have no voice in them. I do not
think we have ever dreamt of a day when we should send representatives
to Westminster. Our sympathies as a nation are not altogether, I think,
with the party of progress. We are devoted to old institutions, and
hold fast to such of them as are our own. All this is, perhaps, what you
would expect of a race of islanders with our antecedents.

Our social history has not been brilliant. I do not gather that the Isle
of Man was ever Merry Man. Not even in its gayest days do we catch any
note of merriment amid the rumpus of its revelries. It is an odd thing
that woman plays next to no part whatever in the history of the island.
Surely ours is the only national pie in which woman has not had a
finger. In this respect the island justifies the ungallant reading of
its name--it is distinctly the Isle of Man. Not even amid the glitter
and gewgaws of our Captain Macheaths do you catch the glint of the gown
of a Polly. No bevy of ladies, no merry parties, no pageants worthy of
the name. No, our social history gives no idea of Merry Man.

Our civil history is not glorious. We are compelled to allow that it
has no heroism in it. There has been no fight for principle, no brave
endurance of wrong. Since the days of Orry, we have had nothing to tell
in Saga, if the Sagaman were here. We have played no part in the work of
the world. The great world has been going on for ten centuries without
taking much note of us. We are a little nation, but even little nations
have held their own. We have not.

One great king we have had, King Orry. He gave us our patriarchal
Constitution, and it is a fine thing. It combines most of the best
qualities of representative government. Its freedom is more free than
that of some republics. The people seem to be more seen, and their voice
more heard, than in any other form of government whose operation I have
witnessed. Yet there is nothing noisy about our Home Rule. And this
Constitution we have kept alive for a thousand years, while it has died
out of every other Norse kingdom. That is, perhaps, our highest national
honour. We may have played a timid part; we may have accepted rulers
from anywhere; we may never have made a struggle for independence; and
no Manxman may ever have been strong enough to stand up alone for his
people. It is like our character that we have taken things easily, and
instead of resisting our enemies, or throwing them from our rocky
island into the sea, we have been law abiding under lawless masters
and peaceful under oppression. But this one thing we have done: we
have clung to our patriarchal Constitution, not caring a ha'p'orth
who administered our laws so long as the laws were our own. That is
something; I think it is a good deal. It means that through many changes
undergone by the greater peoples of the world, we are King Orry's men
still. Let me in a last word tell you a story which shows what that
description implies.

ORRY'S SONS

On the west coast of the Isle of Man stands the town of Peel. It is a
little fishing port, looking out on the Irish Sea. To the north of
it there is a broad shore, to the south lies the harbour with a rocky
headland called Contrary Head; in front--until lately divided from the
mainland by a narrow strait--is a rugged island rock. On this rock stand
the broken ruins of a castle, Peel Castle, and never did castle stand
on a grander spot. The sea flows round it, beating on the jagged cliffs
beneath, and behind it are the wilder cliffs of Contrary. In the water
between and around Contrary contrary currents flow, and when the wind
is high they race and prance there like an unbroken horse. It is a grand
scene, but a perilous place for ships.

One afternoon in October of 1889 a Norwegian ship (strange chance!), the
_St George_ (name surely chosen by the Fates!), in a fearful tempest was
drifting on to Contrary Head. She was labouring hard in the heavy
sea, rearing, plunging, creaking, groaning, and driving fast through
clamouring winds and threshing breakers on to the cruel, black, steep
horns of rock. All Peel was down at the beach watching her. Flakes of
sea-foam were flying around, and the waves breaking on the beach were
scooping up the shingle and flinging it through the air like sleet.

Peel has a lifeboat, and it was got out. There were so many volunteers
that the harbour-master had difficulties of selection. The boat got off;
the coxswain was called Charlie Cain; one of his crew was named Gorry,
otherwise Orry. It was a perilous adventure. The Norwegian had lost her
masts, and her spars were floating around her in the snow-like surf. She
was dangerous to approach, but the lifeboat reached her. Charlie cried
out to the Norwegian captain: "How many of you?" The answer came back,
"Twenty-two!" Charlie counted them as they hung on at the ship's side,
and said: "I only see twenty-one; not a man shall leave the ship until
you bring the odd one on deck." The odd one, a disabled man, had been
left below to his fate. Now he was brought up, and all were taken aboard
the lifeboat.

On landing at Peel there was great excitement, men cheering and women
crying. The Manx women spotted a baby among the Norwegians, fought for
it, one woman got it, and carried it off to a fire and dry clothing. It
was the captain's wife's baby, and an hour afterwards the poor captain's
wife, like a creature distracted, was searching for it all over the
town. And to heighten the scene, report says that at that tremendous
moment a splendid rainbow spanned the bay from side to side. That ought
to be true if it is not.

It was a brilliant rescue, but the moving part of the story is yet to
tell. The Norwegian Government, touched by the splendid heroism of the
Manxmen, struck medals for the lifeboat men and sent them across to the
Governor. These medals were distributed last summer on the island rock
within the ruins of old Peel Castle. Think of it! One thousand years
before, not far from that same place, Orry the Viking came ashore from
Denmark or Norway. And now his Manx sons, still bearing his very name,
Orry, save from the sea the sons of the brethren he left behind, and
down the milky way, whence Orry himself once came, come now to the
Manxmen the thanks and the blessings of their kinsmen, Orry's father's
children.

Such a story as this thrills one to the heart. It links Manxmen to the
great past. What are a thousand years before it? Time sinks away, and
the old sea-warrior seems to speak to us still through the surf of that
storm at Peel.




THE STORY OF THE MANX BISHOPS

Some years ago, in going down the valley of Foxdale, towards the mouth
of Glen Rushen, I lost my way on a rough and unbeaten path under the
mountain called Slieu Whallin. There I was met by a typical old Manx
farmer, who climbed the hillside some distance to serve as my guide.
"Aw, man," said he, "many a Sunday I've crossed these mountains in
snow and hail together." I asked why on Sunday. "You see," said the old
fellow, "I'm one of those men that have been guilty of what St. Paul
calls the foolishness of preaching." It turned out that he was a local
preacher to the Wesleyans, and that for two score years or more, in all
seasons, in all weathers, every Sunday, year in, year out, he had made
the journey from his farm in Foxdale to the western villages of Kirk
Patrick, where his voluntary duty lay. He left me with a laugh and
a cheery word. "Ask again at the cottage at the top of the brew," he
shouted. "An ould widda lives there with her gel." At the summit of the
hill, just under South Barrule, with Cronk-ny-arrey-Lhaa to the west, I
came upon a disused lead mine, called the old Cross Vein, its shaft open
save for a plank or two thrown across it, and filled with water almost
to the surface of the ground. And there, under the lee of the roofless
walls of the ruined engine-house, stood the tiny one-story cottage where
I had been directed to inquire my way again. I knocked, and then saw the
outer conditions of an existence about as miserable as the mind of man
can conceive. The door was opened by a youngish woman, having a thin,
white face, and within the little house an elderly woman was breaking
scraps of vegetables into a pot that swung from a hook above a handful
of turf fire, which burned on the ground. They were the widow and
daughter. Their house consisted of two rooms, a living room and a
sleeping closet, both open to the thatch, which was sooty with smoke.
The floor was of bare earth, trodden hard and shiny. There was one
little window in each apartment, but after the breakages of years,
the panes were obscured by rags stuffed into the gaps to keep out the
weather. The roof bore traces of damp, and I asked if the rain came into
the house. "Och, yes, and bad, bad, bad!" said the elder woman. "He left
us, sir, years ago." That was her way of saying that her husband was
dead, and that since his death there had been no man to do an odd
job about the place. The two women lived by working in the fields, at
weeding, at planting potatoes, at thinning cabbages, and at the hay in
its season. Their little bankrupt barn belonged to them, and it was all
they had. In that they lived, or lingered, on the mountain top, a
long stretch of bare hillside, away from any neighbour, alone in their
poverty, with mountains before and behind, the broad grey sea, without
ship or sail, down a gully to the west, nothing visible to the east
save the smoke from the valley where lay the habitations of men, nothing
audible anywhere but the deep rumble of the waves' bellow, or the chirp
of the birds overhead, or, perhaps, when the wind was southerly, the
church bells on Sunday morning. Never have I looked upon such lonely
penury, and yet there, even there, these forlorn women kept their souls
alive. "Yes," they said, "we're working when we can get the work, and
trusting, trusting, trusting still."

I have lingered too long over this poor adventure of losing my way to
Glen Rushen, but my little sketch may perhaps get you close to that side
of Manx life whereon I wish to speak to-day. I want to tell the history
of religion in Man, so far as we know it; and better, to my thinking,
than a grave or solid disquisition on the ways and doings of Bishops or
Spiritual Barons, are any peeps into the hearts and home lives of the
Manx, which will show what is called the "innate religiosity" of the
humblest of the people. To this end also, when I have discharged my
scant duty to church history, or perhaps in the course of my hasty
exposition of it, I shall dwell on some of those homely manners and
customs, which, more than prayer-books and printed services, tell us
what our fathers believed, what we still believe, and how we stand
towards that other life, that inner life, that is not concerned with
what we eat and what we drink, and wherewithal we shall be clothed.


THE DRUIDS

And now, just as the first chapter of our Manx civil history is lost,
so the first chapter of our church history is lost. That the Druids
occupied the island seems to some people to be clear from many Celtic
names and some remains, such as we are accustomed to call Druidical,
and certain customs still observed. Perhaps worthy of a word is the
circumstance that in the parish where the Bishop now lives, and has
always lived, Kirk Michael, there is a place called by a name which in
the Manx signifies Chief Druid. Strangely are the faiths of the ages
linked together.


CONVERSION TO CHRISTIANITY

We do not know, with any certainty, at what time the island was
converted to Christianity. The accepted opinion is that Christianity was
established in Man by St. Patrick about the middle of the fifth century.
The story goes that the Saint of Ireland was on a voyage thither from
England, when a storm cast him ashore on a little islet on the western
coast of Man. This islet was afterwards called St. Patrick's Isle. St.
Patrick built his church on it. The church was rebuilt eight centuries
later within the walls of a castle which rose on the same rocky site. It
became the cathedral church of the island. When the Norwegians came they
renamed the islet Holm Isle. Tradition says that St. Patrick's coming
was in the time of Mannanan, the magician, our little Manx Prospero. It
also says that St. Patrick drove Mannanan away, and that St. Patrick's
successor, St. Germain, followed up the good work of exterminating evil
spirits by driving out of the island all venomous creatures whatever. We
sometimes bless the memory of St. Germain, and wish he would come again.


THE EARLY BISHOPS OF MAN

After St. Germain came St. Maughold. This Bishop was a sort of
transfigured Manx Caliban. I trust the name does him no wrong. He had
been an Irish prince, had lived a bad, gross life as a robber at the
head of a band of robbers, had been converted by St. Patrick, and,
resolving to abandon the temptations of the world, had embarked on the
sea in a wicker boat without oar or helm. Almost he had his will at
once, but the north wind, which threatened to remove him from the
temptations of this world, cast him ashore on the north of the Isle of
Man. There he built his church, and the rocky headland whereon it stands
is still known by his name. High on the craggy cliff-side, looking
towards the sea, is a seat hewn out of the rock. This is called St.
Maughold's Chair. Not far away there is a well supposed to possess
miraculous properties. It is called St. Maughold's Well. Thus tradition
has perpetuated the odour of his great sanctity, which is the more
extraordinary in a variation of his legend, which says that it was not
after his conversion, and in submission to the will of God, that he put
forth from Ireland in his wicker boat, but that he was thrust out thus,
with hands and feet bound, by way of punishment for his crimes as a
captain of banditti.

But if Maughold was Caliban in Ireland, he was more than Prospero in
Man. Rumour of his piety went back to Ireland, and St. Bridget, who had
founded a nunnery at Kildare, resolved on a pilgrimage to the good
man's island. She crossed the water, attended by her virgins, called
her daughters of fire, founded a nunnery near Douglas, worked miracles
there, touched the altar in testimony of her virginity, whereupon it
grew green and flourished. This, if I may be pardoned the continued
parallel, is our Manx Miranda. And indeed it is difficult to shake off
the idea that Shakespeare must have known something of the early
story of Man, its magicians and its saints. We know the perfidy of
circumstance, the lying tricks that fact is always playing with us, too
well and painfully to say anything of the kind with certainty. But the
angles of resemblance are many between the groundwork of the "Tempest"
and the earliest of Manx records. Mannanan-beg-Mac-y-Lear, the magician
who surrounded the island with mists when enemies came near in ships;
Maughold, the robber and libertine, bound hand and foot, and driven
ashore in a wicker boat; and then Bridget, the virgin saint. Moreover,
the stories of Little Man-nanan, of St. Patrick, and of St. Maughold
were printed in Manx in the sixteenth century. Truly that is not
enough, for, after all, we have no evidence that Shakespeare, who knew
everything, knew Manx. But then Man has long been famous for its seamen.
We had one of them at Trafalgar, holding Nelson in his arms when he
died. The best days, or the worst days--which?--of the trade of the West
Coast of Africa saw Manx captains in the thick of it. Shall I confess to
you that in the bad days of the English slave trade the four merchantmen
that brought the largest black cargo to the big human auction mart at
the Goree Piazza at Liverpool were commanded by four Manxmen! They were
a sad quartet. One of them had only one arm and an iron hook; another
had only one arm and one eye; a third had only one leg and a stump; the
fourth was covered with scars from the iron of the chains of a slave
which he had worn twelve months at Barbadoes. Just about enough humanity
in the four to make one complete man. But with vigour enough, fire
enough, heart enough--I daren't say soul enough--in their dismembered
old trunks to make ten men apiece; born sea-rovers, true sons of Orry,
their blood half brine. Well, is it not conceivable that in those
earlier days of treasure seeking, when Elizabeth's English captains were
spoiling the Spaniard in the Indies, Manx sailors were also there?
If so, why might not Shakespeare, who must have ferreted out many a
stranger creature, have found in some London tavern an old Manx sea-dog,
who could tell him of the Manx Prospero, the Manx Caliban, and the Manx
Miranda?

But I have rambled on about my sailors; I must return to my Bishops.
They seem to have been a line of pious, humble, charitable, godly men
at the beginning. Irishmen, chiefly, living the lives of hermits
and saints. Apparently they were at first appointed by the people
themselves. Would it be interesting to know the grounds of selection?
One was selected for his sanctity, a natural qualification, but another
was chosen because he had a pleasant face, and a fine portly figure;
not bad qualifications, either. Thus things went on for about a hundred
years, and, for all we know, Celtic Bishops and Celtic people lived
together in their little island in peace, hearing nothing of the loud
religious hubbub that was disturbing Europe.


BISHOPS OF THE WELSH DYNASTY

Then came the rule of the Welsh kings, and, though we know but little
with certainty, we seem to realise that it brought great changes to the
religious' life of Man. The Church began to possess itself of lands: the
baronial territories of the island fell into the hands of the clergy;
the early Bishops became Barons. This gave the Church certain powers
of government. The Bishops became judges, and as judges they possessed
great power over the person of the subject. Sometimes they stood in the
highest place of all, being also Governor to the Welsh Kings. Then they
were called Sword-Bishops. Their power at such times, when the crosier
and sword were in the two hands of one man, must have been portentous,
and even terrible. We have no records that picture what came of that.
But it is not difficult to imagine the condition. The old order of
things had passed away. The hermit-saints, the saintly hermits, had
gone, and in their place were monkish barons, living in abbeys and
monasteries, whipping the poor bodies of their people, as well as
comforting their torn hearts, fattening on broad lands, praying each
with his lips: "Give us this day our daily bread," but saying each to
his soul: "Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine
ease; eat, drink, and be merry."


BISHOPS OF THE NORSE DYNASTY

Little as we know of these times, we see that things must have come to
a pretty pass, for when the Scandinavian dynasty came in the
ecclesiastical authorities were forbidden to exercise civil control over
any subjects of the king that were not also the tenants of their own
baronies. So the Bishops were required to confine themselves to keeping
their own house in order. The Norse Constitution established in Man by
King Orry made no effort to overthrow the Celtic Church founded by St.
Patrick, and corrupted by his Welsh successors, but it curtailed its
liberties, and reduced its dignity. It demanded as an act of fealty that
the Bishop or chief Baron should hold the stirrup of the King's saddle,
as he mounted his horse at Tynwald. But it still suffered the Bishop and
certain of his clergy to sit in the highest court of the legislature.
The Church ceased to be purely Celtic; it became Celto-Scandinavian,
otherwise Manx. It was under the Archbishop of Drontheim for its
Metropolitan, and its young clergy were sent over to Drontheim to be
educated. Its revenues were apportioned after the most apostolic manner;
one-third of the tithes to the Bishop for his maintenance, the support
of his courts, his churches, and (miserable conclusion! ) his prisons;
one-third to the priests, and the remaining third to the relief of the
poor and the education of youth. It is a curious and significant fact
that when the Reformation came the last third was seized by the lord.
Good old lordly trick, we know it well!


SODOR AND MAN

The Bishopric of the island was now no longer called the Bishopric of
Man, but Sodor and Man. The title has given rise to much speculation.
One authority derives it from _Soterenssis_, a name given by Danish
writers to the western islands, and afterwards corrupted to _Soderensk_.
Another authority derives it from _Sudreyjas_, signifying in the
Norwegian the Southern Isles. A third derives it from the Greek _Soter_,
Saviour, to whose name the cathedral of Iona was dedicated. And yet a
fourth authority derives it from the supposed third name of the little
islet rock called variously Holm Isle, Sodor, Peel, and St. Patrick's
Isle, whereon St. Patrick or St. Germain built his church, I can claim
no right to an opinion where these good doctors differ, and shall
content myself with saying that the balance of belief is in favour of
the Norwegian derivation, which offers this explanation of the title of
Bishop of Sodor and Man, that the Isle of Man was not included by the
Norsemen in the southern cluster of islands called the Sudereys, and
that the Bishop was sometimes called the Bishop of Man and the Isles,
and sometimes Bishop of the Sudereys and the Isle of Man. Only one
warning note shall I dare, as an ignorant layman, to strike on that
definition, and it is this: that the title of Bishop of Sodor dates back
to the seventh century certainly, and that the Norseman did not come
south until three centuries later.


THE EARLY BISHOPS OF THE HOUSE OF STANLEY

But now I come to matters whereon I have more authority to speak. When
the Isle of Man passed to the Stanley family, the Bishopric fell to
their patronage, and they lost no time in putting their own people into
it. It was then under the English metropolitan of Canterbury, but early
in the sixteenth century it became part of the province of York. About
that time the baronies, the abbeys, and the nunneries were suppressed.
It does not appear that the change of metropolitan had made much
change of religious life. Apparently the clergy kept the Manx people in
miserable ignorance. It was not until the seventeenth century that the
Book of Common Prayer was translated into the Manx language. The Gospels
and the Acts were unknown to the Manx until nearly a century later. Nor
was this due to ignorance of the clergy of the Manx tongue, for most
of them must have been Manxmen, and several of the Bishops were Manxmen
also. But grievous abuses had by this time attached themselves to the
Manx Church, and some of them were flagrant and wicked, and some were
impudent and amusing.


TITHES IN KIND

Naturally the more outrageous of the latter sort gathered about the
process of collecting tithes.

Tithes were paid in kind in those days. It was not until well within our
own century that they were commuted to a money payment. The Manxman paid
tithe on everything. He began to pay tithe before coming into the world,
and he went on paying tithe even after he had gone out of it. This is
a hard saying, but nevertheless a simple truth. Throughout his
journey from the cradle to the grave, the Manxman paid tithe on all he
inherited, on all he had, on all he did, on all his wife did, and on
all he left behind him. We have the equivalent of this in England at
the present hour, but it was yet more tyrannical, and infinitely more
ludicrous, in the Isle of Man down to the year 1839. It is only vanity
and folly and vexation of spirit to quarrel with the modern English
taxgatherer; you are sure to go the wall, with humiliation and with
disgrace. It was not always so when taxes were paid in kind. There was,
at least, the satisfaction of cheating. The Manx people could not always
deny themselves that satisfaction. For instance, they were required to
pay tithe of herring as soon as the herring boats were brought above
full sea mark, and there were ways of counting known to the fishermen
with which the black-coated arithmeticians of the Church were not able
to cope. A man paid tithe on such goods and even such clothes as his
wife possessed on their wedding day, and young brides became wondrous
wise in the selection for the vicarage of the garments that were out of
fashion. A corpse-present was demanded over the grave of a dead man out
of the horses and cattle whereof he died possessed, and dying men left
verbal wills which consigned their broken-winded horses and dry cows to
the mercy and care of the clergyman. You will not marvel much that such
dealings led to disputes, sometimes to quarrels, occasionally to riots.
In my boyhood I heard old people over the farm-house fire chuckle
and tell of various wise doings, to outwit the parson. One of these
concerned the oats harvest. When the oats were in sheaf, the parson's
cart came up, driven by the sumner, the parson's official servant. The
gate of the field was thrown open, and honestly and religiously one
sheaf out of every ten was thrown into the cart. But the husbandman had
been thrifty in advance. The parson's sheaves had all been grouped thick
about the gate, and they were the shortest, and the thinnest, and the
blackest, and the dirtiest, and the poorest that the field had yielded.
Similar were the doings at the digging of the potatoes, but the scenes
of recrimination which often ensued were usually confined to the farmer
and the sumner. More outrageous contentions with the priest himself
sometimes occurred within the very walls of the church. It was the
practice to bring tithe of butter and cheese and eggs, and lay it on the
altar on Sunday. This had to be done under pain of exclusion from the
communion, and that was a penalty most grievous to material welfare. So
the Manxmen and Manxwomen were compelled to go to church much as they
went to market, with their butter- and egg-baskets over their arms. It
is a ludicrous picture, as one sees it in one's mind's eye, but what
comes after reaches the extremity of farce. Say the scene is Maughold
old church, once the temple of the saintly hermit. It is Sunday morning,
the bells are ringing, and Juan-beg-Marry-a-thruss, a rascally old
skinflint, is coming along with a basket. It contains some butter that
he could not sell at Ramsey market yesterday because it was rank, and a
few eggs which he knows to be stale and addled--the old hen has sat on
them, and they have brought forth nothing. These he places reverently on
the altar. But the parson knows Juan, and proceeds to examine his tithe.
May I take so much liberty with history, and with the desecrated old
church, as to imagine the scene which follows?

Priest, pointing contemptuously towards the altar:
"Juan-beg-Marry-a-thruss, what is this?" "Butter and eggs, so plaze your
reverence." "Pig-swill and chalk you mean, man!" "Aw 'deed if I'd known
your reverence was so morthal partic'lar the ould hen herself should
have been layin' some fresh eggs for your reverence."

"Take them away, you thief of the Church! Do you think what isn't fit
for your pig is good enough for your priest? Bring better, or never let
me look on your wizened old wicked face again."

Exit Juan-beg-Marry-a-thruss, perhaps with butter and eggs flying after
his retreating figure.


THE GAMBLING BISHOP

This is an imaginary picture, but no less outrageous things happened
whereof the records remain. A demoralised laity usually co-exists with
a demoralised clergy, and there are some bad stories of the Bishops who
preceded the Reformation. There is one story of a Bishop of that period,
who was a gross drunkard and notorious gambler. He played with his
clergy as long as they had anything to lose, and then he played with a
deemster and lost five hundred pounds himself. Poor little island, that
had two such men for its masters, the one its master in the things of
this world, the other its master in the things of the world to come! If
anything is needful to complete the picture of wretchedness in which
the poor Manx people must have existed then, it is the knowledge of what
manner of man a deemster was in those days, what his powers were, and
how he exercised them.


THE DEEMSTERS

The two deemsters--a name of obvious significance, deem-sters, such as
deem the laws--were then the only judges of the island, all other legal
functionaries being of more recent date. On entering into office, the
deemster took an oath, which is sworn by all deemsters to this day,
declaring by the wonderful works which God hath miraculously wrought in
six days and seven nights, that he would execute the laws of the island
justly "betwixt party and party, as indifferently as the herring's
backbone doth lie in the midst of the fish." But these laws down to the
time of the second Stanley existed only in the breasts of the deemsters
themselves, being therefore called Breast Laws, and thus they were
supposed to be handed down orally from deemster to deemster. The
superstition fostered corruption as well as incapacity, and it will not
be wronging the truth to say that some of the deemsters of old time were
both ignorant and unprincipled. Their jurisdiction was absolute in all
that were then thought to be temporal affairs, beginning with a debt
of a shilling, and going up to murder. They kept their courts in the
centres of their districts, one of them being in the north of the
island, the other in the south, but they were free to hold a court
anywhere, and at any time. A deemster riding from Ramsey to Peel might
find his way stopped by a noisy claimant, who held his defendant by the
lug, having dragged him bodily from the field to the highway, to receive
instant judgment from the judge riding past. Or at midnight, in his
own home, a deemster might be broken in upon by a clamorous gang of
disputants and their witnesses, who came from the pot-house for the
settlement of their differences. On such occasions, the deemster
invariably acted on the sound old legal maxim, once recognised by an Act
of Parliament, that suits not likely to bear good costs should always be
settled out of court. First, the deemster demanded his fee. If neither
claimant nor defendant could give it, he probably troubled himself no
further than to take up his horse-whip and drive both out into the road.
I dare say there were many good men among deemsters of the old order,
who loved justice for its own sake, and liked to see the poor and the
weak righted, but the memory of deemsters of this kind is not green. The
bulk of men are not better than their opportunities, and the temptations
of the deemsters of old were neither few nor slight.


THE BISHOPRIC VACANT

With such masters in the State, and such masters in the Church, the
island fell low in material welfare, and its poverty reacted on both.
Within fifty years the Bishopric was nineteen years vacant, though it
may be that at the beginning of the seventeenth century this was partly
due to religious disturbances. Then in 1697, with the monasteries and
nunneries dispersed, the abbeys in ruins, the cathedral church a wreck,
the clergy sunk in sloth and ignorance, there came to the Bishopric,
four years vacant, a true man whose name on the page of Manx Church
history is like a star on a dark night, when only one is shining--Bishop
Thomas Wilson. He was a strange and complex creature, half angel,
only half man, the serenest of saints, and yet almost the bitterest of
tyrants. Let me tell you about him.


BISHOP WILSON

Thomas Wilson was from Trinity College, Dublin, and became domestic
chaplain to William, Earl of Derby, and preceptor to the Earl's son, who
died young. While he held this position, the Bishopric of Sodor and
Man became vacant, and it was offered to him. He declined it, thinking
himself unworthy of so high a trust. The Bishopric continued vacant.
Perhaps the candidates for it were few; certainly the emoluments
were small; perhaps the patron was slothful--certainly he gave little
attention to the Church. At length complaint was made to the King that
the spiritual needs of the island were being neglected. The Earl was
commanded to fill the Bishopric, and once again he offered it to his
chaplain. Then Wilson yielded. He took possession in 1698, and was
enthroned at Peel Castle. The picture of his enthronement must have been
something to remember. Peel Castle was already tumbling to its fall, and
the cathedral church was a woful wreck. It is even said that from a
hole in the roof the soil and rain could enter, and blades of grass were
shooting up on the altar. The Bishop's house at Kirk Michael, which
had been long shut up, was in a similar plight; damp, mouldy,
broken-windowed, green with moss within and without. What would one give
to turn back the centuries and look on at that primitive ceremony in
St. Germain's Chapel in April 1698! There would be the clergy, a
sorry troop, with wise and good men among them, no doubt, but a poor,
battered, bedraggled, neglected lot, chiefly learned in dubious arts
of collecting tithes. And the Bishop himself, the good chaplain of Earl
Derby, the preceptor of his son, what a face he must have had to watch
and to study, as he stood there that April morning, and saw for the
first time what work he had come to tackle!


BISHOP WILSON'S CENSURES

But Bishop Wilson set about his task with a strong heart, and a resolute
hand. He found himself in a twofold trust. Since the Reformation, the
monasteries and nunneries had been dispersed, and all the baronies had
been broken up, save one, the barony of the Bishop. Thus Bishop Wilson
was the head of the court of his barony. This was a civil court with
power, of jurisdiction over felonies. Its separate criminal control came
to an end in 1777, Such was Bishop Wilson's position as last and sole
Baron of Man. Then as head of the Church he had powers over offences
which were once called offences against common law. Irregular behaviour,
cursing, quarrelling, and drinking, as well as transgressions of the
moral code, adultery, seduction, prostitution, and the like, were
punishable by the Church and the Church courts. The censures of Bishop
Wilson on such offences did not err on the side of clemency. He was
the enemy of sin, and no "gentle foe of sinners." He was a believer
in witchcraft, and for suspicion of commerce with evil spirits and
possession of the evil eye he punished many a blameless old body. For
open and convicted adultery he caused the offenders to stand for an hour
at high fair at each of the market-places of Douglas, Peel, Ramsey, and
Castletown, bearing labels on their breasts calling on all people
to take warning lest they came under the same Church censure. Common
unchastity he punished by exposure in church at full congregation, when
the guilty man or the poor victimised girl stepped up from the west
porch to the altar, covered from neck to heels in a white sheet.
Slanderers and evil speakers he clapped into the Peel, or perhaps the
whipping-stocks, with tongue in a noose of leather, and when after a
lapse of time the gag was removed the liberated tongue was obliged to
denounce itself by saying thrice, clearly, boldly, probably with good
accent and discretion, "False tongue, thou hast lied."

It is perhaps as well that some of us did not live in Bishop Wilson's
time. We might not have lived long. If the Church still held and
exercised the same powers over evil speakers we should never hear our
own ears in the streets for the din of the voices of the penitents; and
if it still punished unchastity in a white sheet the trade of the linen
weaver would be brisk.

You will say that I have justified my statement that Bishop Wilson was
the bitterest of tyrants. Let me now establish my opinion that he was
also the serenest of saints. I have told you how low was the condition
of the Church, how lax its rule, how deep its clergy lay in sloth and
ignorance, and perhaps also in vice, when Bishop Wilson came to Man in
1698. Well, in 1703, only five years later, the Lord Chancellor King
said this: "If the ancient discipline of the Church were lost elsewhere
it might be found in all its force in the Isle of Man." This points
first to force and vigour on the Bishop's part, but surely it also
points to purity of character and nobility of aim. Bishop Wilson began
by putting his own house in order. His clergy ceased to gamble and to
drink, and they were obliged to collect their tithes with mercy. He once
suspended a clergyman for an opinion on a minor point, but many times he
punished his clergy for offences against the moral law and the material
welfare of the poor. In a stiff fight for integrity of life and purity
of thought, he spared none. I truly believe that if he had caught
himself in an act of gross injustice he would have clambered up into
the pillory. He was a brave, strong-hearted creature, of the build of
a great man. Yes! In spite of all his contradictions, he _was_ a great
man. We Manxmen shall never look upon his like again!


THE GREAT CORN FAMINE

Towards 1740 a long and terrible corn famine fell upon our island. The
fisheries had failed that season, and the crops had been blighted
two years running. Miserably poor at all times, ill-clad, ill-housed,
ill-fed at the best, the people were in danger of sheer destitution. In
that day of their bitter trouble the poorest of the poor trooped off to
Bishop's court. The Bishop threw open his house to them all, good and
bad, improvident and thrifty, lazy and industrious, drunken and sober;
he made no distinctions in that bad hour. He asked no man for his name
who couldn't give it, no woman for her marriage lines who hadn't got
them, no child whether it was born in wedlock. That they were all
hungry was all he knew, and he saved their lives in thousands. He bought
ship-loads of English corn and served it out in bushels; also tons of
Irish potatoes, and served them out in _kischens_. He gave orders that
the measure was to be piled as high as it would hold, and never smoothed
flat again. Yet he was himself a poor man. While he had money he spent
it. When every penny was gone he pledged his revenue in advance.
After his credit was done he begged in England for his poor people in
Man--_he_ begged for _us_ who would not have held out his hat to save his
own life! God bless him! But we repaid him. Oh yes, we repaid him.
His money he never got back, but gold is not the currency of the other
world. Prayers and blessings are the wealth that is there, and these
went up after him to the great White Throne from the swelling throats of
his people.


THE BISHOP AT COURT

Not of Bishop Wilson could it be said, as it was said of another, that
he "flattered princes in the temple of God." One day, when he was coming
to Court, Queen Caroline saw him and said to a company of Bishops and
Archbishops that surrounded her, "See, my lords, here is a Bishop who
does not come for a translation." "No, indeed, and please your Majesty,"
said Bishop Wilson, "I will not leave my wife in her old age because she
is poor." When Bishop Wilson was an old man, Cardinal Fleury sent over
to ask after his age and health, saying that they were the two oldest
and poorest Bishops in the world. At the same time he got an order that
no French privateer should ever ravage the Isle of Man. The order has
long lapsed, but I am told that to this day French seamen respect a
Manxman. It touches me to think of it that thus does the glory of this
good man's life shine on our faces still.


STORIES OF BISHOP WILSON

How his people must have loved him! Many of the stories told of him are
of rather general application, but some of them ought to be true if they
are not.

One day in the old three-cornered market-place at Ramsey a little
maiden of seven crossed his path. She was like sunshine, rosy-cheeked,
bright-eyed, bare-footed and bare-headed, and for love of her sweetness
the grey old Bishop patted her head and blest her. "God bless you, my
child; God bless you," he said. The child curtseyed and answered, "God
bless you, too, sir." "Thank you, child, thank you," the Bishop said
again; "I dare say your blessing will be as good as mine."

It was customary in those days, and indeed down to my own time, when
a suit of clothes was wanted, to have the journeyman tailor at home to
make it. One, Danny of that ilk, was once at Bishop's Court making
a long walking coat for the Bishop. In trying it on in its nebulous
condition, that leprosy of open white seams and stitches, Danny made
numerous chalk marks to indicate the places of the buttons. "No, no,
Danny," said the Bishop, "no more buttons than enough to fasten it--only
one, that will do. It would ill become a poor priest like me to go
a-glitter with things like those." Now, Danny had already bought his
buttons, and had them at that moment in his pocket. So, pulling a
woful face, he said, "Mercy me, my lord, what would happen to the poor
button-makers, if everybody was of your opinion?" "Button it all over,
Danny," said the Bishop. A coat of Bishop Wilson's still exists. Would
that we had that one of the numerous buttons, and could get a few more
made of the same pattern! It would be out of fashion--Danny's progeny
have taken care of that. There are not many of us that it would fit--we
have few men of Bishop Wilson's build nowadays. But human kindliness is
never old-fashioned, and there are none of us that the garment of sweet
grace would not suit.


QUARRELS OF CHURCH AND STATE

So far from "flattering princes in the temple of God," Bishop Wilson was
even morbidly jealous of the authority of the Church, and he resisted
that of the State when the civil powers seemed to encroach upon it. More
than once he came into collision with the State's highest functionary,
the Lieutenant-Governor, representative of the Lord of Man himself. One
day the Governor's wife falsely defamed a lady, and the lady appealed
to the Bishop. Thereupon the Bishop interdicted the Governor's wife
from receiving the communion. But the Governor's chaplain admitted
her. Straightway the Bishop suspended the Governor's chaplain. Then the
Governor fined the Bishop in the sum of fifty pounds. The Bishop refused
to pay, and was committed to Castle Rushen, and lay there two months.
They show us his cell, a poor, dingy little box, so damp in his day that
he lost the use of some of his fingers. After that the Bishop appealed
to the Lord, who declared the imprisonment illegal. The Bishop was
liberated, and half the island went to the prison gate to fetch him
forth in triumph. The only result was that the Bishop lost L500, whereof
L300 were subscribed by the people. One hardly knows whether to laugh
or cry at it all. It is a sorry and silly farce. Of course it made
a tremendous hurly-burly in its day, but it is gone now, and doesn't
matter a ha'porth to anybody. Nevertheless because Gessler's cap goes up
so often nowadays, and so many of us are kneeling to it, it is good and
wholesome to hear of a poor Bishop who was brave enough to take a shot
at it instead.


SOME OLD ORDEALS

Notwithstanding Bishop Wilson's severity, his tyranny, his undue pride
in the authority of the Church, and his morbid jealousy of the powers
of the State, his rule was a wise and just one, and he was a spiritual
statesman, who needed not to be ashamed. He raised the tone of life in
the Isle of Man, made it possible to accept a man's _yea_ and _nay_,
even in those perilous issues of life where the weakness and meanness
of poor humanity reveals itself in lies and subterfuges. This he did by
making false swearing a terror. One ancient ordeal of swearing he set
his face against, but another he encouraged, and often practised, let me
describe both.

In the old days, when a man died intestate, leaving no record of his
debts, a creditor might establish a claim by going with the Bishop to
the grave of the dead man at midnight, stretching himself on it with
face towards heaven and a Bible on his breast, and then saying solemnly,
"I swear that So-and-so, who lies buried here, died in my debt by so
much." After that the debt was allowed. What warning the Bishop first
pronounced I do not know, but the scene is a vivid one, even if we think
of the creditor as swearing truly, and a startling and terrible one if
we think of him as about to swear to what is false. The dark night, the
dark figures moving in it, the churchyard, the debtor's grave, the sham
creditor, who had been loud in his protests under the light of the inn
of the village, now quaking and trembling as the Bishop's warning comes
out of the gloom, then stammering, and breaking down, and finally, with
ghostly visions of a dead hand clutching at him from the grave, starting
up, shrieking, and flying away. It is a nightmare. Let us not remember
it when the candles are put out.

This ordeal was in force until the seventeenth century, but Bishop
Wilson judged it un-Christian, and never practised it. The old Roman
canon law of Purgation, a similar ordeal, he used not rarely. It was
designed to meet cases of slander in which there was no direct and
positive evidence. If a good woman had been accused of unchastity in
that vague way of rumour which is always more damaging and devilish than
open accusation, she might of her own free choice, or by compulsion of
the Bishop, put to silence her false accusers by appearing in church,
with witnesses ready to take oath that they believed her, and there
swearing at the altar that common fame and suspicion had wronged her. If
a man doubted her word he had to challenge it, or keep silence for ever
after. The severest censures of the Church were passed upon those who
dared to repeat an unproved accusation after the oaths of Purgation and
Compurgation had been taken unchallenged. It is a fine, honest ordeal,
very old, good for the right, only bad for the wrong, giving strength to
the weak and humbling the mighty. But it would be folly and mummery in
our day. The Church has lost its powers over life and limb, and no one
capable of defaming a pure woman would care a brass penny about the
Church's excommunication. Yet a woman's good name is the silver thread
that runs through the pearl chain of her virtues. Pity that nowadays it
can be so easily snapped. Conversation at five o'clock tea is enough to
do that. The ordeal of compulsory Purgation was abolished in Man as late
as 1737.


THE HERRING FISHERY

Bishop Wilson began, or revived, a form of service which was so
beautiful, so picturesque, and withal so Manx that I regret the loss of
scarce any custom so much as the discontinuance of this one. It was the
fishermen's service on the shore at the beginning of the herring-season.
But in order to appreciate it you must first know something of the
herring fishing itself. It is the chief industry of the island. Half the
population is connected with it in some way. A great proportion of the
men of the humbler classes are half seamen, half landsmen, tilling their
little crofts in the spring and autumn, and going out with the herring
boats in summer. The herring is the national fish. The Manxman swears
by its flavour. The deemsters, as we have seen, literally swear by its
backbone. Potatoes and herrings constitute a common dish of the country
people. They are ready for it at any hour of the day or night. I have
had it for dinner, I have taken it for supper, I have seen it for tea,
and even known it for breakfast. It is served without ceremony. In the
middle of the table two great crocks, one of potatoes boiled in their
jackets, the other of herrings fresh or salted; a plate and a bowl
of new milk at every seat, and lumps of salt here and there. To be a
Manxman you must eat Manx herrings; there is a story that to transform
himself into a Manxman one of the Dukes of Athol ate twenty-four of them
at breakfast, a herring for every member of his House of Keys.

The Manx herring fishery is interesting and very picturesque. You know
that the herrings come from northern latitudes, Towards mid-winter a
vast colony of them set out from the arctic seas, closely pursued by
innumerable sea-fowl, which deal death among the little emigrants. They
move in two divisions, one westward towards the coasts of America, the
other eastward in the direction of Europe. They reach the Shetlands in
April and the Isle of Man about June. The herring is fished at night. To
be out with the herring boats is a glorious experience on a calm night.
You have set sail with the fleet of herring boats about sun-down, and
you are running before a light breeze through the dusk. The sea-gulls
are skimming about the brown sails of your boat. They know what you are
going to do, and have come to help you, Presently you come upon a flight
of them wheeling and diving in the gathering darkness. Then you know
that you have lit on the herring shoal. The boat is brought head to the
wind and left to drift. By this time the stars are out, perhaps the moon
also--though too much moon is not good for the fishing--and you can just
descry the dim outline of the land against the dark blue of the sky.

Luminous patches of phosphorescent light begin to move in the water,
"The mar-fire's rising," say the fishermen, the herring are stirring.
"Let's make a shot; up with the gear," cries the skipper, and nets are
hauled from below, passed over the bank-board, and paid out into the
sea--a solid wall of meshes, floating upright, nine feet deep and a
quarter of a mile long. It is a calm, clear night, just light enough
to see the buoys on the back of the first net. The lamp is fixed on the
mitch-board. All is silence, only the steady plash, plash, plash of the
slow waters on the boat's side; no singing among the men, no chaff, no
laughter, all quiet aboard, for the fishermen believe that the fish can
hear; all quiet around, where the deep black of the watery pavement
is brightened by the reflection of stars. Then out of the white
phosphorescent patches come minute points of silver and countless faint
popping sounds, The herrings are at play about the nets. You see them in
numbers exceeding imagination, shoals on shoals. "Pull up now, there's
a heavy strike," cries the skipper, and the nets are hauled up, and come
in white and moving--a solid block of fish, cheep, cheep, cheeping like
birds in the early morning. At the grey of dawn the boats begin to run
for home, and the sun is shining as the fleet makes the harbour. Men and
women are waiting there to buy the night's catch. The quay is full of
them, bustling, shouting, laughing, quarrelling, counting the herrings,
and so forth.


THE FISHERMEN'S SERVICE

Such is the herring fishery of Man. Bishop Wilson knew how bitter a
thing it could be if this industry failed the island even for a single
season. So, with absolute belief in the Divine government of the world,
he wrote a Service to be held on the first day of the herring season,
asking for God's blessing on the harvest of the sea. The scene of that
service must have been wondrously beautiful and impressive. Why does not
some great painter paint it? Let me, by the less effectual vehicle of
words, attempt to realise what it must have been.

The place of it was Peel bay, a wide stretch of beach, with a gentle
slope to the left, dotted over with grey houses; the little town farther
on, with its nooks and corners, its blind alleys and dark lanes, its
narrow, crabbed, crooked streets. Behind this the old pier and the
herring boats rocking in the harbour, with their brown sails half set,
waiting for the top of the tide. In the distance the broad breast of
Contrary Head, and, a musket-shot outside of it, the little rocky islet
whereon stand the stately ruins of the noble old Peel Castle. The
beach is dotted over with people--old men, in their curranes and undyed
stockings, leaning on their sticks; children playing on the shingle;
young women in groups, dressed in sickle-shaped white sun-bonnets, and
with petticoats tucked up; old women in long blue homespun cloaks. But
these are only the background of the human picture. In the centre of
it is a wide circle of fishermen, men and boys, of all sizes and sorts,
from the old Admiral of the herring fleet to the lad that helps the
cook--rude figures in blue and with great sea-boots. They are on their
knees on the sand, with their knitted caps at their rusty faces, and
in the middle of them, standing in an old broken boat, is the Bishop
himself, bareheaded, white-headed, with upturned face praying for
the fishing season that is about to begin. The June day is sweet and
beautiful, and the sun is going down behind the castle. Some sea-gulls
are disporting on the rock outside, and, save for their jabbering cries,
and the boom of the sea from the red horizon, and the gentle plash of
the wavelets on the pebbles of the shore, nothing is heard but the slow
tones of the Bishop and the fishermen's deep _Amen_. Such was Bishop
Wilson's fishermen's service. It is gone; more's the pity.


SOME OLD LAWS

The spiritual laws of Man were no dead letters when Bishop Wilson
presided over its spiritual courts. He was good to illegitimate
children, making them legitimate if their parents married within two
years of their birth, and often putting them on the same level with
their less injured brothers and sisters where inheritance was in
question. But he was unmerciful to the parents themselves. There is
one story of his treatment of a woman which passes all others in its
tyranny. It is, perhaps, the only deep stain on his character. I thank
God that it can never have come to the ears of Victor Hugo. Told as Hugo
would have told it, surely it must have blasted for ever the name of a
good man. It is the dark story of Katherine Kinrade.


KATHERINE KINRADE

She was a poor ruin of a woman, belonging to Kirk Christ, but wandering
like a vagrant over the island. The fact of first consequence is, that
she was only half sane. In the language of the clergy of the time, she
"had a degree of unsettledness and defect of understanding." Thus she
was the sort of human wreck that the world finds it easy to fling away.
Katherine fell victim to the sin that was not her own. A child was born.
The Church censured her. She did penance in a white sheet at the church
doors. But her poor, dull brain had no power to restrain her. A second
child was born. Then the Bishop committed her for twenty-one days to
his prison at the Peel. Let me tell you what the place is like. It is
a crypt of the cathedral church. You enter it by a little door in the
choir, leading to a tortuous flight of steep steps going down. It is
a chamber cut out of the rock of the little island, dark, damp, and
noisome. A small aperture lets in the light, as well as the sound of
the sea beating on the rocks below. The roof, if you could see it in the
gloom, is groined and ribbed, and above it is the mould of many graves,
for in the old days bodies were buried in the choir. Can you imagine a
prison more terrible for any prisoner, the strongest man or the bravest
soldier? Think of it on a tempestuous night in winter. The lonely islet
rock, with the swift seas rushing around it; the castle half a ruin, its
guard-room empty, its banqueting hall roofless, its sally port silent;
then the cathedral church falling to decay; and under the floor of its
choir, where lie the graves of dead men, this black, grim, cold cell,
silent as the graves themselves, save for the roar of the sea as it
beats in the darkness on the rocks outside! But that is not enough.
We have to think of this gloomy pile as inhabited on such a night of
terrors by only one human soul--this poor, bedraggled, sin-laden woman
with "the defect of understanding." Can anything be more awful? Yet
there is worse to follow. The records tell us that Katherine Kinrade
submitted to her punishment "with as much discretion as could be
expected of the like of her." But such punishments do not cleanse the
soul that is "drenched with unhallowed fire." Perhaps Katherine did not
know that she was wronged; nevertheless God's image was being trodden
out of her. She went from bad to worse, became a notorious strumpet,
strolled about the island, and led "a scandalous life on other
accounts." A third child was born. Then the Bishop concluded that for
the honour of the Christian name, "to prevent her own utter destruction,
and for the example of others," a timely and thorough reformation must
be made by a further and severer punishment. It was the 15th day of
March, and he ordered that on the 17th day, being the fair of St.
Patrick, at the height of the market, the said Katherine Kinrade
should be taken to Peel Town in charge of the general sumner, and the
constables and soldiers of the garrison, and there dragged after a boat
in the sea! Think of it! On a bitter day in March this wretched woman
with the "defect of understanding" was to be dragged through the sea by
a rope tied to the tail of a boat! And if any owner, master, and crew of
any boat proved refractory by refusing to perform this service for the
restraining of vice, they were to be subject to fine and imprisonment!
When St. Patrick's Day came the weather was so stormy that no boat
could live in the bay, but on St. Germain's Day, about the height of the
market, the censure was performed. After undergoing the punishment the
miserable soul was apparently penitent, "according to her capacity,"
took the communion, and was "received into the peace of the Church."
Poor human ruin, defaced image of a woman, begrimed and buried soul,
unchaste, misshapen, incorrigible, no "juice of God's distilling" ever
"dropped into the core of her life," to such punishment she was doomed
by the tribunal of that saintly man, Bishop Thomas Wilson! She has met
him at another tribunal since then; not where she has crouched before
him, but where she has stood by his side. She has carried her great
account against him, to Him before whom the proudest are as chaff.

     None spake when Wilson stood before
          The Throne;
          And He that sat thereon
     Spake not; and all the presence-floor
     Burnt deep with blushes, and the angels cast
     Their faces downwards.--Then, at last,
          Awe-stricken, he was ware
          How on the emerald stair
     A woman sat divinely clothed in white,
     And at her knees four cherubs bright
          That laid
     Their heads within her lap.   Then, trembling, he essayed
          To speak--"Christ's mother, pity me!"
          Then answered she,
     "Sir, I am Katherine Kinrade." {*}

     * Unpublished poem by the author of ''Fo'c's'le Yarns."


BISHOP WILSON'S LAST DAYS

Have I dashed your faith in my hero? Was he indeed the bitterest of
tyrants as well as the serenest of saints? Yet bethink you of the other
good men who have done evil deeds? King David and the wife of Uriah,
Mahomet and his adopted son; the gallery of memory is hung round with
many such portraits. Poor humanity, weak at the strongest, impure at
the purest; best take it as it is, and be content. Remember that a good
man's vices are generally the excess of his virtues. It was so with
Bishop Wilson. Remember, too, that it is not for what a man does, but
for what he means to do, that we love him or hate him in the end. And
in the end the Manx people loved Bishop Wilson, and still they bless his
memory.

We have a glimpse of his last days, and it is full of tender beauty.
True to his lights, simple and frugal of life, God-fearing and strong
of heart, he lived to be old. Very feeble, his beautiful face grown
mellower even as his heart was softer for his many years, tottering on
his staff, drooping like a white flower, he went in and out among his
people, laying his trembling hands on the children's heads and blessing
them, remembering their fathers and their fathers' fathers. Beloved by
the young, reverenced by the old, honoured by the great, worshipped by
the poor, living in sweet patience, ready to die in hope. His day was
done, his night was near, and the weary toiler was willing to go to his
rest. Thus passed some peaceful years. He died in 1755, and was followed
to his grave by the whole Manx nation. His tomb is our most sacred
shrine. We know his faults, but we do not speak of them there. Call a
truce over the place of the old man's rest. There he lies, who was once
the saviour of our people. God bless him! He was our fathers' bishop,
and his saintly face still shines on our fathers' children.


THE ATHOL BISHOPS

Let me in a last clause attempt a sketch of the history of the Manx
Church in the century or more that has followed Bishop Wilson's death.
The last fifty years of it are featureless, save for an attempt to
abolish the Bishopric. This foolish effort first succeeded and then
failed, and was a poor bit of mummery altogether, ending in nothing
but waste of money and time, and breath and temper. The fifty years
immediately succeeding Bishop Wilson were full of activity. But so far
as the Church was concerned, the activity was not always wholesome. If
religion was kept alive in Man in those evil days, and the soul hunger
of the poor Manx people was satisfied, it was not by the masters of the
Manx Church, the Pharisees who gave alms in the streets to the sound
of a trumpet going before them, or by the Levites who passed by on
the other side when a man had fallen among thieves. It was partly by
dissent, which was begun by Wesley in 1775 (after Quakerism had been
suppressed), and partly by a small minority of the Manx clergy, who kept
going the early evangelicalism of Newton and Cowper and Cecil--dear,
sunny, simple-hearted old Manx vicars, who took sweet counsel together
in their old-fashioned homes, where you found grace in all senses of the
word, purity of soul, the life of the mind, and gentle courtliness of
manners.

Bishop Wilson's successor was Doctor Mark Hildlesley, in all respects
a worthy man. He completed the translation of the Scriptures into Manx,
which had been begun by his predecessor, and established Sunday-schools
in Man before they had been commenced in any other country. But after
him came a line of worthless prelates, Dr. Richmond, remembered for his
unbending haughtiness; Dr. Mason, disgraced by his debts; and Claudius
Cregan, a bishop unfit to be a curate. Do you not read between the
broad lines of such facts? The Athol dynasty was now some thirty years
established in Man, and the swashbuckler Court of fine gentlemen was
in full swing. In that costume drama of soiled lace and uproarious
pleasures, what part did the Church play? Was it that of the man clad
in camel's skin, living on locusts and wild honey, and calling on the
generation of revellers to flee from the wrath to come? No; but that
of the lover of cakes and ale. The records of this period are few and
scanty, but they are full enough to show that some of the clergy of the
Athols knew more of backgammon than of theology. While they pandered to
the dissolute Court they lived under, going the errands of their masters
in the State, fetching and carrying for them, and licking their shoes,
they tyrannised over the poor ignorant Manx people and fleeced them
unmercifully. Perhaps this was in a way only natural. Corruption was in
the air throughout Europe. Dr. Youngs were grovelling for preferments
at the feet of kings' mistresses, and Dr. Warners were kissing the
shoebuckles of great ladies for sheer love of their faces, plastered red
and white, The parasites of the Manx clergy were not far behind some
of their English brethren. There is a story told of their life among
themselves which casts lurid light on their character and ways of life.
It is said that two of the Vicars-general summoned a large number of the
Manx people to Bishop's Court on some business of the spiritual court,
Many of the people had come long distances, chiefly a-foot, without
food, and probably without money. After a short sitting the court was
adjourned for dinner. The people had no dinner, and they starved. The
Vicars-general went into the palace to dine with the Bishop. Some hours
passed. The night was gathering. Then a message came out to say that no
more business could be done that day. Some of the poor people were old,
and had to travel fifteen miles to their homes. The record tells us that
the Bishop gave his guests "most excellent wine." What of a scene like
that? Outside, a sharp day in Spring, two score famished folks tramping
the glen and the gravel-path, the gravel-path and the glen, to and
fro, to and fro, minute after minute, hour after hour. Inside, my
lord Bishop, drenched in debt, dining with his clergy, drinking
"most excellent wine" with them, unbending his mighty mind with them,
exchanging boisterous stories with them, jesting with them, laughing
with them, until his face grows as red as the glowing turf on his
hearth. Presently a footfall on the gravel, and outside the window a
hungry, pinched, anxious face looking nervously into the room. Then this
colloquy:

"Ah, the court, plague on't, I'd forgotten it."

"Adjourn it, gentlemen."

"Wine like yours, my lord, would make a man forget Paradise."

"Sit down again, gentlemen. Juan, go out and tell the people to come
back to-morrow."

"Your right good health, my lord!"

"And yours, gentlemen both!"

Oh, if there is any truth in religion, if this world is God's, if a day
is coming when the weak shall be exalted and the mighty laid low, what
a reckoning they have gone to whose people cried for bread and they gave
them a stone! And if there is not, if the hope is vain, if it is all a
sham and a mockery, still the justice of this world is sure. Where are
they now, these parasites? Their game is played out. They are bones and
ashes; they are in their forgotten graves.




THE STORY OF THE MANX PEOPLE


THE MANX LANGUAGE

A friend asked me the other day if there was any reason why I should not
deliver these lectures in Manx. I answered that there were just forty
good and sufficient reasons. The first was that I did not speak Manx.
Like the wise queen in the story of the bells, he then spared me the
recital of the remaining nine-and-thirty. But there is at least one of
the number that will appeal strongly to most of my hearers. What that
is you shall judge for yourselves after I have braved the pitfalls of
pronunciation in a tongue I do not know, and given you some clauses of
the Lord's Prayer in Manx.

     Ayr ain t'ayns niait,
     (Father our who art in heaven.)

     Caskerick dy row dty ennym.
     (Holy be Thy name.)

     Dy jig dty reeriaght.
     (Come Thy kingdom.)

     Dty aigney dy row jeant er y thalloo mry te ayns niau.
     (Thy will be done on the earth even as in heaven.)

*****

     Son dy bragh, as dy bragh, Amen.
     (For ever and ever. Amen.)

I asked a friend--it was Mr. Wilson Barrett--if in its fulness, its fine
chest-notes, its force and music, this old language did not sound like
Italian.

"Well, no," he answered, "it sounds more like hard swearing."

I think you must now understand why the greater part of these lectures
should be delivered in English.

Manx is a dialect mainly Celtic, and differing only slightly from the
ancient Scottish Gaelic. I have heard my father say that when he was
a boy in Ramsey, sixty years ago, a Scotch ship came ashore on the
Carrick, and next morning after the wreck a long, lank, bony creature,
with bare legs, and in short petticoats, came into the marketplace and
played a tune on a little shrieking pair of smithy bellows, and then
sang a song. It was a Highland piper, and he sang in his Gaelic, but the
Manx boys and girls who gathered round him understood almost every word
of his song, though they thought his pronunciation bad. Perhaps they
took him for a poor old Manxman, somehow strayed and lost, a sort of
Manx Rip Van Winkle who had slept a century in Scotland, and thereby
lost part of his clothes.

You will wonder that there is not more Norse in our language,
remembering how much of the Norse is in our blood. But the predominance
of the Celtic is quite natural. Our mothers were Celts, speaking Celtic,
before our Norse-fathers came. Was it likely that our Celtic mothers
should learn much of the tongue of their Norse husbands? Then, is it not
our mother, rather than our father, who teaches us to speak when we are
children? So our Celtic mothers taught us Celtic, and thus Celtic became
the dominant language of our race.


MANX NAMES

But though our Norse fathers could not impose their Norse tongue on
their children, they gave them Norse names, and to the island they
gave Norse place-names. Hence we find that though Manx names show
a preponderance of the Celtic, yet that the Norse are numerous and
important. Thus we have many _dales, fells, garths_, and _ghylls_.
Indeed, we have many pure Scandinavian surnames and place-names. When
I was in Iceland I sometimes found myself face to face with names which
almost persuaded me that I was at home in our little island of the Irish
Sea. There is, for example, a Snaefell in Man as well as in Iceland.
Then, our Norwegian surnames often took Celtic prefixes, such as _Mac_,
and thus became Scandio-Gaelic. But this is a subject on which I have
no right to speak with authority. You will find it written down with
learning and judgment in the good book of my friend Mr. A. W. Moore,
of Cronkbourne. What concerns me more than the scientific aspect of the
language is its literary character. I seem to realise that it was the
language of a poetic race. The early generations of a people are often
poetic. They are child-like, and to be like a child is the best half of
being like a poet. They name their places by help of their observatory
powers. These are fresh and full of wonder, and Nature herself is
beautiful or strange until man tampers with her.

So when an untaught and uncorrupted mind looks upon a new scene and
bethinks itself of a name to fit it, the name is almost certainly full
of charm or rugged power. Thus we find in Man such mixed Norse and
Celtic names as: _Booildooholly_ (Black fold of the wood), _Douglas_
(Black stream), _Soderick_ (South creek), _Trollaby_ (Troll's farm),
_Gansy_ (Magic isle), _Cronk-y-Clagh Bane_ (Hill of the white stone),
_Cronk-ny-hey_ (Hill of the grave), _Cronk-ny-arrey-lhaa_ (Hill of the
day watch).


MANX IMAGINATION

This poetic character of the place-names of the island is a standing
reproach to us as a race. We have degenerated in poetic spirit since
such names were the natural expression of our feelings. I tremble to
think what our place-names would be if we had to make them now. Our few
modern Christenings set my teeth on edge. We are not a race of poets.
We are the prosiest of the prosy. I have never in my life met with any
race, except Icelanders and Norwegians, who are so completely the slave
of hard fact. It is astounding how difficult the average Manxman finds
it to put himself into the mood of the poet. That anything could come
out of nothing, that there is such a thing as imagination, that any
human brother of an honest man could say that a thing had been, which
had not been, and yet not lie--these are bewildering difficulties to
the modern Manxman. That a novel can be false and yet true--that, well
that's foolishness. I wrote a Manx romance called "The Deemster;" and I
did not expect my fellow-countrymen of the primitive kind to tolerate it
for a moment. It was merely a fiction, and the true Manxman of the old
sort only believes in what is true. He does not read very much, and when
he does read it is not novels. But he could not keep his hands off this
novel, and on the whole, and in the long run, he liked it--that is, as
he would say, "middling," you know! But there was only one condition on
which he could take it to his bosom--it must be true. There was the rub,
for clearly it transgressed certain poor little facts that were patent
to everybody.

Never mind, Hall Caine did not know poor Man, or somebody had told
him wrong. But the story itself! The Bishop, Dan, Ewan, Mona, the body
coming ashore at the Mooragh, the poor boy under the curse by the Calf,
lord-a-massy, that was thrue as gospel! What do you think happened? I
have got the letters by me, and can show them to anybody. A good Manxman
wrote to remonstrate with me for calling the book a "romance." How dare
I do so? It was all true. Another wrote saying that maybe I would like
to know that in his youth he knew my poor hero, Dan Mylrea, well. They
often drank together. In fact, they were the same as brothers. For
his part he had often warned poor Dan the way he was going. After the
murder, Dan came to him and gave him the knife with which he had killed
Ewan. He had got it still!

Later than the "Deemster," I published another Manx romance, "The
Bondman." In that book I mentioned, without thought of mischief, certain
names that must have been lying at the back of my head since my boyhood.
One of them becomes in the book the name of an old hypocrite who in the
end cheats everybody and yet prays loudly in public. Now it seems that
there is a man up in the mountains who owns that name. When he first
encountered it in the newspapers, where the story was being published as
a serial, he went about saying he was in the "Bondman," that it was
all thrue as gospel, so it was, that he knew me when I was a boy, over
Ramsey way, and used to give me rides on his donkey, so he did. This was
before the hypocrite was unmasked; and when that catastrophe occurred,
and his villany stood naked before all the island, his anger knew
no limits. I am told that he goes about the mountains now like a
thunder-cloud, and that he wants to meet me. I had never heard of the
man before in all my life.

What I say is true only of the typical Manxman, the natural-man among
Manxmen, not of the Manxman who is Manxman plus man of the world, the
educated Manxman, who finds it as easy as anybody else to put himself
into a position of sympathy with works of pure imagination. But you must
go down to the turf if you want the true smell of the earth. Education
levels all human types, as love is said to level all ranks; and to
preserve your individuality and yet be educated seems to want a strain
of genius, or else a touch of madness.

The Manx must have been the language of a people with few thoughts
to express, but such thoughts as they had were beautiful in their
simplicity and charm, sometimes wise and shrewd, and not rarely full of
feeling. Thus _laa-noo_ is old Manx for child, and it means literally
half saint--a sweet conception, which says the best of all that
is contained in Wordsworth's wondrous "Ode on the Intimations of
Immortality." _Laa-bee_ is old Manx for bed, literally half-meat, a
profound commentary on the value of rest. The old salutation at the door
of a Manx cottage before the visitor entered was this word spoken
from the porch: _Vel peccaghs thie?_ Literally: Any sinner within? All
humanity being sinners in the common speech of the Manx people.


MANX PROVERBS

Nearly akin to the language of a race are its proverbs, and some of the
Manx proverbs are wise, witty, and racy of the soil. Many of them are
the common possession of all peoples. Of such kind is "There's many
a slip 'twixt the cup and the lip." Here is one which sounds like an
Eastern saying: "Learning is fine clothes for the rich man, and riches
for the poor man." But I know of no foreign parentage for a proverb like
this: "A green hill when far away; bare, bare when it is near."

That may be Eastern also. It hints of a long weary desert; no grass,
no water, and then the cruel mirage that breaks down the heart of the
wayfarer at last. On the other hand, it is not out of harmony with
the landscape of Man, where the mountains look green sometimes from a
distance when they are really bare and stark, and so typify that waste
of heart when life is dry of the moisture of hope, and all the world is
as a parched wilderness. However, there is one proverb which is so Manx
in spirit that I could almost take oath on its paternity, so exactly
does it fit the religious temper of our people, though it contains a
word that must strike an English ear as irreverent: "When one poor man
helps another poor man, God himself laughs."


MANX BALLADS

Next to the proverbs of a race its songs are the best expression of its
spirit, and though Manx songs are few, some of them are full of Manx
character. Always their best part is the air. A man called Barrow
compiled the Manx tunes about the beginning of the century, but his book
is scarce. In my ignorance of musical science I can only tell you how
the little that is left of Manx music lives in the ear of a man who does
not know one note from another. Much of it is like a wail of the wind in
a lonely place near to the sea, sometimes like the soughing of the long
grass, sometimes like the rain whipping the panes of a window as
with rods. Nearly always long-drawn like a moan rarely various, never
martial, never inspiriting, often sad and plaintive, as of a people
kept under, but loving liberty, poor and low down, but with souls alive,
looking for something, and hoping on,--full of the brine, the salt foam,
the sad story of the sea. Nothing would give you a more vivid sense of
the Manx people than some of our old airs. They would seem to take you
into a little whitewashed cottage with sooty rafters and earthen floor,
where an old man who looks half like a sailor and half like a landsman
is dozing before a peat fire that is slumbering out. Have I in my
musical benightedness conveyed an idea of anything musical? If not, let
me, by the only vehicle natural to me, give you the rough-shod words of
one or two of our old ballads. There is a ballad, much in favour, called
_Ny kirree fo niaghey_, the Sheep under the Snow. Another, yet better
known, is called _Myle Charaine_. This has sometimes been called the
Manx National Air, but that is a fiction. The song has nothing to do
with the Manx as a nation. Perhaps it is merely a story of a miser
and his daughter's dowry. Or perhaps it tells of pillage, probably of
wrecking, basely done, and of how the people cut the guilty one off from
all intercourse with them.

     O, Myle Charaine, where got you your gold?
       Lone, lone, you have left me here,
     O, not in the curragh, deep under the mould,
       Lone, lone, and void of cheer.

This sounds poor enough, but it would be hard to say how deeply this
ballad, wedded to its wailing music, touches and moves a Manxman. Even
to my ear as I have heard it in Manx, it has seemed to be one of the
weirdest things in old ballad literature, only to be matched by some of
the old Irish songs, and by the gruesome ditty which tells how "the sun
shines fair on Carlisle wa'."


MANX CAROLS

The paraphrase I have given you was done by George Borrow, who once
visited the island. My friend the Rev. T. E. Brown met him and showed
him several collections of Manx carols, and he pronounced them all
translations from the English, not excepting our famous _Drogh Vraane_,
or carol of every bad woman whose story is told in the Bible, beginning
with the story of mother Eve herself. And, indeed, you will not be
surprised that to the shores of our little island have drifted all
kinds of miscellaneous rubbish, and that the Manxmen, from their very
simplicity and ignorance of other literatures, have had no means of
sifting the flotsam and assigning value to the constituents. Besides
this, they are so irresponsible, have no literary conscience, and
accordingly have appropriated anything and everything. This is true of
some Manx ballads, and perhaps also of many Manx carols. The carols,
called Carvals in Manx, serve in Man, as in other countries, the purpose
of celebrating the birth of Jesus, but we have one ancient custom
attached to them which we can certainly claim for our own, so Manx is
it, so quaint, so grimly serious, and withal so howlingly ludicrous.

It is called the service of Oiel Verree, probably a corruption of
_Feaill Vorrey_, literally the Feast of Mary, and it is held in the
parish church near to midnight on Christmas Eve. Scott describes it in
"Peveril of the Peak," but without personal knowledge.

Services are still held in many churches on Christmas Eve; and I think
they are called Oiel Verree, but the true Oiel Verree, the real, pure,
savage, ridiculous, sacrilegious old Oiel Verree, is gone. I myself just
came in time for it; I saw the last of it, nevertheless I saw it at its
prime, for I saw it when it was so strong that it could not live any
longer. Let me tell you what it was.

The story carries me back to early boyish years, when, from the lonely
school-house on the bleak top of Maughold Head, I was taken in secret,
one Christmas Eve, between nine and ten o'clock, to the old church of
Kirk Maughold, a parish which longer than any other upheld the rougher
traditions. My companion was what is called an original. His name was
Billy Corkill. We were great chums. I would be thirteen, he was about
sixty. Billy lived alone in a little cottage on the high-road, and
worked in the fields. He had only one coat all the years I knew him. It
seemed to have been blue to begin with, but when it had got torn Billy
had patched it with anything that was handy, from green cloth to red
flannel. He called it his Joseph's coat of many colours. Billy was a
poet and a musical composer. He could not read a word, but he would
rather have died than confess his ignorance. He kept books and
newspapers always about him, and when he read out of them, he usually
held them upside down. If any one remarked on that, he said he could
read them any way up--that was where his scholarship came in. Billy was
a great carol singer. He did not know a note, but he never sang except
from music. His tunes were wild harmonies that no human ear ever heard
before. It will be clear to you that old Billy was a man of genius.

Such was my comrade on that Christmas Eve long ago. It had been a bitter
winter in the Isle of Man, and the ground was covered with snow. But the
church bells rang merrily over the dark moorland, for Oiel Verree was
peculiarly the people's service, and the ringers were ringing in the one
service of the year at which the parishioners supplanted the Vicar, and
appropriated the old parish church. In spite of the weather, the church
was crowded with a motley throng, chiefly of young folks, the young men
being in the nave, and the girls (if I remember rightly) in the little
loft at the west end. Most of the men carried tallow dips, tied
about with bits of ribbon in the shape of rosettes, duly lighted, and
guttering grease at intervals on to the book-ledge or the tawny fingers
of them that held them. It appeared that there had been an ordinary
service before we arrived, and the Vicar was still within the rails
of the communion. From there he addressed some parting words of solemn
warning to the noisy throng of candle-carriers. As nearly as I can
remember, the address was this: "My good people, you are about to
celebrate an old custom. For my part, I have no sympathy with such
customs, but since the hearts of my parishioners seem to be set on
this one, I have no wish to suppress it. But tumultuous and disgraceful
scenes have occurred on similar occasions in previous years, and I
beg you to remember that you are in God's house," &c. &c. The grave
injunction was listened to in silence, and when it ended, the Vicar, a
worthy but not very popular man, walked towards the vestry. To do so,
he passed the pew where I sat under the left arm of my companion, and he
stopped before him, for Billy had long been a notorious transgressor at
Oiel Verree.

"See that you do not disgrace my church to-night," said the Vicar. But
Billy had a biting tongue.

"Aw, well," said he, "I'm thinking the church is the people's."

"The people are as ignorant as goats," said the Vicar.

"Aw, then," said Billy, "you are the shepherd, so just make sheeps of
them."

At that the Vicar gave us the light of his countenance no more. The last
glimpse of his robe going through the vestry door was the signal for a
buzz of low gossip, and straightway the business of Oiel Verree began.

It must have been now approaching eleven o'clock, and two old greybeards
with tousled heads placed themselves abreast at the door of the west
porch. There they struck up a carol in a somewhat lofty key. It was a
most doleful ditty. Certainly I have never since heard the like of it.
I remember that it told the story of the Crucifixion in startling
language, full of realism that must have been horribly ghastly, if it
had not been so comic. At the end of each verse the singers made one
stride towards the communion. There were some thirty verses, and every
mortal verse did these zealous carollers give us. They came to an end at
length, and then another old fellow rose in his pew and sang a ditty
in Manx. It told of the loss of the herring-fleet in Douglas Bay in the
last century. After that there was yet another and another carol--some
that might be called sacred, others that would not be badly wronged with
the name of profane. As I recall them now, they were full of a burning
earnestness, and pictured the dangers of the sinner and the punishment
of the damned. They said nothing about the joys of heaven, or the
pleasures of life. Wherever these old songs came from they must have
dated from some period of religious revival. The Manxman may have
appropriated them, but if he did so he was in a deadly earnest mood. It
must have been like stealing a hat-band.

My comrade had been silent all this time, but in response to various
winks, nods, and nudges, he rose to his feet. Now, in prospect of Oiel
Verree I had written the old man a brand new carol. It was a mighty
achievement in the sentimental vein. I can remember only one of its
couplets:

     Hold your souls in still communion,
     Blend them in a holy union.

I am not very sure what this may mean, and Billy must have been in the
same uncertainty. Shall I ever forget what happened? Billy standing in
the pew with my paper in his hand the wrong way up. Myself by his side
holding a candle to him. Then he began to sing. It was an awful tune--I
think he called it sevens--but he made common-sense of my doggerel by
one alarming emendation. When he came to the couplet I have given you,
what do you think he sang?

     "Hold your souls in still communion,
     Blend them in--a hollow onion!"

Billy must have been a humorist. He is long dead, poor old Billy. God
rest him!


DECAY OF THE MANX LANGUAGE

If in this unscientific way I have conveyed my idea of Manx carvals,
Manx ballads, or Manx proverbs, you will not be surprised to hear me say
that I do not think that any of these, can live long apart from the Manx
language. We may have stolen most of them; they may have been wrecked on
our coast, and we may have smuggled them; but as long as they wear our
native homespun clothes they are ours, and as soon as they put it off
they cease to belong to us. A Manx proverb is no longer a Manx proverb
when it is in English. The same is true of a Manx ballad translated, and
of a Manx carval turned into an English carol. What belongs to us,
our way of saying things, in a word, our style, is gone. The spirit is
departed, and that which remains is only an English ghost flitting about
in Manx grave-clothes.

Now this is a sad fact, for it implies that little as we have got of
Manx literature, whether written or oral, we shall soon have none at
all. Our Manx language is fast dying out. If we had any great work in
the Manx tongue, that work alone would serve to give our language a
literary life at least. But we have no such great work, no fine Manx
poem, no good novel in Manx, not even a Manx sermon of high mark. Thus
far our Manx language has kept alive our pigmies of Manx literature; but
both are going down together. The Manx is not much spoken now. In
the remoter villages, like Cregnesh, Ballaugh, Kirk Michael, and Kirk
Andreas, it may still be heard. Moreover, the Manxman may hear Manx a
hundred times for every time an Englishman hears it. But the younger
generation of Manx folk do not speak Manx, and very often do not
understand it. This is a rapid change on the condition of things in my
own boyhood. Manx is to me, for all practical uses, an unknown tongue.
I cannot speak it, I cannot follow it when spoken, I have only a sort
of nodding acquaintance with it out of door, and yet among my earliest
recollections is that of a household where nothing but Manx was ever
spoken except to me. A very old woman, almost bent double over a
spinning wheel, and calling me Hommy-Veg, and _baugh-millish_, and so
forth. This will suggest that the Manx people are themselves responsible
for the death of the Manx language. That is partly true. The Manx tongue
was felt to be an impediment to intercourse with the English people.
Then the great English immigration set in, and the Isle of Man became a
holiday resort. That was the doomster of the Manx language. In another
five-and-twenty years the Manx language will be as dead as a Manx
herring.

One cannot but regret this certain fate. I dare not say that the
language itself is so good that it ought to live. Those who know it
better say that "it's a fine old tongue, rich and musical, full of
meaning and expression." {*} I know that it is at least forcible, and
loud and deep in sound. I will engage two Manxmen quarrelling in Manx
to make more noise in a given time than any other two human brethren in
Christendom, not excepting two Irishmen. Also I think the Manx must be
capable of notes of sweet feeling, and I observe that a certain higher
lilt in a Manx woman's voice, suggesting the effort to speak about the
sound of the sea, and the whistle of the wind in the gorse, is lost in
the voices of the younger women who speak English only. But apart from
tangible loss, I regret the death of the Manx tongue on grounds of
sentiment. In this old tongue our fathers played as children, bought and
sold as men, prayed, preached, gossiped, quarrelled, and made love. It
was their language at Tynwald; they sang their grim carvals in it, and
their wailing, woful ballads.

     * The Rev. T. E. Brown.

When it is dead more than half of all that makes us Manxmen will be
gone. Our individuality will be lost, the greater barrier that separates
us from other peoples will be broken down. Perhaps this may have its
advantages, but surely it is not altogether a base desire not to be
submerged into all the races of the earth. The tower of Babel is built,
the tongues of the builders are confounded, and we are not all anxious
to go back and join the happy family that lived in one ark.

But aside from all lighter thoughts there is something very moving and
pathetic in the death of an old language. Permit me to tell you, not
as a philologist, a character to which I have no claim, but as an
imaginative writer, how the death of an ancient tongue affects me. It is
unlike any other form of death, for an unwritten language is even as a
breath of air which when it is spent leaves no trace behind. A nation
may die, yet its history remains, and that is the tangible part of its
past. A city may fall to decay and lie a thousand years under the sands
of the desert, yet its relics revivify its life. But a language that is
dead, a tongue that has no life in its literature, is a breath of wind
that is gone. A little while and it went from lip to lip, from lip to
ear; it came we know not whence; it has passed we know not where. It was
an embodied spirit of all man's joys and sorrows, and like a spirit it
has vanished away.

Then if this old language has been that of our own people its death is a
loss to our affections. Indeed, language gets so close to our heart that
we can hardly separate it from our emotions. If you do not speak the
Italian language, ask yourself whether Dante comes as close to you as
Shakespeare, all questions of genius and temperament apart. And if Dante
seems a thousand miles away, and Shakespeare enters into your closest
chamber, is it not first of all because the language of Shakespeare is
your own language, alive with the life that is in your own tongue, vital
with your own ways of thought and even tricks and whims of speech? Let
English die, and Shakespeare goes out of your closet, and passes away
from you, and is then your brother-Englishman only in name. So close is
the bond of language, so sweet and so mysterious.

But there is yet a more sacred bond with the language of our fathers
when it can have no posthumous life in books. This is the bond of love.
Think what it is that you miss first and longest when death robs you of
a friend. Is it not the living voice? The living face you can bring back
in memory, and in your dark hours it will shine on you still; the good
deed can never die; the noble thought lives for ever. Death is not
conqueror over such as these, but the human voice, the strange and
beautiful part of us that is half spirit in life, is lost in death. For
a while it startles us as an echo in an empty chamber, and then it is
gone, and not all the world's wealth could bring one note of it back.
And such as the vanishing away of the voice of the friend we loved is
the death of the old tongue which our fathers spoke. _It is the death of
the dead_.


MANX SUPERSTITIONS

When the Manx tongue is dead there will remain, however, just one badge
of our race--our superstition. I am proud to tell you that we are the
most superstitious people now left among the civilised nations of the
world. This is a distinction in these days when that poetry of life,
as Goethe names it, is all but gone from the face of the earth. Manxmen
have not yet taken the poetry out of the moon and the stars, and the
mist of the mountains and the wail of the sea. Of course we are ashamed
of the survival of our old beliefs and try to hide them, but let nobody
say that as a people we believe no longer in charms, and the evil eye,
and good spirits and bad. I know we do. It would be easy to give you a
hundred illustrations. I remember an ill-tempered old body living on
the Curragh, who was supposed to possess the evil eye. If a cow died at
calving, she had witched it. If a baby cried suddenly in its sleep,
the old witch must have been going by on the road. If the potatoes
were blighted, she had looked over the hedge at them. There was a charm
doctor in Kirk Andreas, named Teare-Ballawhane. He was before my time,
but I recall many stories of him. When a cow was sick of the witching of
the woman of the Curragh, the farmer fled over to Kirk Andreas for the
charm of the charm-doctor. From the moment Teare-Ballawhane began to
boil his herbs the cow recovered. If the cow died after all, there was
some fault in the farmer. I remember a child, a girl, who twenty years
ago had a birth-mark on her face--a broad red stain like a hand on her
cheek. Not long since, I saw her as a young woman, and the stain was
either gone entirely or hidden by her florid complexion. When I asked
what had been done for her, I heard that a good woman had charmed her.
"Aw, yes," said the girl's mother, "a few good words do no harm anyway."
Not long ago I met an old fellow in Onchan village who believed in the
Nightman, an evil spirit who haunts the mountains at night predicting
tempests and the doom of ships, the _dooinney-oie_ of the Manx, akin to
the _banshee_ of the Irish. "Aw, man," said he, "it was up Snaefell way,
and I was coming from Kirk Michael over, and it was black dark, and I
heard the Nightman after me, shoutin' and wailin' morthal, _how-la-a,
how-a-a_. But I didn't do nothin', no, and he came up to me lek a besom,
and went past me same as a flood, _who-o-o!_ And I lerr him! Aw, yes,
man, yes!"

I remember many a story of fairies, some recited half in humour,
others in grim earnest. One old body told me that on the night of her
wedding-day, coming home from the Curragh, whither she had stolen away
in pursuit of a belated calf, she was chased in the moonlight by a
troop of fairies. They held on to her gown, and climbed on her back, and
perched on her shoulders, and clung to her hair. There were "hundreds
and tons" of them; they were about as tall as a wooden broth-ladle, and
all wore cocked-hats and velvet jackets.

A good fairy long inhabited the Isle of Man. He was called in Manx the
Phynnodderee. It would appear that he had two brothers of like
features with himself, one in Scotland called the Brownie, the other in
Scandinavia called the Swart-alfar.

I have often heard how on a bad night the Manx folk would go off to bed
early so that the Phynnodderee might come in out of the cold. Before
going upstairs they built up the fire, and set the kitchen table with
crocks of milk and pecks of oaten cake for the entertainment of their
guest. Then while they slept the Phynnodderee feasted, yet he always
left the table exactly as he found it, eating the cake and drinking the
milk, but filling up the peck and the crock afresh. Nobody ever intruded
upon him, so nobody ever saw him, save the Manx Peeping Tom. I remember
hearing an old Manxman say that his curiosity overcame his reverence,
and he "leff the wife," stepped out of bed, crept to the head of the
stairs, and peeped over the banisters into the kitchen. There he saw
the Phynnodderee sitting in his own arm-chair, with a great company of
brother and sister fairies about him, baking bread on the griddle, and
chattering together like linnets in spring. But he could not understand
a word they were saying.

I have told you that the Manxman is not built by nature for a gallant.
He has one bad fairy, and she is the embodied spirit of a beautiful
woman. Manx folk-lore, like Manx carvals, Manx ballads, and Manx
proverbs, takes it for a bad sign of a woman's character that she has
personal beauty. If she is beautiful, ten to one she is a witch. That is
how it happens that there are so many witches in the Isle of Man.

The story goes that a beautiful wicked witch entrapped the men of the
island. They would follow her anywhere. So she led them into the sea,
and they were all drowned. Then the women of the island went forth to
punish her, and, to escape from them, she took the form of a wren and
flew away. That is how it comes about that the poor little wren is
hunted and killed on St. Stephen's Day. The Manx lads do it, though
surely it ought to be the Manx maidens. At midnight they sally forth in
great companies, armed with sticks and carrying torches. They beat the
hedges until they light on a wren's nest, and, having started the wren
and slaughtered it, they suspend the tiny mite to the middle of a long
pole, which is borne by two lads from shoulder to shoulder. They then
sing a rollicking native ditty, of which one version runs:--

     We'll hunt the wren, says Robbin the Bobbin;
     We'll hunt the wren, says Richard the Robbin;
     We'll hunt the wren, says Jack of the Lan';
     We'll hunt the wren, says every one.

But Robbin the Bobbin and Richard the Robbin are not the only creatures
who have disappeared into the sea. The fairies themselves have also gone
there. They inhabit Man no more. A Wesleyan preacher declared some years
ago that he witnessed the departure of all the Manx fairies from the Bay
of Douglas. They went away in empty rum puncheons, and scudded before
the wind as far as the eye could reach, in the direction of Jamaica. So
we have done with them, both good and bad.

However, among the witches whom we have left to us in remote corners of
the island is the very harmless one called the Queen of the Mheillia.
Her rural Majesty is a sort of first cousin of the Queen of the May. The
Mheillia is the harvest-home. It is a picturesque ceremonial, observed
differently in different parts. Women and girls follow the reapers
to gather and bind the corn after it has fallen to the swish of the
sickles. A handful of the standing corn of the last of the farmer's
fields is tied about with ribbon. Nobody but the farmer knows where that
handful is, and the girl who comes upon it by chance is made the Queen
of the Mheillia. She takes it to the highest eminence near, and waves
it, and her fellow-reapers and gleaners shout huzzas. Their voices are
heard through the valley, where other farmers and other reapers
and gleaners stop in their work and say, "So-and-so's Mheillia!"
"Ballamona's Mheillia's took!" That night the farmer gives a feast in
his barn to celebrate the getting in of his harvest, and the close of
the work of the women at the harvesting. Sheep's heads for a change on
Manx herrings, English ale for a change on Manx jough; then dancing led
by the mistress, to the tune of a fiddle, played faster and wilder
as the night advances, reel and jig, jig and reel. This pretty rural
festival is still observed, though it has lost much of its quaintness. I
think I can just remember to have heard the shouts of the Mheillia from
the breasts of the mountains.

You will have gathered that in no part of the world could you find
a more reckless and ill-conditioned breeding-ground of suppositions,
legends, traditions, and superstitions than in the Isle of Man. The
custom of hunting the wren is widely spread throughout Ireland; and if
I were to tell you of Manx wedding customs, Manx burial customs, Manx
birth customs, May day, Lammas, Good Friday, New Year, and Christmas
customs, you would recognise in the Manxman the same irresponsible
tendency to appropriate whatever flotsam drifts to his shore. What I
have told you has come mainly of my own observation, but for a complete
picture of Manx manners and customs, beliefs and superstitions, I will
refer you to William Kennish's "Mona's Isle, and other Poems," a rare
book, with next to no poetic quality, and containing much that is
worthless, but having a good body of real native stuff in it, such as
cannot be found elsewhere. A still better anthology is likely to be soon
forthcoming from the pen of Mr. A. W. Moore (the excellent editor of
"Manx Names") and the press of Mr. Nutt.

It is easy to laugh at these old superstitions, so childish do they
seem, so foolish, so ignorant. But shall we therefore set ourselves so
much above our fathers because they were slaves to them, and we believe
them not? Bethink you. Are we so much wiser, after all? How much farther
have we got? We know the mists of Mannanan. They are only the vapours
from the south, creeping along the ridge of our mountains, going north.
Is that enough to know? We know the cold eye of the evil man, whose mere
presence hurts us, and the warm eye of the born physician, whose mere
presence heals us. Does that tell us everything? We hear the moans which
the sea sends up to the mountains, when storms are coming, and ships are
to be wrecked, and we do not call them the voices of the Nightman, but
only the voices of the wind. We have changed the name; but we have taken
none of the mystery and marvel out of the thing itself. It is the Wind
for us; it was the Nightman for our fathers. That is nearly all.
The wind bloweth where it listeth. We are as far off as ever. Our
superstitions remain, only we call them Science, and try not to be
afraid of them. But we are as little children after all, and the best of
us are those that, being wisest, see plainest that, before the wonders
and terrors of the great world we live in, we are children, walking
hand-in-hand in fear.


MANX STORIES

You will say that there ought to be many good stories of a people like
the Manx; and here again I have to confess to you that the absence of
all literary conscience, all perception of keeping and relation, all
sense of harmony and congruity in the Manxman has so demoralised our
anecdotal _ana_ that I hesitate to offer you certain of the best of
our Manx yarns from fear that they may be venerable English, Irish, and
Scotch familiars. I will content myself with a few that bear undoubted
Manx lineaments. As an instance of Manx hospitality, simple and rude,
but real and hearty, I think you would go the world over to match this.
The late Rev. Hugh Stowell Brown, a Manxman, brother of the most famous
of living Manxmen, and himself our North-country Spurgeon, with his
wife, his sister, and his mother, were belated one evening up Baldwin
Glen, and stopped at a farm-house to inquire their way. But the farmer
would not hear of their going a step further. "Aw, nonsense!" he said.
"What's the use of talkin', man? You'll be stoppin' with us to-night.
Aw 'deed ye will, though. The women can get along together aisy, and
_you're a clane lookin' sort o' chap; you'll be sleepin' with me!_"

In the old days of, say, two steamboats a week to England the old Manx
captains of the Steamboat Company were notorious soakers. There is a
story of one of them who had the Archdeacon of the island aboard in a
storm. It was night. The reverend Archdeacon was in an agony of pain and
terror. He inquired anxiously of the weather. The captain, very drunk,
answered, "If it doesn't mend we'll all be in heaven before morning,
Archdeacon!" "Oh, God forbid, captain," cried the Archdeacon.

I have said what true work for religion Nonconformity must have done
in those evil days when the clergy of the Athols were more busy with
backgammon than with theology. But the religion of the old type of Manx
Methodist was often an amusing mixture of puritanism and its opposite,
a sort of grim, white-faced sanctity, that was never altogether free of
the suspicion of a big boisterous laugh behind it. The Methodist local
preachers have been the real guardians and repositories of one side
of the Manx genius, a curious, hybrid thing, deadly earnest, often
howlingly ludicrous, simple, generally sincere, here and there
audaciously hypocritical. Among local preachers I remember some of the
sweetest, purest, truest men that ever walked this world of God; but
I also remember a > man who was brought home from market on Saturday
night, dead drunk, across the bottom of his cart drawn by his faithful
horse, and I saw him in the pulpit next morning, and heard his sermon on
the evils of backsliding. There is a story of the jealousy of two local
preachers. The one went to hear the other preach. The preacher laid out
his subject under a great many heads, firstly, secondly, thirdly, up to
tenthly. His rival down below in the pew spat and _haw'd_ and _tchut'd_
a good deal, and at last, quite impatient of getting no solid religious
food, cried aloud, "Give us mate, man, give us mate!" Whereupon the
preacher leaned over the pulpit cushion, and said, "Hould on, man, till
I've done with the carving."

But to tell of Happy Dan, and his wondrous sermon on the Prodigal Son
at the Clover Stones, Lonan, and his discourse on the swine possessed
of devils who went "triddle-traddle, triddle-traddle down the brews and
were clane drownded;" and of the marvellous account of how King David
remonstrated in broadest Manx _patois_ with the "pozzle-tree," for being
blown down; and then of the grim earnestness of a good man who could
never preach on a certain text without getting wet through to the
waistcoat with perspiration--to open the flood-gates of this kind of
Manx story would be to liberate a reservoir that would hardly know an
end, so I must spare you.


MANX "CHARACTERS"

At various points of my narrative I have touched on certain of our
eccentric Manx "characters." But perhaps more interesting than any such
whom I have myself met with are some whom I have known only by repute.
These children of Nature are after all the truest touchstones of a
nation's genius. Crooked, distorted, deformed, they nevertheless, and
perhaps therefore, show clearly the bent of their race. If you are
without brake or curb you may be blind, but you must know when you are
going down hill. The curb of education, and the brake of common-sense
are the surest checks on a people's individuality. And these poor
halfwits of the Manx race, wiser withal than many of the Malvolios who
smile on them so demurely, exhibit the two great racial qualities of
the Manx people--the Celtic and the Norse--in vivid companionship and
contrast. It is an amusing fact that in some wild way the bardic spirit
breaks out in all of them. They are all singers, either of their own
songs, or the songs of others. That surely is the Celtic strain in them.
But their songs are never of the joys of earth or of love, or yet of
war; never, like the rustic poetry of the Scotch, full of pawky humour;
never cynical, never sarcastic; only concerned with the terrors of
judgment and damnation and the place of torment. That, also, may be a
fierce and dark development of the Celtic strain, but I see more of the
Norse spirit in it. When my ancient bard in Glen Rushen took down his
thumb-marked, greasy, discoloured poems from the "lath" against the
open-timbered ceiling, and read them aloud to me in his broad Manx
dialect, with a sing-song of voice and a swinging motion of body, while
the loud hailstorm pelted the window pane and the wind whistled round
the house, I found they were all startling and almost ghastly appeals to
the sinner to shun his evil courses. One of them ran like this:


HELL IS HOT.

     O sinner, see your dangerous state,
     And think of hell ere 'tis too late;
     When worldly cares would drown each thought,
     Pray call to mind that hell is hot.
     Still to increase your godly fears,
     Let this be sounding in your ears,
     Still bear in mind that hell is hot,
     Remember and forget it not.


There was another poem about a congregation of the dead in the region of
the damned:

     I found a reverend parson there,
        A congregation too,
     Bowed on their bended knees at prayer,
        As they were wont to do.
     But soon my heart was struck with pain,
        I thought it truly odd,
     The parson's prayer did not contain
        A word concerning God.

You will remember the Danish book called "Letters from Hell," containing
exactly the same idea, and conclude that the Manx bard was poking fun at
some fashionable yet worldly-minded preacher. But no; he was too much a
child of Nature for that.

There is not much satire in the Manx character, and next to no cynicism
at all. The true Manxman is white-hot. I have heard of one, John Gale,
called the Manx Burns, who lampooned the upstarts about him, and also of
one, Tom the Dipper, an itinerant Manx bard, who sang at fairs; but in a
general way the Manx bard has been a deadly earnest person, most at home
in churchyards. There was one such, akin in character to my old friend
Billy of Maughold, but of more universal popularity, a quite privileged
pet of everybody, a sort of sacred being, though as crazy as man may be,
called Chalse-a-Killey. Chaise was scarcely a bard, but a singer of
the songs of bards. He was a religious monomaniac, who lived before his
time, poor fellow; his madness would not be seen in him now. The idol
of his crazed heart was Bishop Wilson. He called him _dear_ and _sweet_,
vowed he longed to die, just that he might meet him in heaven; then
Wilson would take him by the hand, and he would tell him all his mind,
and together they would set up a printing press, with the types of
diamonds, and print hymns, and send them back to the Isle of Man. Poor,
'wildered brain, haunted by "half-born thoughts," not all delusions, but
quaint and grotesque. Full of valiant fury, Chaise was always ready to
fight for his distorted phantom of the right. When an uncle of my
own died, whose name I bear, Chaise shocked all the proprieties by
announcing his intention of walking in front of the funeral procession
through the streets and singing his terrible hymns. He would yield to
no persuasion, no appeals, and no threats. He had promised the dead man
that he would do this, and he would not break his oath to save his life.
It was agony to the mourners, but they had to submit. Chaise fulfilled
his vow, walked ten yards in front, sang his fierce music with the tears
streaming from his wild eyes down his quivering face. But the spectacle
let loose no unseemly mirth. Nobody laughed, and surely if the heaven
that Chaise feared was listening and looking down, his crazy voice was
not the last to pierce the dome of it. My friend the Rev. T. E. Brown
has written a touching and beautiful poem, "To Chaise in Heaven":

     So you are gone, dear Chaise!
     Ah well; it was enough--
     The ways were cold, the ways were rough,
     O Heaven!   O home!
     No more to roam,
        Chaise, poor Chaise!
     And now it's all so plain, dear Chaise!
        So plain--
        The 'wildered brain,
        The joy, the pain
     The phantom shapes that haunted,
     The half-born thoughts that daunted:
        All, all is plain,
           Dear Chaise!
        All is plain.

*****

     Ah now, dear Chaise! of all the radiant host,
     Who loves you most?
     I think I know him, kneeling on his knees;
     Is it Saint Francis of Assise?
        Chaise, poor Chaise.


MANX CHARACTERISTICS

I have rambled on too long about my eccentric Manx characters, and left
myself little space for a summary of the soberer Manx characteristics.
These are independence, modesty, a degree of sloth, a non-sanguine
temperament, pride, and some covetousness. This uncanny combination of
characteristics is perhaps due to our mixed Celtic and Norse blood. Our
independence is pure Norse. I have never met the like of it, except in
Norway, where a Bergen policeman who had hunted all the morning for my
lost umbrella would not take anything for his pains; and in Iceland,
where a poor old woman in a ragged woollen dress, a torn hufa on her
head, torn skin shoes on her feet, and with rheumatism playing visible
havoc all over her body, refused a kroner with the dignity, grave look,
stiffened lips, and proud head that would have become a duchess. But the
Manxman's independence almost reaches a vice. He is so unwilling to owe
anything to any man that he is apt to become self-centred and cold,
and to lose one of the sweetest joys of life--that of receiving great
favours from those we greatly love, between whom and ourselves there is
no such thing as an obligation, and no such thing as a debt. There is
something in the Manxman's blood that makes him hate rank; and though he
has a vast respect for wealth, it must be his own, for he will take off
his hat to nobody else's.

The modesty of the Manxman reaches shyness, and his shyness is capable
of making him downright rude. One of my friends tells a charming story,
very characteristic of our people, of a conversation with the men of the
herring-fleet. "We were comin' home from the Shetland fishing, ten boats
of us; and we come to an anchor in a bay. And there was a tremenjis fine
castle there, and a ter'ble great lady. Aw, she was a ter'ble kind lady;
she axed the lot of us (eighty men and boys, eight to each boat) to come
up and have dinner with her. So the day come--well, none of us went!
That shy!" My friend reproved them soundly, and said he wished he knew
who the lady was that he might write to her and apologise. Then followed
a long story of how a breeze sprung up and eight of the boats sailed.
After that the crew of the remaining two boats, sixteen men and boys,
went up to the tremenjis great castle, and the ter'ble great lady, and
had tea. If any lady here present knows a lady on the north-west coast
of Scotland who a year or two back invited eighty Manx men and boys to
dinner, and received sixteen to tea, she will redeem the character of
our race if she will explain that it was not because her hospitality was
not appreciated that it was not accepted by our foolish countrymen.

There is nothing that more broadly indicates the Norse strain in the
Manx character than the non-sanguine temperament of the Manxmen. Where
the pure Celt will hope anything and promise everything, the Manxman
will hope not at all and promise nothing. "Middling" is the commonest
word in a Manxman's mouth. Hardly anything is entirely good, or wholly
bad, but nearly everything is middling. It's a middling fine day, or a
middling stormy one; the sea is middling smooth or middling rough; the
herring harvest is middling big or middling little; a man is never much
more, than middling tired, or middling well, or middling hungry, or
middling thirsty, and the place you are travelling to is alwaya middling
near or middling far. The true Manxman commits himself to nothing.
When Nelson was shot down at Trafalgar, Cowle, a one-armed Manx
quartermaster, caught him in his remaining arm. This was Cowle's story:
"He fell right into my arms, sir. 'Mr. Cowle,' he says, 'do you think I
shall recover?' 'I think, my lord,' I says, 'we had better wait for the
opinion of the medical man.'" Dear old Cowle, that cautious word showed
you were no Irishman, but a downright middling Manxman.

I have one more story to tell, and that is of Manx pride, which is a
wondrous thing, usually-very ludicrous. A young farming girl who will go
about barefoot throughout the workdays of the week would rather perish
than not dress in grand attire, after her own sort, on Sunday afternoon.
But Manx pride in dress can be very touching and human. When the
lighthouse was built on the Chickens Rock, the men who were to live in
it were transferred from two old lighthouses on the little islet
called the Calf of Man, but their families were left in the disused
lighthouses. Thus the men were parted from their wives and children, but
each could see the house of the other, and on Sunday mornings the wives
in their old lighthouses always washed and dressed the children and made
them "nice" and paraded them to and fro on the platforms in front of
the doors, and the men in their new lighthouse always looked across the
Sound at their little ones through their powerful telescopes.


MANX TYPES

Surely that is a lovely story, full of real sweetness and pathos.
It reminds me that amid many half-types of dubious quality, selfish,
covetous, quarrelsome, litigious, there are at least two types of Manx
character entirely charming and delightful. The one is the best type of
Manx seaman, a true son of the sea, full of wise saws and proverbs, full
of long yarns and wondrous adventures, up to anything, down to anything,
pragmatical, a mighty moralist in his way, but none the less equal to
a round ringing oath; a sapient adviser putting on the airs of a
philosopher, but as simple as the baby of a girl--in a word, dear old
Tom Baynes of "Fo'c's'le Yarns," old salt, old friend, old rip. The
other type is that of the Manx parish patriarch. This good soul it
would be hard to beat among all the peoples of earth. He unites the best
qualities of both sexes; he is as soft and gentle as a dear old woman,
and as firm of purpose as a strong man. Garrulous, full of platitudes,
easily moved to tears by a story of sorrow and as easily taken in, but
beloved and trusted and reverenced by all the little world about him.
I have known him as a farmer, and seen him sitting at the head of his
table in the farm kitchen, with his sons and daughters and men-servants
and women-servants about him, and, save for ribald gossip, no one of
whatever condition abridged the flow of talk for his presence. I have
known him as a parson, when he has been the father of his parish, the
patriarch of his people, the "ould angel" of all the hillside round
about. Such sweetness in his home life, such nobility, such gentle,
old-fashioned ceremoniousness, such delightful simplicity of manners.
Then when two of these "ould angels" met, two of these Parson Adamses,
living in content on seventy pounds a year, such high talk on great
themes, long hour after long hour in the little low-ceiled Vicarage
study, with no light but the wood fire, which glistened on the diamond
window-pane! And when midnight came seeing each other home, spending
half the night walking to and fro from Vicarage to Vicarage, or turning
out to saddle the horse in the field, but (far away "in wandering mazes
lost") going blandly up to the old cow and putting on the blinkers and
saying, "Here he is, sir." Have we anything like all this in England?
Their type is nearly extinct even in the Isle of Man, where they have
longest survived. And indeed they are not the only good things that are
dying out there.


LITERARY ASSOCIATIONS

The island has next to no literary associations, but it would be
unpardonable in a man of letters if he were to forget the few it can
boast. Joseph Train, our historian, made the acquaintance of Scott in
1814, and during the eighteen years following he rendered important
services to "The Great Unknown" as a collector of some of the legendary
stories used as foundations for what were then called the Scotch Novels.
But it is a common error that Train found the groundwork of the Manx
part of "Peveril of the Peak." It was Scott who directed Train to the
Isle of Man as a fine subject for study. Scott's brother Thomas lived
there, and no doubt this was the origin of Scott's interest in the
island. Scott himself never set foot on it. Wordsworth visited the
island about 1823, and he recorded his impressions in various sonnets,
and also in the magnificent lines on Peel Castle--"I was thy neighbour
once, thou rugged pile." He also had a relative living there--Miss
Hutchinson, his sister-in-law. A brother of this lady, a mariner, lies
buried in Braddan churchyard, and his tombstone bears an epitaph which
Wordsworth indited. The poet spent a summer at Peel, pitching his tent
above what is now called Peveril Terrace. One of my friends tried long
ago to pump up from this sapless soil some memory of Wordsworth, but no
one could remember anything about him. Shelley is another poet of whom
there remains no trace in the Isle of Man. He visited the island early
in 1812, being driven into Douglas harbour by contrary winds on his
voyage from Cumberland to Ireland. He was then almost unknown; Harriet
was still with him, and his head was full of political reforms. The
island was in a state of some turmoil, owing to the unpopularity of
the Athols, who still held manorial rights and the patronage of the
Bishopric. The old Norse Constitution was intact, and the House of Keys
was then a self-elected chamber. It is not wonderful that Shelley made
no impression on Man in 1812, but it is surprising that Man seems to
have made no impression on Shelley. It made a very sensible impression
on Hawthorne, who left his record in the "English Note Book."


MANX PROGRESS

I am partly conscious that throughout these lectures I have kept my face
towards the past. That has been because I have been loth to look at the
present, and almost afraid to peep into the future. The Isle of Man is
not now what it was even five-and-twenty years ago. It has become
too English of late. The change has been sudden. Quite within my own
recollection England seemed so far away that there was something beyond
conception moving and impressive in the effect of it and its people upon
the imagination of the Manx. There were only about two steamers a week
between England and the Isle of Man at that time. Now there are about
two a day. There are lines of railway on this little plot of land, which
you might cross on foot between breakfast and lunch, and cover from
end to end in a good day's walk. This is, of course, a necessity of the
altered conditions, as also, no doubt, are the parades, and esplanades,
and promenades, and iron piers, and marine carriage drives, and Eiffel
Tower, and old castles turned into Vauxhall Gardens, and fairy glens
into "happy day" Roshervilles. God forbid that I should grudge the
factory hand his breath of the sea and glimpse of the gorse-bushes; but
I know what price we are paying that we may entertain him.

Our young Manxman is already feeling the English immigration on his
character. He is not as good a man as his father was before him. I dare
say that in his desire to make everything English that is Manx, he
may some day try to abolish the House of Keys, or at least dig up the
Tynwald Hill. In one fit of intermittent mania, he has already attempted
to "restore" the grand ruins of Peel Castle, getting stones from
Whitehaven, filling up loop-holes, and doing other indecencies with
the great works of the dead. All this could be understood if the young
Manxman were likely to be much the richer for the changes he is bringing
about. But he is not; the money that comes from England is largely taken
by English people, and comes back to England.


CONCLUSION

From these ungracious thoughts let me turn again, in a last word, to
the old island itself, the true Mannin-veg-Veen of the real Manxman. In
these lectures you have seen it only as in flashes from a dark lantern.
I am conscious that an historian would have told you so much more of
solid fact that you might have carried away tangible ideas. Fact is not
my domain, and I shall have to be content if in default of it I have got
you close to that less palpable thing, the living heart of Manx-land,
shown you our island, helped you to see its blue waters and to scent its
golden gorse, and to know the Manxman from other men. Sometimes I have
been half ashamed to ask you to look at our countrymen, so rude are they
and so primitive--russet-coated, currane-shod men and women, untaught,
superstitious, fishing the sea, tilling their stony land, playing next
to no part in the world, and only gazing out on it as a mystery far
away, whereof the rumour comes over the great waters. No great man among
us, no great event in our history, nothing to make us memorable. But I
have been re-assured when I have remembered that, after all, to look on
a life so simple and natural might even be a tonic. Here we are in the
heart of the mighty world, which the true Manxman knows only by vague
report; millions on millions huddled together, enough to make five
hundred Isles of Man, more than all the Manxmen that have lived since
the days of Orry, more than all that now walk on the island, added to
all that rest under it; streets on streets of us, parks on parks, living
a life that has no touch of Nature in the ways of it; save only in our
own breasts, which often rebel against our surroundings, struggling
with weariness under their artificiality, and the wild travesty of what
we are made for. Do what we will, and be what we may, sometimes we feel
the falseness of our ways of life, and surely it is then a good and
wholesome thing to go back in thought to such children of Nature as my
homespun Manx people, and see them where Nature placed them, breathing
the free air of God's proper world, and living the right lives of His
servants, though so simple, poor, and rude.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Little Manx Nation - 1891, by Hall Caine

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE MANX NATION - 1891 ***

***** This file should be named 25571.txt or 25571.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/5/7/25571/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
