The Project Gutenberg EBook of Northern Nut Growers Association, Report of
the Proceedings at the Seventh Annual Meeting, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Northern Nut Growers Association, Report of the Proceedings at the Seventh Annual Meeting
       Washington, D. C. September 8 and 9, 1916.

Author: Various

Editor: Northern Nut Growers Association

Release Date: May 25, 2008 [EBook #25597]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTHERN NUT GROWERS ASSOC. 1916 ***




Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





+------------------------------------------------------------------------+
|DISCLAIMER                                                              |
|                                                                        |
|The articles published in the Annual Reports of the Northern Nut Growers|
|Association are the findings and thoughts solely of the authors and are |
|not to be construed as an endorsement by the Northern Nut Growers       |
|Association, its board of directors, or its members. No endorsement is  |
|intended for products mentioned, nor is criticism meant for products not|
|mentioned. The laws and recommendations for pesticide application may   |
|have changed since the articles were written. It is always the pesticide|
|applicator's responsibility, by law, to read and follow all current     |
|label directions for the specific pesticide being used. The discussion  |
|of specific nut tree cultivars and of specific techniques to grow nut   |
|trees that might have been successful in one area and at a particular   |
|time is not a guarantee that similar results will occur elsewhere.      |
+------------------------------------------------------------------------+




NORTHERN NUT GROWERS ASSOCIATION

REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS AT THE SEVENTH ANNUAL MEETING

WASHINGTON, D. C. SEPTEMBER 8 AND 9, 1916.

PRESS OF The Advertiser-republican, ANNAPOLIS, MD.




CONTENTS

                                                                    PAGE

   Officers and Committees of the Association                          4
   Members of the Association                                          5

   Constitution and By-Laws                                           10

   Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Meeting                          13

   Report of the Secretary-Treasurer                                  14

   Notes on the Chinquapins, Dr. Robert T. Morris, New York           15

   The Black Walnut, T. P. Littlepage, Washington, D. C.              25

   Discussion on the Almond                                           33

   Discussion on the Hazel                                            37

   The Chestnut Bark Disease, Dr. Haven Metcalf, Washington, D. C.    41

   Discussion on Quarantine for Chestnut Nursery Stock                49

   Hybrids and Other New Chestnuts for Blight Districts, Dr. Walter
     Van Fleet, Washington, D. C.                                     54

   President's Address, Dr. J. Russell Smith, Roundhill, Va.          58

   Diseases of the Persian Walnut, S. M. McMurran, Washington, D. C.  67

   Discussion on Winter Killing                                       72

   Address of Col. C. A. Van Duzee, Cairo, Georgia                    75

   Resolutions on Chestnut Blight Quarantine                          80

   Resolution on Investigations in Nut Tree Propagation               84

   Discussion on the Growth and Fruiting of Pecans in the North       86

   Top Working Pecans on Other Hickories                              91

   Appendix:

   Letter from W. C. Reed, Vice-President                             98

   The Food Value of Nuts, Dr. J. H. Kellogg, Battle Creek, Mich.    101

   Letter from J. C. Cooper, McMinnville, Oregon                     114

   List of those present at the meeting                              117




OFFICERS OF THE ASSOCIATION

   _President_                W. C. REED            Vincennes, Indiana
   _Vice-President_           W. N. HUTT       Raleigh, North Carolina
   _Secretary and Treasurer_  W. C. DEMING     Georgetown, Connecticut


COMMITTEES

   _Auditing_--C. P. CLOSE, C. A. REED
   _Executive_--T. P. LITTLEPAGE, J. RUSSELL SMITH AND THE OFFICERS
   _Finance_--T. P. LITTLEPAGE, WILLARD G. BIXBY, W. C. DEMING
   _Hybrids_--R. T. MORRIS, C. P. CLOSE, W. C. DEMING, J. G. RUSH
   _Membership_--HARRY R. WEBER, R. T. OLCOTT, F. N. FAGAN, W. O. POTTER,
      W. C. DEMING, WENDELL P. WILLIAMS, J. RUSSELL SMITH
   _Nomenclature_--C. A. REED, R. T. MORRIS, R. L. MCCOY, J. F. JONES
   _Press and Publication_--RALPH T. OLCOTT, J. RUSSELL SMITH,
      W. C. DEMING
   _Programme_--W. C. DEMING, J. RUSSELL SMITH, C. A. REED, W. N. HUTT,
      R. T. MORRIS
   _Promising Seedlings_--C. A. REED, J. F. JONES, PAUL WHITE


STATE VICE-PRESIDENTS

   California      T. C. Tucker          311 California St., San Francisco
   Canada          G. H. Corsan          63 Avenue Road, Toronto
   Connecticut     Charles H. Plump      West Redding
   Delaware        E. R. Angst           527 Dupont Building, Wilmington
   Georgia         J. B. Wight           Cairo
   Illinois        H. A. Riehl           Alton
   Indiana         J. F. Wilkinson       Rockport
   Iowa            Wendell P. Williams   Danville
   Kentucky        A. L. Moseley         Calhoun
   Maryland        C. P. Close           College Park
   Massachusetts   James II. Bowditch    903 Tremont Building, Boston
   Michigan.       Miss Maude M. Jessup  440 Thomas St., Grand Rapids
   Minnesota       L. L. Powers          1018 Hudson Ave., St. Paul
   Missouri        P. C. Stark           Louisiana
   New Jersey      C. S. Ridgway         Lumberton
   New York        M. E. Wile            37 Calumet St., Rochester
   North Carolina  W. N. Hutt            Raleigh
   Ohio            Harry R. Weber        601 Gerke Building, Cincinnati
   Pennsylvania    J. G. Rush            West Willow
   Texas           R. S. Trumbull        M. S. R. R. Co., El Paso
   Virginia        John S. Parish        Eastham
   Washington      A. E. Baldwin         Kettle Falls
   West Virginia   B. F. Hartzell        Shepherdstown




MEMBERS OF THE NORTHERN NUT GROWERS ASSOCIATION

  CALIFORNIA
  Dawson, L. H., Llano
  Johnson, Chet, R. D. 1, Biggs
  Tucker, T. C., Manager California Almond Growers' Exchange,
    311 California St., San Francisco

  CANADA
  Corsan, G. H., University of Toronto
  Dufresne, Dr. A. A., 1872 Cartier St., Montreal
  Sager, Dr. D. S., Brantford

  CONNECTICUT
  Barnes, John R., Yalesville
  Deming, Dr. W. C., Georgetown
  Deming, Mrs. W. C., Georgetown.
  Goodwin, James L., Box 447, Hartford
  Hungerford, Newman, Torrington, R. 2, Box 76, for circulars, Box 1082,
    Hartford, for letters
  Ives, Ernest M., Sterling Orchards, Meriden
  Lay, Charles Downing, Wellesmere, Stratford
  Lewis, Henry Leroy, Stratford
  Mikkelsen, Mrs. M. A., Georgetown
 *Morris, Dr. Robert T., Cos Cob, R. 28, Box 95
  Plump, Charles II., West Redding
  Sessions, Albert L., Bristol
  Staunton, Gray, R. D. 30, Stamford
  White, Gerrard, North Granby
  Williams, W. W., Milldale

  DELAWARE
  Augst, E. R., 527 DuPont Building, Wilmington, Del.
  Lord, George Frank, care of DuPont Powder Company, Wilmington

  DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
  Close, Prof. C. P., Pomologist, Department of Agriculture, Washington
  Goddard, R. H., States' Relations Service, Washington
 *Littlepage, T. P., Union Trust Building, Washington
  Reed, C. A., Nut Culturist, Department of Agriculture, Washington

  GEORGIA
  Bullard, Wm. P., Albany
  Van Duzee, C. A., Judson Orchard Farm, Cairo
  Wight, J. B., Cairo

  ILLINOIS
  Casper, O. II., Anna
  Poll, Carl J, 1009 Maple St., Danville
  Potter, Hon. W. O., Marion
  Riehl, E. A., Alton

  INDIANA
  Hutchings, Miss Lida G., 118 Third St., Madison
  Lukens, Mrs. B., Anderson
  Reed, M. P., Vincennes
  Reed, W. C, Vincennes
  Wilkinson, J. F., Rockport
  Woolbright, Clarence, R. D. 3, Elnora

  IOWA
  Snyder, D. C., Center Point
  Williams, Wendell P., Danville

  KENTUCKY
  Matthews, Prof. C. W., Horticulturist, State Agricultural Station,
    Lexington
  Moseley, A. L., Bank of Calhoun, Calhoun

  MARYLAND
  Campbell, George D., Lonaconing
  Darby, R. U., Suite 804, Continental Building, Baltimore
  Hayden, Chas. S., 200 E. Lexington St., Baltimore
  Keenan, Dr. John N., Brentwood
  King, W. J., 232 Prince George St., Annapolis
  Kyner, James H., Bladensburg
  Littlepage, Miss Louise, Bowie
  Murray, Miss Annie C., Cumberstone
  Stabler, Henry, Hancock
  White, Paul, Bowie

  MASSACHUSETTS
 *Bowditch, James II., 903 Tremont Building, Boston
  Cleaver, C. Leroy, Hingham Center
  Cole, Mrs. George B., 15 Mystic Ave., Winchester
  Hoffman, Bernhard, Overbrook Orchard, Stockbridge
  Smith, Fred A., 39 Pine St., Danvers
  Vaughan, Horace A., Peacehaven, Assonet
  White, Warren, Holliston

  MICHIGAN
  Copland, Alexander W., Strawberry Hill Farm, Birmingham
  Jessup, Miss Maud M., 440 Thomas St., Grand Rapids
  Johnson, Franklin, Munising
  Kellogg, J. H., Battle Creek
  Staunton, Gray, Muskegon, Box 233

  MINNESOTA
  Powers, L. L., 1018 Hudson Ave., St. Paul

  MISSOURI
  Bauman, X. C., Ste. Genevieve
  Darche, J. H., Parkville
  Funston, E. S., 1521 Morgan St., St. Louis
  Phelps, Howe, Pine Hurst Dairy, Carthage
  Stark, P. C., Louisiana (Mo.)

  NEBRASKA
  Kurtz, John W., 5304 Bedford St., Omaha

  NEW JERSEY
  Black, Walter C., of Jos. H. Black, Son & Co., Hightstown
  Childs, Fred., Morristown, R. D. 2
  Jaques, Lee W., 74 Waverly St., Jersey City Heights
  Lovett, J. T., Little Silver
  Marston, Edwin S., Florham Park, Box 72
  Mechling, Edward A., Wonderland Farm, Moorestown
  Ridgeway, C. S. Floralia, Lumberton, N. J.
  Roberts, Horace, Moorestown
  Young, Frederick C., Palmyra, Box 335

  NEW YORK
  Abbott, Frederick B., 419 Ninth St., Brooklyn
  Atwater, C. G., The Barrett Co., 17 Battery Place, New York City
  Baker, Dr. Hugh P., Dean of State College of Forestry, Syracuse
  Baker, Prof. J. Fred, Director of Forest Investigations, State College
    of Forestry, Syracuse
  Baker, Wm. A., North Rose
  Bixby, Willard G., 46th St. and 2nd Ave., Brooklyn
  Brown, Ronald J., 320 Broadway, New York City
  Ellwanger, Mrs. W. D., 510 East Ave., Rochester
  Fullerton, H. B., Director Long Island Railroad Experiment Station,
    Medford, L. I.
  Haywood, Albert, Flushing
  Hickox, Ralph, 3832 White Plains Ave., New York City
  Holden, E. B., Hilton
 *Huntington, A. M., 15 W. 81st St., New York City
  Jackson, Dr. James H., Dansville
  Loomis, C. B., East Greenbush
  Miller, Milton R., Batavia, Box 394
  Morse, Geo. A., Fruit Acres, Williamson, N. Y.
  Nelson, Dr. James Robert, 23 Main St., Kingston-on-Hudson
  Olcott, Ralph T., Ellwanger & Barry Building, Rochester
  Palmer, A. C., New York Military Academy, Cornwall-on-Hudson
  Pannell, W. B., Pittsford
  Pomeroy, A. C., Lockport
  Rice, Mrs. Lillian McKee, Adelano, Pawling
  Simmons, A. L., State Highway Department, Albany
  Stuart, C. W., Newark
  Teele, A. W., 30 Broad St., New York City
  Teter, Walter C., 10 Wall St., New York City
  Thomson, Adelbert, East Avon
  Tuckerman, Bayard, 118 E. 37th St., New York City
  Ulman, Dr. Ira, 213 W. 147th St., New York City
  Wile, M. E., 37 Calumet St., Rochester
  Williams, Dr. Charles Mallory, 48 E. 49th St., New York City
 *Wissman, Mrs. F. de R., Westchester, New York City

  NORTH CAROLINA
  Glover, J. Wheeler, Morehead City
  Hutt, Prof. W. N., State Horticulturist, Raleigh
  Van Lindley, J., J. Van Lindley Nursery Company, Pomona
  Whitfield, Dr. Wm. Cobb, Grifton

  OHIO
  Dayton, J. H., Storrs & Harrison Company, Painesville
  Evans, Miss Myrta L., Briallen Farm, Oak Hill, Jackson County
  Miller, H. A., Gypsum
  Thorne, Charles E., Wooster, Agric. Exp. Sta.
  Weber, Harry E., 601 Gerke Building, Cincinnati
  Yunck, E. G., 710 Central Ave., Sandusky

  PENNSYLVANIA
  Druckemiller, W. C., Sunbury
  Fagan, Prof. P. N., Department of Horticulture, State College
  Grubbs, H. L., Fairview, R. 1
  Hall, Robt. W., 133 Church St., Bethlehem
  Harshman, U. W., Waynesboro
  Heffner, H., Highland Chestnut Grove, Leeper
  Hile, Anthony, Curwensville National Bank, Curwensville
  Hoopes, Wilmer W., Hoopes Brothers and Thomas Company, Westchester
  Hutchinson, Mahlon, Ashwood Farm, Devon, Chester County
  Jenkins, Charles Francis, Farm Journal, Philadelphia
 *Jones, J. P., Lancaster, Box 527
  Kaufman, M. M., Clarion
  Leas, F. C., 882 Drexel Building, Philadelphia, Mountain Brook Orchard
    Company, Salem, Va.
  Middleton, Fenton H., 1118 Chestnut St., Philadelphia
  Murphy, P. J., Vice-President L. & W. R. R. R. Company, Scranton
  O'Neill, Wm. C., 1328 Walnut St., Philadelphia
  Rheam, J. F., 45 N. Walnut St., Lewistown
  Rick, John, 438 Pennsylvania Sq., Reading
  Rife, Jacob A., Camp Hill
  Rush, J. G., West Willow
 *Sober, Col. C. K., Lewisburg
  Thomas, Joseph W., Jos. W. Thomas & Sons, King of Prussia P. O.
  Weaver, Wm. S., McCungie
  Webster, Mrs. Edmund, 1324 S. Broad St., Philadelphia
 *Wister, John C, Wister St. and Clarkson Ave., Germantown
  Wright, R. P., 235 W. 6th St., Erie

  SOUTH CAROLINA
  Shanklin, Prof. A. G., Clemson College

  TENNESSEE
  Marr, Thomas S., 701 Stahlman Building, Nashville

  TEXAS
  Burkett, J. H., Nut Specialist, State Dept, of Agric., Clyde
  Trumbull, R. S., Agricultural Agent, El Paso & S. W. System, Morenci
    Southern Railroad Company, El Paso

  VIRGINIA
  Crockett, E. B., Monroe
  Engleby, Thos. L., 1002 Patterson Ave., Roanoke
  Lee, Lawrence R., Leesburg
  Miller, L. O., Miller & Rhodes, Richmond
  Parish, John S., Eastham, Albemarle County
  Shackford, Theodore B., care of Adams Brothers-Paynes Company, Lynchburg
  Smith, Dr. J. Russell, Roundhill

  WASHINGTON
  Baldwin, Dr. A. E., Kettle Falls
  Rogers, Dr. Albert, Okanogan

  WEST VIRGINIA
  Hartzell, B. F., Shepherdstown

    * Life member.




CONSTITUTION

ARTICLE I

_Name._ This society shall be known as the NORTHERN NUT GROWERS
ASSOCIATION.

ARTICLE II

_Object._ Its object shall be the promotion of interest in nut-bearing
plants, their products and their culture.

ARTICLE III

_Membership._ Membership in the society shall be open to all persons who
desire to further nut culture, without reference to place of residence
or nationality, subject to the rules and regulations of the committee on
membership.

ARTICLE IV

_Officers._ There shall be a president, a vice-president and a
secretary-treasurer, who shall be elected by ballot at the annual
meeting; and an executive committee of five persons, of which the
president, two last retiring presidents, vice-president and
secretary-treasurer shall be members. There shall be a state
vice-president from each state, dependency or country represented in the
membership of the association, who shall be appointed by the president.

ARTICLE V

_Election of Officers._ A committee of five members shall be elected at
the annual meeting for the purpose of nominating officers for the
following year.

ARTICLE VI

_Meetings._ The place and time of the annual meeting shall be selected
by the membership in session or, in the event of no selection being made
at this time, the executive committee shall choose the place and time
for the holding of the annual convention. Such other meetings as may
seem desirable may be called by the president and executive committee.

ARTICLE VII

_Quorum._ Ten members of the association shall constitute a quorum, but
must include a majority of the executive committee or two of the three
elected officers.

ARTICLE VIII

_Amendments._ This constitution may be amended by a two-thirds vote of
the members present at any annual meeting, notice of such amendment
having been read at the previous annual meeting, or a copy of the
proposed amendment having been mailed by any member to each member
thirty days before the date of the annual meeting.




BY-LAWS

ARTICLE I

_Committees._ The association shall appoint standing committees as
follows: On membership, on finance, on programme, on press and
publication, on nomenclature, on promising seedlings, on hybrids, and an
auditing committee. The committee on membership may make recommendations
to the association as to the discipline or expulsion of any member.

ARTICLE II

_Fees._ The fees shall be of two kinds, annual and life. The former
shall be two dollars, the latter twenty dollars.

ARTICLE III

_Membership._ All annual memberships shall begin with the first day of
the calendar quarter following the date of joining the association.

ARTICLE IV

_Amendments._ By-laws may be amended by a two-thirds vote of members
present at any annual meeting.




Northern Nut Growers Association

SEVENTH ANNUAL MEETING

SEPTEMBER 8 AND 9, 1916

WASHINGTON, D. C.


The seventh annual meeting of the Northern Nut Growers Association was
called to order in rooms 42-43 of the new building of the National
Museum at Washington, D. C., on Friday, September 8th, at 10 a. m., the
president, Dr. J. Russell Smith, presiding.

THE PRESIDENT: It is often customary to start meetings of this sort with
a considerable amount of eloquence, such as an address of welcome by
some high city or state official, a response to the address of welcome
by some one else high in authority, and so on, during which the visitors
are told of the many privileges they may enjoy, "the keys of the town"
are handed over to them, and a good deal of high-flown oratory is
indulged in. We suppose that the people in attendance at this meeting
are so well acquainted with Washington that those preliminaries are
unnecessary, and I have been informed by the members of the local
committee that we can dispense with the frills in this case and proceed
with the business of the meeting, which we think is going to rather
crowd our time if we get said all that we want to say. We are going to
devote this morning's programme first to a paper by Dr. Robert T. Morris
on the chinquapin, and then to the discussion of a comparatively newly
considered member of our nut family, namely, the American black walnut.
We have been heretofore much interested in sundry exotics and talking
far too little about this great tree nearer home.

Before taking up the technical programme we have a few matters of
business to put through. First, we will have the report of the secretary
and treasurer.




   REPORT OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER

   Balance on hand date of last report                    $ 140.24
   Receipts:
       Dues                                                 292.75
       Advertisements                                        21.00
       Contributions                                          5.50
       Sale of report                                        34.75
       Contributions for prizes                              10.00
       Miscellaneous                                           .65
                                                           -------
                                                                   $504.89

   Expenses:
       Printing report                                   $  142.56
       Envelopes for report                                   9.00
       Miscellaneous printing                                32.50
       Postage and stationery                                49.26
       Stenographer                                          26.35
       Express and freight                                    2.77
       Prizes                                                18.00
       Checks, J. R. S. expenses and circulars              180.00
       Lantern operator                                       3.00
       Litchfield Savings Society                            20.00
                                                           -------
                                                                   $483.44
                                                                   -------
       Balance on hand                                              $21.45

Receipts from all sources, except sale of reports, have fallen off
markedly, as have new members, 31 less than last year, though we have
now 154 paid up members, one more than last year. 10 members have
resigned and 42 have been dropped for non-payment of dues. We have lost
one member by death, Herbert R. Orr, of Washington.

The committees on membership and on finance should be more active.

Our annual report constitutes the minutes of the last meeting. Our nut
contest and other matters of interest have been reported through the
columns of the American Nut Journal, our official organ.

[Accepted.]

THE PRESIDENT: Next in order of business is the first step toward the
election of officers for the ensuing year. It is our custom to have a
nominating committee elected at an early session. They deliberate and
bring forward a slate which is voted on at a later session. This morning
is a suitable time for the election of a committee, and tomorrow morning
will be a suitable time for their report. Are there any nominations for
the Nominating Committee?

MR. M. P. REED: Mr. President, I move that Dr. Morris, Mr. C. P. Close,
Mr. C. A. Reed, Prof. Stabler and Dr. Ira Ulman be appointed as the
Nominating Committee.

THE PRESIDENT: Are there any other nominations?

MR. C. A. REED: Mr. President, I would like to ask that Mr. Littlepage's
name replace my name on that committee.

THE PRESIDENT: Will the nominating member accept that amendment?

MR. M. P. REED: Yes, sir.

THE PRESIDENT: Are there any other nominations? Do I hear a second to
the nominations?

A MEMBER: Second it.

[Carried.]

THE PRESIDENT: Are there any other committees to report at this time?

THE SECRETARY: There is a Committee on Incorporation.

MR. T. P. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President, the Committee on Incorporation has
done some investigating as to the desirability of incorporating the
Association, and also, if desirable, under what laws, but that committee
has not yet made any final report nor come to any final conclusion, and
I would suggest, as a member of the committee, that the committee be
continued and instructed to report the following year.

THE PRESIDENT: I think that it is unnecessary to vote on the continuance
of the committee, as it was appointed with indefinite tenure. We will
proceed with the programme and first have the pleasure of listening to
Dr. Morris.




NOTES ON THE CHINQUAPINS.

DR. ROBERT T. MORRIS, NEW YORK

According to Sargent the chinquapin (_Castanea pumila_) occupies dry
sandy ridges, rich hillsides and the borders of swamps from southern
Pennsylvania to northern Florida and the valley of the Neches River in
Texas. He states that this chestnut is usually shrubby in the region
east of the Alleghany Mountains, and assuming the tree form west of the
Mississippi River. Most abundant and of largest size in southern
Arkansas and eastern Texas.

Curiously enough there are chinquapins also in northeastern Asia which
occur as understudies of the larger chestnuts, very much as they do in
America.

The indigenous range of the chinquapin in America is limited northward
by a plan of nature for checking distribution of the species. This plan
is manifested in a habit which the nuts have of sprouting immediately
upon falling in the early autumn. They proceed busily to make a tap root
which may become several inches in length before frost calls a halt. In
the north where the warm season is not long enough to allow the autumn
sprout to lignify sufficiently for bearing the rigors of winter it is
killed. If we protect the small autumn plants, or if we transplant older
seedlings from their natural habitat, they may be grown easily far north
of their indigenous range. Thrifty chinquapins are happy in the Arnold
Arboretum at Jamaica Plain in Massachusetts, and no one knows but they
might be cultivated in Nova Scotia and Minnesota.

The American chinquapin is one of the many beautiful and valuable plants
which have not as yet been taken up by horticulturists for extensive
development. It promises to become one of our important sources of food
supply for tomorrow. If we were to develop all of our plant resources at
once it would be an unkindness to the horticulturists of two thousand
years from now, who would be left moping around with nothing to do.
Chinquapin nuts borne in heavy profusion by the plants are delicious in
quality, but usually too small to attract customers aside from the wood
folk. The wood of the chinquapin of tree form (_C. pumila var.
arboriformis_) is valuable for purposes to which wood of the common
American chestnut is put, and some of the tree chinquapins acquire an
earned increment of two or three feet diameter of trunk, and a height of
more than fifty feet. The bush chinquapin on the other hand feels rather
exclusive when attaining a height of as much as fifteen feet.

I present for inspection a freshly cut branch from an ordinary bush
chinquapin, loaded with burs, indicating the prolific nature of the
variety. The nuts in this particular specimen are small. The next branch
exhibited is from a similar bush, but with nuts quite as large as those
of the average common chestnut. The horticulturist has only to graft or
bud his ordinary run of chinquapin stocks from some one bush which bears
large nuts, and he will then have a valuable graded market product. The
larger the nut the less prolific the plant is a rule which holds good
with the fruiting of almost any plant.

Look at this branch from a tree chinquapin. It is not remarkable in any
way, but the leaves seem to be a little larger than those of the bush
chinquapin. My tree chinquapins came from Stark's nursery in Missouri.
The first two which came into bearing had nuts quite as large as those
of the common chestnut and I imagined that a discovery of value had been
made, but other trees of this variety later bore very small nuts, and
all of the tree chinquapin nuts, large and small, were much duller in
color than those of the bush chinquapin. My final conclusion is that so
far as nuts alone are concerned we may plant and cultivate either the
tree variety or the bush variety of the species and then bud or graft
any number of stocks from some one plant which bears the best product.

DR. AUGUSTUS STABLER: Is it a somewhat finer grained wood than the
ordinary chestnut?

DR. MORRIS: I think it is. All the chestnuts have rather coarse wood. It
is strong, hard, durable, and valuable. This chinquapin wood is somewhat
coarse grained, but, for comparison with the American chestnut, I don't
know. I imagine it is finer grained.

DR. AUGUSTUS STABLER: I know that the chinquapin wood is very much
tougher than the American chestnut.

DR. MORRIS: Oh, yes. You cannot break the branches so easily.

Here is a branch from a hybrid between a chinquapin and a common
American chestnut (_Castanea dentata_). The leaves and bark, you will
observe, are very much like those of the larger parent. The burs are
borne singly or in small groups like those of the common chestnut,
instead of being crowded in dense clusters like chinquapin burs. There
are two or three nuts to the bur, while the chinquapin has normally, but
one nut to the bur. This particular hybrid tree showed an interesting
peculiarity. During the first two seasons of bearing it had but one nut
to the bur, and this was of chinquapin character. In the third year its
nuts were still borne singly, but they were lighter in color than before
and oddly corrugated at the base. As the tree became older its chestnut
parentage influence pre-dominated, and the tree began to bear two or
three nuts to the bur, and more like chestnuts in character, becoming
smooth again at the base.

I have a number of hybrids between chinquapins and various species and
varieties of other chestnuts, but none of these as yet has produced nuts
of marked value. There seems to be a tendency for the coarseness of the
larger nuts to prevail in the hybrids, a certain loss of gentility
beneath a showy exterior.

The next branch which I present for inspection is from a most beautiful
member of the chestnut family, the alder-leaved chestnut (_Castanea
alnifolia_). It is classed among the chinquapins in Georgia where the
plant is nearly if not quite evergreen. At Stamford it is deciduous very
late in the autumn, but sometimes a green leaf will be found in
February, where snow or dead leaves on the ground have furnished a
protecting covering. The notable value of this species is perhaps in its
decorative character for lawns, although the nuts are first rate. The
dark green brilliant leaves are striking in appearance, and the shrub is
inclined toward a trailing habit, much like that of some of the
junipers. This species is one of my pets at Merribrooke, and a perennial
source of wonder that nurserymen have not as yet pounced upon it for
purposes of exaggeration and misstatement in their annual catalogues.

All of these specimens shown today are from my country place at
Stamford, Connecticut, where the mercury in the thermometer leads one to
make quotations relating to the Eve of Saint Agnes; five or ten degrees
below the zero of Fahrenheit occasionally, and once down to twenty
degrees below without injury to any kind of chestnut so far as I could
observe.

I cannot make an exhibit of the golden-leaved chinquapin, from the
Pacific slope, because tragedy came to all of my little trees of this
species, and like most of the Pacific slope plants they are not very
joyous in the east. One lot lived through one winter at Merribrooke, but
they were the first green things that my cows saw in the springtime, and
further comment would be surplus. A single specimen took courage in its
root and grew finely until autumn, but it was near a path and somebody
pulled it up and left it lying stark naked on the ground. Botanists have
recently made two species of the golden-leaved chinquapin, one of the
species attaining a height of more than one hundred feet. If
horticulturists will secure specimens of _Castanopsis chrysophilla_ from
the region of Mount Shasta in California I presume that this beautiful
evergreen chinquapin may be taught to grow in some of our gardens. It is
cultivated in the gardens of temperate Europe. In our north it should be
planted close to a running brook, where the roots of young trees can
carry water in plenty to the evergreen top while the ground is frozen
hard in winter.

Our common chinquapin of the east is perhaps the one that will be
cultivated most profitably in the region between the Rocky Mountains
and the Atlantic coast. The beauty of freshly picked bush chinquapin
nuts is not rivalled by that of any other kind of nut that I have ever
seen. The exquisitely polished mahogany color comes out of a light downy
cloud near the apex of the nut, dark as midnight for a moment and then
shading through glows of lively chestnut until it dawns in a dreamy
cream color at the base, with just enough suggestion of green to temper
the reds.

If any gourmet with a color soul could serve each one of his friends to
a plate of twenty freshly picked bush chinquapins along with two Bennett
persimmons, and all resting upon late September leaves of tupelo or of
sweet gum the friends would remain and live at his expense while the
combination lasted.

Furthermore, the children must always be taken into consideration along
with chinquapin questions. According to authorities on the subject of
decadence, we do not care very much about the children in these days. If
some old-fashioned folks still remain, and if these old-fashioned folks
do not take any particular personal interest in the beautiful garden and
lawn trees that America has held out towards us in the chinquapins, they
may at least plant a few of them because of the social standing that
will follow. How so? Well, you see, it's because the parents of elite
children will run over for a little visit in order to find out why the
children do not come home. Then again, we are kind to dumb animals when
raising chinquapins. Squirrels and white-footed mice, crows and blue
jays are full of enthusiasm for the nuts, and they will assume the
responsibility of gathering the crop if the matter is left in their
charge.

This is really a funny country; something of a joke of a country when
you come to think of it. Instead of setting out trees that will become
both useful and beautiful, in accordance with the old Greek ideal of
combining beauty and utility we set out Norway spruces that will make
people hate evergreens in general. We set out poplars and all sorts of
bunches of leaves in our parks and along the highways, instead of trees
still more beautiful that would yield tons of coupon dollars every
autumn. _De gustibus non est disputandum!_

When experimenting with hybridization of chinquapins, I ran across a
phenomenon of new interest to botanists, and quite accidentally. A
number of clusters of pistillate flowers of the bush chinquapin had been
covered with paper bags, but not pollenized because of a shortage of
pollen. An active man with a good sense of neatness and order would have
removed those bags merely for the sake of appearance, but I was lazy
and allowed the bags to remain for two or three weeks. When they were
finally removed, it was found that the branches had set quite full of
fruit, although not so full as other branches that had been pollenized
from oaks. We were evidently dealing with an instance of
parthenogenesis. The flowers that had received oak pollen did not show
any oak parentage later in their progeny, and it was observed in other
experiments in other years that almost any cupuliferous pollen would
start cells of the chinquapin ovary into division and into the
development of fertile nuts, but without inclusion of the pollen cell in
a gamete. For purposes of convenience in thinking I have temporarily
called this phenomenon "stereochemic parthenogenesis." Apparently the
propinquity of foreign pollen serves to stimulate a female cell into
division, although the pollen cell retains fixed molecular identity, and
does not fuse with the female cell. I need not bring up abstruse
questions of chromatin or of subatomic influence here.

At Stamford the bush chinquapins begin to blossom regularly about the
twelfth of June, irrespective of weather conditions. The tree
chinquapins blossom a little later, but the alder-leaved chestnut may
not blossom until July, later than the common American chestnut. The
bush chinquapins begin to open their burs very regularly about the
fifteenth of September; earlier than any other chestnuts. They bear at
an early age, sometimes in their fifth summer.

Grafting and budding is easily done among all of the chestnuts as a
rule, and this year I employed for the first time a large chinquapin
bush for top-working with the choice Merribrooke variety of the common
chestnut. Every one of the grafts caught, and some of them have grown
tremendously. This introduces an interesting question. May we graft the
common American chestnut upon bush chinquapin stocks and secure
precocious bearing? In that case we shall have trees like the dwarf
apple and pear trees that are readily pruned and sprayed.

The chinquapin is practically immune to the blight (_Endothia
parasitica_.) Easily blighting varieties of choice American chestnuts
may be grafted upon these blight resistant stocks in orchard form if my
experiment proves to be a success. It will not lessen the vulnerability
of the American chestnut, but dwarf trees will be within reach of the
horticulturist's pruning knife and spray outfit. Orchards of fine
varieties of the common chestnut may perhaps be maintained in this way
until the present epidemic of Endothia has expended its protoplasmic
energy, or until it has succumbed to microbic parasites of its own.


THE PRESIDENT: Are there any questions to put to Dr. Morris?

THE SECRETARY: I venture to say that a good many people have tried, in
the north, to raise the chinquapin, and I would like to have Dr. Morris
tell us what to do to get it to grow best, whether to buy the trees from
the nurserymen, or to plant the nuts, and just how to do it.

PROF. C. P. CLOSE: I would like to ask Dr. Morris about those
chinquapins that set without the application of pollen, whether they
fill well and whether they sprout at planting?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: With us out in Maryland it isn't a question of producing
the chinquapin; we cut the bushes down every year by the thousands; we
have nothing at all against it, but we have found that the weevil has
been absolutely unsurmountable with us. It is the only discouraging
thing about it in this part of the country. Around Washington the
chinquapin is a weed tree, and if you gather a peck of chinquapins you
will find that the whole peck, in two weeks, have turned to weevils.
Perhaps Dr. Morris can tell us what to do about that, and put us on the
road to success.

THE PRESIDENT: I should like to ask Dr. Morris two questions, first, as
to the possibility of utilizing the western tree chinquapins as stocks
for the larger eastern chinquapins with nuts of chestnut size. Is there
a possibility thus of getting a larger tree?

The second question is akin to that--utilization of the western tree as
a stock for a hybrid chinquapin which might have arboreal possibilities
and enough chinquapin qualities to be blight-resistant.

DR. STABLER: I am very much interested in Dr. Morris' proposition to
produce dwarf chestnut trees by grafting on chinquapin stocks. Now, the
difficulty I would expect to encounter is the same as when pecans are
grafted on hickory, and when sweet cherries are grafted on Mahaleb,
namely, that the root is not sufficiently vigorous to support the top.
The fact that his grafts grew so tremendously when put on the chinquapin
roots would look as though that might occur.

THE PRESIDENT: The audience seems to have run out of questions.

DR. MORRIS: All right, sir. First, how are we to grow chinquapins? Plant
as soon as the nuts have fallen. Put them in a cage. I have wire cages
that are about eight inches high, and about two feet wide and three feet
long. I plant all the nuts there. They have wire mesh tops to keep out
the rodents; that is the important thing. All nuts, I find, are best
planted under conditions which simulate the normal conditions. Our nut
trees are not as yet domesticated. They haven't learned bad habits, and
they depend upon peculiarly favorable conditions of moisture, warmth and
light. You plant a nut two inches below the surface, but nature doesn't
do anything like that. Consequently, that nut is surprised, doesn't know
what to do, and stays down there looking for something to happen. But if
you put that nut so it is about half buried in the sand, so that it is
damp on one side and the sun strikes it on the other side, and the frost
and snow affect it naturally, the nut does just what you want it to do.
It gets out of that uncomfortable condition and begins to grow.
(Laughter.) When planting any nuts, I place them in the sand and leave
one side exposed to light, moisture, frost, and the observation of
visitors. When I have sprouted chinquapins in the north and there is
danger of their not lignifying when the ground begins to freeze, I put a
lot of little sticks upright amongst them, so that my mulch will not
bear too heavily upon the chinquapins, and then cover them with several
inches of oak leaves, or any good, strong leaves that will not pack too
tightly. That mulch of loose leaves will protect the sprouted nuts
perfectly during the winter in Connecticut, so they all start growing in
the next spring.

Another way is to buy chinquapin stocks from any of the nurserymen,
stocks two or three years old, which begin to bear when four or five
years of age.

Professor Close, I think it was, who asked if the nuts were fertile,
both the ones that developed without fertilization by any pollen and the
ones that developed by stereochemic parthenogenesis--by the influence of
neighboring pollen. Both sorts are fertile, and I presume that the
effect of that would be similar to the effect of close inbreeding. In
other words, we would have intensification of characteristics of some
one parent. If you get parthenogenesis through two or three generations
I presume that same peculiar feature of the original parent would become
so intensified as to become a marked feature of the progeny. This offers
a new line of cleavage for horticultural investigation. I am very glad
that you raised that question.

Answering Mr. Littlepage, I have apparently managed to get some crosses
back and forth between chestnuts, and oaks, and beech, this year. I have
a number of those crosses now under way that are apparently good
hybrids.

DR. STABLER: A cross between a chestnut and a beech?

DR. MORRIS: Yes, I think so. You see, I have got to wait a year or so
until the plants develop later characteristics. All of these parent
trees are pretty closely related, you see. The blooming period between
the different ones may be as much as two or three weeks, or three months
apart, in fact. I have cross pollinated hazels and oaks, this year. The
way to do that is to find correspondents at the extreme limit of the
blossoming range of the species, who will send pollen. For instance,
Professor Hume, in Florida, sends me chestnut pollen in time to cross my
oaks, and Professor Conser, of the University of Maine, has some beeches
that blossom in time for me to cross with chinquapins and oak trees.
That is one way to do it.

Another way is to put your pollen in cold storage with some sphagnum
moss, just put a little damp moss in your box with the pollen and put it
in cold storage, and keep it at just about forty, above the freezing
point. Another way is to put branches with dormant flower buds in cold
storage. Hazels, for instance, may be kept for six months in this way.
Put them in water, in the sun, and you soon have flowers furnishing
pollen. I would take up the whole session of two days here if you were
to ask too many questions along that line. (Laughter.)

Mr. Littlepage's question about the weevils. The question may be settled
very easily where there are not many chinquapin trees. That is the case
in Connecticut. Collect all the nuts, and you collect all of the weevil
larvae. Curiously enough, the common chestnut weevil, that had become
very abundant, has disappeared locally with the disappearance of our
American chestnut, and has not attacked our chinquapins. If you have an
orchard of chinquapins and collect all the nuts you will soon dispose of
the weevils. That is the only way that I know of for disposing of the
weevils. Eat them up. (Laughter.) You can pick out the weevil chestnuts
fairly well if you toss all of the nuts into a cup of water and pick
out the ones that float. Pound them up with a mallet and throw them
into the chicken coop.

Dr. Smith asks if the use of the tree chinquapin as a stock for the
American chestnut would give good-sized trees. Undoubtedly, and, besides
that, if it is used for hybridizing purposes, we shall probably find
that we have, now and then, an individual that is very much larger than
the American chestnut or the tree chinquapin. It is a peculiarity of
hybrids to show eccentricities, and many hybrids that occur are very
thrifty and larger than either parent. That is the case with the Royal
walnut that they have said so much about in California. It grows so
rapidly there that even Californians do not dare to tell about it.
(Laughter.)

Another question, the last one--will the effect of using a bush
chinquapin stock for the American chestnut be like that of growing sour
cherries upon stocks which do not carry them well? Now, we have there
what the lawyers call "a question of fact," and we shall have to work
that out. Some tops will exhaust a root. Some tops will grab a root by
the back of the neck and drag it right along. Some tops will adjust
themselves philosophically to almost any sort of unusual conditions, and
go on and bear fruit like true philosophers. We have an instance of that
in the dwarf apple, which is a success. We have an instance of failure
in some of the cherries which exhaust themselves. We have an example of
dragging the smaller stock along when we graft the Royal walnut upon the
common black walnut. The Royal walnut just drags the black walnut along
where it doesn't want to go at all. So there we have three instances of
grafting a foreign visitor upon another stock.

I have taken more than my share of time, Mr. Chairman, but the
discussion has been very interesting, indeed. (Applause.)

THE PRESIDENT: I am going to take the liberty of asking Dr. Morris one
more question, which, perhaps, is of interest to others. In your
experience with the golden-leafed chinquapins, from how far South have
you secured stock, and how far North will the golden-leafed chinquapin
grow?

DR. MORRIS: My specimens I got from a dealer in Portland, Oregon, and
they grew pretty far North. The tree ranges from Oregon and Washington
down through the lower extremities of the Coast range, but we had better
get the northern forms, and there is one man, Carl Purdy, of Ukiah,
California, who has the golden chinquapin for sale.

THE PRESIDENT: The next subject on the programme is the American black
walnut. We have sent to the membership a series of questions about the
black walnut which I will read for the benefit of those who haven't this
programme.

First. What evidence is there to show that the black walnut may become a
valuable nut commercially?

Second. Is quality important with the black walnut, and is there much
difference in the quality of different nuts?

Third. What varieties of black walnut are most promising?

Fourth. Is the Thomas black walnut better than many others that have
been brought to notice?

Fifth. What are the best methods of propagating?

Now, we have no set paper on that subject. I will call on ex-President
Littlepage to make a few sallies concerning the black walnut.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President, the black walnut ought to be the easiest
subject in the world to talk about. It is a question of how much one
ought not to say, however, in a limited time. The pecan tree was my
first love. I shall always stick to the pecan. But if I were called upon
today, to point out to this Association or to any prospective grower who
actually wants to make money raising nuts, and who wants something that
will pay the grocery bill and his sixty or ninety day notes, I think I
should tell them to plant the black walnut. And I don't think, either,
that that is treason, because I think, as we go through with this
programme, the pecan will be properly taken care of.

In the first place, the black walnut is a native tree. I have seen it
growing, too, on the Gulf of Mexico, and in the Dominion of Canada. Most
native trees are immune to fungous and bacterial diseases that destroy
so many trees. The black walnut is a hardy tree, and a fine timber
proposition. In the second place, it is a fast growing tree. I don't
knew just how quickly one could actually produce a black walnut orchard,
but, outside of a few trees, such as the black locust and a number of
others that do not produce nuts, the black walnut is one of the fastest
growers. If you will feed a young walnut tree a small application of
wood ashes and some stable manure it will commonly make a growth of six
or seven feet a year. Therefore, you don't have to wait a long time for
walnut trees to come into bearing.

It is easy to propagate the black walnut. Cleft grafting is one of the
simplest methods in the spring. Dormant wood, cut in February or March
and put in cold storage, and cleft grafted in the spring, ought to give
from sixty to seventy per cent of success. I haven't had experience
budding, but those who have say it is easy. Mr. Roper says it is, but
grafting is easy and simple. The walnut, like other nut trees, must be
propagated by budding or grafting in order to come true. It will not
come true from seed.

Up until a few years ago I seldom saw a whole half of a black walnut.
The ordinary black walnut cracks about like this (showing picture). Here
is a black walnut cracked with two halves, and you can't even see the
kernel. The two upper pictures show very beautiful walnuts, but they
defy you to get out a whole kernel.

Now, then, when you come to a black walnut like this (showing picture),
where you can crack out anywhere from fifty to seventy-five per cent of
whole halves, and many entirely whole kernels, the most important
problem is solved, and the black walnut has come into the competition.

This variety was discovered by Henry Stabler, and I named it after him.
Perhaps one out of every ten of these nuts furnishes a whole, solid,
undivided kernel. The other walnut is the ordinary field walnut that has
little commercial value for the reason that you can't get the kernels
out. It wouldn't make any difference if the nuts grew as big as pumpkins
and a million of them on a tree if you couldn't get the meat out of
them. I suppose no one will question that the black walnut will grow and
bear almost anywhere. It is a weed tree in this part of the country. On
President Smith's farm last year I saw them growing everywhere. They
grow and bear all over the fields. And, as I said, the question of
propagation is rather simple. I think the great trouble we are up
against on the farm in America is labor, and that is because you cannot
afford to pay good labor. You want a superabundance of laborers in the
summer time for two or three months, and expect them to loaf all winter.
The farm proposition isn't a profitable one, very largely because of the
question of labor, and the farmers of this country must produce
something profitable enough to enable them to hire and pay high-grade
labor the year round, or they will go broke. They must raise such crops
as Alfalfa that they can feed to their dairy cattle, and tree crops that
they can use their labor on in the winter time. Nine men are leaving the
farm today for every one going there. If you don't believe it, read the
census statistics. The reason is labor and because you can't afford to
pay it. I don't think there is any profit in selling the black walnut as
a nut, but there will be profit in gathering that nut, storing it, and,
when your farm crops are all in and you are ready to discharge the
labor, put up an ordinary cheap cracking shed and let them crack the
nuts for you, and sell the meats. That solves the question of what to do
with farm labor in the winter time. The walnuts return about ten pounds
of meat to a bushel, and a good cracker ought to crack from four to six
bushels of nuts a day. Suppose you get only twenty-five cents a pound
for the meats and your men crack only three bushels a day, each there is
$7.50 a day coming in from each cracker, and, besides, you have made a
valuable employment for your labor through the winter, and you can
afford to pay them for their work. That is why I say the black walnut
is, to my mind, one of the best commercial propositions.

I don't know how soon you can bring a black walnut orchard into bearing.
Here is a picture of a tree probably seven or eight years old, loaded
with nuts. That is a seedling tree. I should think a budded tree would
bear sooner than that.

I don't know much about walnut varieties. The Rush and Thomas are
excellent nuts. But this Stabler walnut, in my opinion, is in a class by
itself in cracking possibilities. It is simply a cracking proposition
with the black walnut, and that is, to my mind, about all there is to
it. Perhaps, other good varieties will be discovered. Then, suppose we
find, after a while, an English walnut much better and more profitable
than we have at present, and one that is blight resistant. If you have
an orchard of black walnuts you have an ideal stock to top-work to
English. I will show you one on my farm with a larger top than I cut off
grown in two summers, and it set some nuts last spring. So, if you want
a foundation for an English walnut orchard, you can't make any mistake
in planting the budded or grafted varieties of these black walnuts.

The black walnut is a beautiful roadside tree. There are different
types, the same as with the pecan tree. Here is a picture of curly black
walnut wood. The logs were cut from a tree in Kentucky. It took three
wagons to haul this one tree to market, and it brought thirty-five
hundred dollars.

THE PRESIDENT: I wish to present Mr. Stabler as the original propagator
of the tree that bears his name. The nuts of the Stabler black walnut
have been pronounced by a good many authorities as the best variety thus
far discovered.

MR. HENRY STABLER: Dr. Smith has just introduced me as the discoverer of
this walnut. This is hardly fair to Mr. Littlepage, who first introduced
and, probably, first propagated this walnut. It was discovered by my
grandfather a little over forty years ago. Nothing was done with it at
that time for the reason that nothing could be done, but I was not the
first one to get the idea of propagating it, because my father, who is
here today, attempted to graft these walnuts, and every cion failed.

It seems to me that Mr. Littlepage strikes the key-note in his article
in _The Country Gentleman_ last spring when he says that:

"Through the efforts of the Northern Nut Growers' Association there was
recently discovered a black walnut tree in Howard County, Maryland,
producing nuts that crack out seventy-five to eighty per cent of whole
halves. The meat of this variety, the Stabler, weighs forty-seven per
cent of the whole nut."

That's it, gentlemen. I did not discover this walnut, and without the
organization of the Northern Nut Growers' Association I could not have
done any more with it than my grandfather was able to do forty years
ago, but, as it was, we just took up several samples and the Northern
Nut Growers did the rest. The walnut has been attracting more and more
attention ever since.

Considering the black walnut as timber, here is a picture of a black
walnut log, published in Farmers' Bulletin No. 715, of the Department of
Agriculture. The original owner, a farmer, sold the whole tree,
standing, for fifty dollars; the buyer felled it at a cost of fifteen
dollars, and sold it there for $138.26. It was resold, without being
removed, for $164.84, and later sold (the last price is not published)
to a large sewing machine factory, but it certainly brought more than
that last price which is printed, of $164.84. We occasionally hear of
prices of $100 or so being paid for black walnut trees on the stump. The
reason we don't hear of such prices being paid more frequently is
because the farmer in not more than one case out of twenty gets real
value for his black walnut trees. There is a very highly organized and
efficient system in the United States of gathering up the black walnut
trees which are large enough to use for furniture and other purposes and
paying for them as little as possible; but they make a practice of
getting them even if they do have to pay more. There was a man living
not so far from where I live, up in our country, who had a very fine
black walnut tree standing in his yard. One day a man came around and
entered into conversation with him, and said, "Mr. Harder, what will you
take for that tree in your yard?" "It isn't for sale," said Mr. Harder.
"Well," said the man, "I'll give you a hundred dollars for it." Mr.
Harder merely shook his head. The buyer dickered along a little bit more
and after a while said, "I'll tell you what I'll do; I'll give you $150
for that tree." Mr. Harder said "If you don't get off this place, sir,
immediately, I'll shoot you."

I am prepared to say that if you are going to plant trees for timber
there is no other tree which will give such a yield as the black walnut,
with the exception of the catalpa, and, perhaps, the black locust. It is
the most valuable tree we have, and it is the most valuable wood grown
in the North. I don't believe, either, the black walnut will ever be
less valuable than it is. I know positively that the Stabler tree is not
over sixty-five years old, perhaps, not over sixty, and yet that tree,
judging from the prices I have seen paid for other trees of similar
size, is worth from $125 to $150 on the stump. From the time that tree
started until now, it has increased in value at the rate of two dollars
a year, for timber alone, to say nothing of the nut. Suppose the tree
had been purchased sixty years ago at two dollars from the nurseryman.
It would have paid one hundred per cent annually on the investment. It
bears, as a regular thing, a crop every other year.

As to what Mr. Pomeroy said about the black walnut not cracking well and
crumbling up when it gets to be old, I have some specimens here of the
Stabler walnut I cracked this morning, which are of the 1915 crop.

The kernel of these old nuts keeps its flavor and sweetness wonderfully.
There is hardly any change in quality within one year, whereas some
other nuts, as the hazel and some varieties of the pecan, become rancid
after keeping six months.

DR. MORRIS: I would like to say one word about the curly walnut. In
Maine, not long ago, I saw a young man who had bought a bird's eye
maple, perhaps fifty years of age, that he paid $1,500 for. I asked him
why he didn't graft one million ordinary maples from that tree and sell
the stock at $200 per tree, and then he would have $200,000,000 at just
about the time of life when he could enjoy it. Well, that hadn't
occurred to him. Now, if Mr. Littlepage will hunt up this curly black
walnut stump that sold for $3,500, and if he will graft a million trees
from that he will be able to raise a family of ten children (Laughter.)

DR. STABLER: Mr. President, I just want to call attention to an omission
in the little talk that my son gave about the characteristics of this
Stabler tree, namely, its beauty as a shade tree. He didn't mention
that, and I don't think any one has mentioned it in connection with the
black walnut. Now, the black walnut trees, as we meet them along the
roadsides, vary exceedingly in habit of growth. The majority of them
have very few main limbs, perhaps not over half a dozen main limbs on a
tree, and they will be gaunt, ungainly things, stretched out straight,
like great arms reaching out with very little beauty. Now, if you plant
seedlings, that is what you are likely to get on your lawn. You may have
something that is not pretty except as a trunk, but the tree that
produces these very remarkable nuts is also one of the most beautiful in
its conformation. It is shaped just like an umbrella, rather low, very
spreading, and very frequently with a very much larger number of limbs
than almost any black walnut tree that I have ever seen, and its habit
of growing in the nursery confirms that opinion--that it produces a very
large number of buds and branches from each graft.

Mr. Littlepage has in his fence row, uncultivated and surrounded by
bushes of every kind, a small seedling walnut that he grafted this year
with the Stabler walnut. When he grafted the seedling it was a little
over an inch in diameter. I measured the growth from that graft
recently, and five shoots measured over five feet long, and others over
four feet long. Four month's growth--five shoots over five feet long!
Now, I don't know of any other walnut or any other nut tree that would
have produced that many shoots from a single graft. It makes a very
beautiful shade tree and has a top which is capable of producing very
large crops of fruit.

THE PRESIDENT: It sometimes makes me feel ashamed of my race when I
realize our limitations in comparison with the trees. We run across a
valuable type of tree genus, and we can make millions like it in a short
time. But when a remarkable specimen of the genus homo, arises, he stays
with us but a short while before we cart him off to the cemetery, and
that is the last of him. Does any one else wish to make a contribution
to the black walnut?

MR. M. P. REED: Mr. Littlepage made the remark that it is very easy to
propagate the black walnut. We haven't found it so. We have made almost
a complete failure of both budding and grafting.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Well, I was speaking of my experience in grafting this
spring. I think I remarked that my personal experience in budding had
not gone far enough to tell definitely what the results are going to be.
But I put in about fifty-five grafts, and I had fifty of them to grow,
and of that fifty there were probably ten or twelve knocked out--thrown
out at the first cultivation--and probably thirty-five are growing there
yet. I don't know what Mr. White's experience was in Indiana. I think it
was, perhaps, not as good as he expected, because of the fact that a lot
of the bud-wood dried out, but I think Mr. McCoy can give some
experience. Now, Mr. Roper here, has had experience in budding the black
walnut, haven't you?

MR. W. N. ROPER: We only put in about a dozen buds a short time ago. I
think half of those are growing.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Well, we budded, perhaps, two or three hundred this
summer, and I don't know really how they are coming out, but, from the
way these grafts behaved this spring, I don't see any reason why it is
going to be very difficult. What do you know about it, Mr. McCoy?

MR. R. L. MCCOY: Mr. Stabler's grafts didn't take very well, but so far
as budding the black walnut is concerned, it is just as easy as handling
the peach; there is nothing to it when you get the bud-wood; but first
you have got to have the bud-wood. You can't jump on to any old tree and
get buds that will give satisfactory results. Now, if Mr. Reed and his
father had to go into Wisconsin and Michigan to get their bud-wood, and
cut it from some old cherry trees, we'll say, and came back to Indiana
and tried to produce trees from those buds in the nursery, they would
fail.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, the net result, apparently, of the discussion on
propagation seems to be that Mr. McCoy, in Indiana, has had great
success with buds; Mr. Littlepage, in Maryland, has had great success
with grafts; I also had great success with grafts put in by a man who
could neither read nor write, but who was taught the technique as
taught by this Society. Is there any further discussion?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President, Professor Hutt ought to know something
about the black walnut. He knows something about everything else I have
ever talked to him about. I believe he wrote me, in connection with some
of his tests, that forty-seven per cent of the Stabler nuts were meat.

PROF. W. N. HUTT: I think so. I think it was pretty close to a half.
There were no broken halves at all, and some of them came out entirely
whole.

THE PRESIDENT: We want to hear from Dr. Deming.

THE SECRETARY: I just want to call attention to one of the questions on
our list. "What can we do to cheapen nuts and nut meats in the retail
market so as to make this valuable food available to persons of small
means?" It seems to me that we are going to do that with such nuts as
the black walnut. I think we ought to work for the time when the black
walnut can be sold in quantity in New York City, and in all the larger
cities for around a dollar a bushel. Perhaps the shellbark hickory is
also going to be a nut of the same kind, a nut that can be put on the
market in large quantities at a small price, for the man of limited
means to buy and crack out himself. Dr. Morris, speaking of some tough
nut, once said it was so tough that it was only of interest to squirrels
and men out of work. That expression about "men out of work" made me
think, as do so many things that Dr. Morris says. If a man out of work
can buy a bushel of black walnuts for a dollar, and if he can crack out
several bushels a day, or even only one bushel a day, he can make more
wages just cracking out that bushel of black walnuts than at ordinary
laboring work. I think that we ought to get on the market a supply of
cheap nuts for the man of limited means and that we ought to educate the
people to a knowledge of the value of such nuts.

THE PRESIDENT: It is always well to put the brakes on. I haven't heard a
thing about this black walnut except virtues. I believe Mr. McMurran, of
the Department of Agriculture, is present, and I think he has been
giving particular attention to the black walnut, and perhaps he will
tell us of some of its enemies, either animal or vegetable.

MR. S. M. MCMURRAN: Well, Mr. President, unfortunately, I haven't given
much attention to the black walnut. My time has been given to the pecan
until this summer, when I worked on the persian walnut to some extent,
but I can say, generally, that the black walnut hasn't got any very
serious enemies. Everything it has got is right here now. There isn't
any reason to suppose that it would have any serious disease if we
cultivated it on an extensive scale.

As to the insects, I am not able to state. I have never noticed any
particularly on the nut since a boy.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President, I think Mr. McMurran has covered the
diseases of the black walnut. I think the observation of every one will
confirm what Mr. McMurran has said.

THE PRESIDENT: The chair will deviate from parliamentary practice for a
moment by dismissing the question. I wish to contribute three small
facts. One is with reference to the special growth of the black walnut
under fertilization. The men on my place have to cut bushes around apple
trees, and some stray black walnuts planted by nature under those trees
have been cut for 10 years but for the last two seasons have been left
alone. They have promptly come up through those apple trees, under the
influence of nitrate of soda, like a steer going through a bush. They
have grown five or six feet each season.

Another point is the great variation, apparently, of the black walnut
with regard to its keeping qualities. I recall putting away in a garret,
in 1894, a number of bushels of a nut of particular merit, and they were
perfectly sweet and edible as much as seven years later. Now it is only
occasionally that you will find one that will keep as long as that, but
with the trees bearing every two years, it is quite possible that the
fruit would be marketable for two or three, or even four years
afterwards, if kept properly.

There is no reason to think that the Stabler is the best nut growing in
the United States. It merely grew within reach of the eyes of observing
men.

The filbert and the almond we hope to cover briefly before adjourning. I
will ask Mr. Reed to give us a short contribution on the almond.

MR. M. P. REED: This almond (exhibiting specimens) we received scions of
from Mr. C. A. Reed, of the Department a few years ago. It was three
years ago this summer that we top-worked it, and we picked almost half a
bushel of almonds from it this summer. The almond has a thick shell,
kernel of good flavor, but I don't think it will amount to anything
very much except for home use.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: How old was the tree that bore them?

MR. M. P. REED: Top-worked three years ago this summer.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: And bore how many?

MR. W. C. REED: Bore a half a bushel this last summer.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: If any one here would like bud-wood of that almond I
will be glad to send it to them.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Littlepage offers to send those present bud-wood of
that tree, which can be, with great ease, top-worked on the peach by the
ordinary process of shield budding.

DR. IRA ULMAN: I have grafted scions of this nut on Amygdalus Davidiana,
the new Chinese peach of the Department of Agriculture, and the growth
is marvelous. It does just exactly as Mr. Reed told you.

DR. STABLER: I would like to ask whether the almond is attacked by the
same insects and diseases that affect the peach, whether it is affected
by peach yellows and whether it is affected by the peach borer. I
understand that the apricot is, in a measure, immune to the peach borer
at least, and possibly also to the peach yellows. If the almond is to be
short-lived like the peach tree, it may not be nearly as valuable as if
it were a hardy tree. If you place it upon peach stock it seems to me
you must expect it to be attacked by the peach borer.

MR. M. P. REED: I believe that the original tree of this variety is
something over sixty years old. Not very many peach trees live to be
that old, and in the nursery it is a very vigorous grower.

THE PRESIDENT: The commercial almond is a rather long-lived tree in the
countries where it is grown. Of course, here is a question of technique
and individual behavior which only experience can answer. We ought to
take some of these nuts home that Mr. Reed has given us. I should like
to know why Mr. Reed so deprecates a tree which bears so much fruit in
so short a time. If the fruit is good, why can't it be handled
commercially?

MR. M. P. REED: It is the cracking quality. It has a very thick shell.

THE PRESIDENT: Is that a problem that machines cannot solve?

MR. M. P. REED: No, sir.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: How is the flavor?

MR. M. P. REED: The flavor is good.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: I was just going to say, Mr. President, that I visited
Mr. Reed's place this summer, and it is utterly surprising how fast and
beautifully this hardy almond grew. He took me out at the edge of the
garden where he has them growing, and I could hardly realize that they
were only three-year-old trees. They were as full of little almonds as
the peach trees were of peaches, only they were much longer and with
very red leaves. Vincennes, Indiana, is on the thirty-ninth parallel,
which is the northern boundary of the District of Columbia, and it gets
much colder there than here, and those trees haven't the slightest sign
of winter-killing. I don't know anything about the quality of the meat,
but they are certainly wonderful bearers.

DR. MORRIS: I find that in the region of Stamford, Connecticut, hard
shelled almonds do pretty well if you look after them pretty closely,
but they take all your time. They have so many different blights on them
that I am glad mine died a long time ago. They bore heavily, but they
were too much trouble. They blossom so early in our locality that the
blossoms are apt to be caught by frost. You may overcome that if you set
the trees on the north side of a stone wall where the ground retains the
frost for from one to two weeks later than on the south side. I find,
that by doing this you can retard their time of blossoming sufficiently
to materially lessen the danger of their being caught by spring frosts.

MR. HARRY R. WEBER: Will you get the same results if you put a mulch
under the tree? Won't that prevent thawing and hold the tree for a week
or two?

DR. MORRIS: Yes, sir.

THE PRESIDENT: Have you used this particular almond?

DR. MORRIS: One very much like it, and it was a mighty good almond--hard
to get at but good.

THE PRESIDENT: I would like to ask Mr. Reed as to the blooming time of
this particular tree in comparison with some standard peach like the
Elberta.

MR. M. P. REED: It bloomed about a week earlier than the Elberta, and
the peach crop is light.

MR. HENRY STABLER: I have been associated for the past three or four
years occasionally with Mr. M. B. Waite, of the Department of
Agriculture, and I have had a good chance to study the effect of
spraying on peaches in preventing brown rot and curculio. At Mr.
Littlepage's I observed an almond tree that started, I should think,
with twenty-five or thirty almonds on it this spring. Those almonds
gradually succumbed to the curculio and brown rot until, at last, only
one was left, and it seems to me that, if this almond is to be grown
commercially in this climate, we will have to use the same methods of
growing as with peaches, and we will have to spray them.

THE PRESIDENT: I think the chief benefit of the discussion of the almond
would be to get more of us to try it, and the fact that we have one
which is only one week earlier than the Elberta peach in blooming shows
that we have a good chance, possibly, of even exceeding the
possibilities of the peaches.

MR. MCCOY: Mr. President, I notice a good many almonds bloom about the
same time as Elberta peaches. I have probably twenty-five trees of this
almond that Mr. Reed spoke of, and I think they were in bloom at the
time the peaches were. It is very productive, just as he says. I have
noticed some of the old trees around in our neighborhood have borne good
crops for several years, and I don't notice much disease on them either.

DR. STABLER: I asked the question whether anybody knows whether the
almond is affected by peach yellows, and nobody seems to know, but peach
yellows is something connected with climate. There is a yellows line
that has remained definite and distinct for the last twenty-five years,
and you can describe that line on the map, and it stays right where you
put it. All north of that line the peach trees are affected by yellows,
and south they are not. That line runs through Mount Vernon and
Annapolis, and across Chesapeake Bay to Chestertown. Now, below that
isothermal line there is a little peninsula south of Chestertown, in
Kent county, a little peninsula there--a little long neck that runs out
into the bay below Chestertown--where they have never had any peach
yellows, and yet at Chestertown the trees have always been affected by
peach yellows, and it is probable that it will be found, if the almond
is affected by peach yellows, that the same laws apply to it. That is,
south they will have the yellows, and north they will not. Now, at
Vincennes, I suppose that they are north of the yellows line for
peaches. Do your peach trees have peach yellows?

MR. M. P. REED: No, sir.

DR. STABLER: Perhaps you are north of it, then. If so, the almond hasn't
been tried out as to yellows.

THE PRESIDENT: This association is greatly indebted to Dr. Morris, who
helped to get it together, for his indefatigable searching of the
corners of the earth for specimens, species and varieties of trees in
his ambition to get to his Stamford place all of the varieties of
nut-bearing trees. Several of our members have taken a little interest
in the question of the hazel-filbert family. Dr. Morris has taken a lot
of interest. Last year he gave us a most exhilarating presentation of
the subject, and he is this year going to give us some brief notes on
the progress of his knowledge concerning the hazels and filberts. Dr.
Morris.

DR. MORRIS: Just a word, in order to start the discussion. I have tried
to work out during the past year two or three points that came up for
discussion last year. I stated that in Connecticut the common American
hazel would probably not become a horticultural proposition for the
reason that the main stock seldom lives more than seven or eight years,
and then dies. New stolons, starting from the root, make abundant new
stocks. In that way, dying at the center, and growing at the periphery,
like a ring worm, one plant may extend so widely as to drive cows out of
the pasture lot. (Laughter). Dr. Deming understood me to say that it
spread so "rapidly" as to drive the cows out of a lot. I said "widely,"
not "rapidly." (Laughter). For that reason a plant of our common hazel
bears a few nuts about the third year; it bears a good crop about the
fourth year and sometimes in the fifth year. It then begins to die and
is gone by the seventh or eighth year, while new stolons, coming up on
all sides, are ready to perpetuate that rotation. That, at least, is
ordinary hazel history in my part of Connecticut. So I doubt if this
species will ever be a good horticultural proposition.

This year, for the first time, I have budded the European hazel upon our
common stock for the purpose of observing whether the character of the
guest will change the character of the host.

Now another point. Many of the European hazels that have been brought to
this country, I find, do not bear for the reason that they flower so
early that the staminate flowers are caught by frost--not the
pistillate. The pistillates will hold out against frost for a long time
and make good. There are two or three ways for overcoming this
difficulty. We may select for cultivation those kinds which bloom a week
or two, or even three weeks later than others, as in the case of the
Bony Bush variety.

There is hardly any more valuable tree in Central Europe than the purple
leafed hazel. I never have seen one bearing in this country. Its
staminate flowers come out too early in Connecticut. I have now some in
which I have grafted the Bony Bush, which flowers so much later that I
hope to have my purple hazels bearing nuts at Merribrooke.

On the whole, most of the points have been simply confirmatory of points
previously considered. We need not fear hazel blight because it is very
easily controlled, and many of the European hazels will furnish an
immensely valuable crop for almost all parts of temperate America. We
may develop, by breeding and by cultivation, types which will be hardy,
which will give us large, valuable, marketable crops, and which will be
desirable from the market man's point of view.

DR. STABLER: Can you get stocks that are free from blight?

DR. MORRIS: Last year I showed specimens of blight. The blight,
fortunately, begins upon a fairly large stem--upon a part of the stem
that is in plain sight. It takes from two to four years for a patch of
that blight to encircle a limb. If one will go over his hazel orchard
once a year and, where a bit of blight appears, cut it out with his
jack-knife and later paint the spot with a little white paint, one can
very readily control hazel blight. It is so easily done that we need not
fear it at all.

THE PRESIDENT: Dr. Ulman, I believe, is a hazel enthusiast.

DR. ULMAN: I have attempted to gather as much information as I could by
seeking out the failures with hazel because I had found no one reporting
success. In answer to a large number of letters which I sent out I
received some 290 replies which reported failures with the European
hazel. Dr. Morris tells us that blight can be readily controlled. So
far, that does not seem to be the experience of others, but it is only
fair to say that they do not know how to get rid of it in the way that
Dr. Morris has told us.

THE PRESIDENT: Dr. Ulman, I should like to ask if it is not true that
the hazels growing at Rochester could be added to your collection of 290
and change this complexion a little bit. Certainly last year we saw
hazel trees almost the diameter of this room which appeared to be
perfectly healthy.

THE SECRETARY: Can we recommend the hazel to be planted commercially?

THE PRESIDENT: If the hazel propagates by underground stolons
automatically, why can we not take the stolons and plant them in the
places that the trees have abandoned, letting them run on elsewhere?

DR. MORRIS: In regard to Dr. Deming's question, green European hazel
nuts are now selling in New York, out of cold storage, at seventy-five
cents a pound. Green hazel nuts like green almonds are prized by the
gourmet. All of the European hazels will eventually furnish a good
commercial proposition provided that the market is large enough, and the
market will probably grow, is growing in fact. Ripe filberts bring,
approximately, from ten to fifteen cents a pound. The trees bear well,
and I don't know of any reason why the hazel proposition should not be a
first rate one right now. The thing to do is to select kinds which we
know are valuable here. One may go through the seedling orchards at
Rochester and select one parent which bears large nuts prolifically, and
then propagate any number of European hazels from that one stock. My
Bony Bush is probably a desirable hazel.

In regard to the question of breeding from stolons, if we can keep that
thing going it would be all right, but it requires so much work I doubt
if we shall do anything in that way with the American hazel. The
European hazels don't travel by stolons. That is the advantage. So I
have given up the common American hazel as a commercial proposition. A
number of European and Asiatic hazels will be commercially profitable,
unquestionably, just as soon as we care to develop them.

MR. WEBER: What do you know about the hazels of the Western coast?

DR. MORRIS: Very profitable in parts of Oregon and Washington. They have
a large, good crop, which sells locally, but, like most Pacific Coast
fruits, the nuts lack flavor and quality. They have size and beauty, but
lack quality. The fruits and nuts grown on the Pacific Coast all lack a
certain fineness of character, for some reason yet unknown.

You have got to look after your European hazels, and not neglect the
orchard. I remember seeing some very beautiful apple trees in central
Maine not very long ago--no blight--no codling moth, and the trees free
from almost everything in the way of insects or fungous
troubles--beautiful, cultivated trees, and beautiful apples on them. I
asked another man, one of my acquaintances there, an old farmer, why he
didn't set out a lot of similar trees and make a good income. He said,
"Well, it won't go." He had a pasture about eight miles north of there,
and, said he, "I spent thirty dollars for apple trees to put into an
orchard, and I had great ideas about those apples. I set the trees out
in that orchard about three or four years ago, and last year when I went
up to look at them, there were hardly any apple trees left." He hadn't
looked at them for three or four years. (Laughter.) You can't raise
hazels that way.

THE SECRETARY: The reason I asked about the commercial value of the
hazel is that my own experience has been very unsatisfactory. I got some
hazels from Gillet, on the Pacific Coast six or seven years ago, set
them out around my place, and they have grown beautifully. I haven't
been able to detect any blight on them anywhere. Some of them are
fifteen feet high, have grown luxuriantly, and blossom every year, but I
haven't seen one nut yet. On the other hand, the other day I visited a
man near my home, who told me that he had raised some trees from nuts
which he had bought from an Italian grocery on the corner. He gets the
nuts when the crop first comes in, and stratifies in wet sand all
winter, and he says they all grow. He had some beautiful hazel trees.
One I estimated to be twenty feet high. I never saw a hazel tree which
approached it. He said it was only five or six years old. Last year he
had a fine crop of nuts from it. This year, however, he said that during
a warm spell in the winter the staminate bloom came out and was killed,
and there were no nuts on the trees. Now it seems to me that there is
great uncertainty about the hazels, and I don't know exactly what to
advise people to do. People ask me for advice as to what nuts to plant
commercially. I don't know whether to advise them to plant hazels or
not, and I don't know what varieties to advise people to plant. I don't
know how to advise them to overcome this difficulty of the early
staminate bloom and the winter killing. I can't now conscientiously
recommend people to plant hazel nuts commercially.

DR. MORRIS: Go to Rochester and get some there that bloom every year and
that bloom later. My Bony Bush blossoms some three weeks later than the
others, I presume. It is a bush that bears well every other year,
apparently.

THE PRESIDENT: Are there any further questions about this large family
of nut trees of which we have but a small corner of knowledge? If not,
we may look to an adjournment.

First, I wish to announce that this afternoon we are going to devote to
an excursion around the city, to see some of the most remarkable Persian
walnut trees which I think may be found anywhere.

I am asked by Prof. Close to say that the Department of Agriculture has
an exhibit of nuts on the fourth floor at 220 Fourteenth Street,
Southwest.

Meeting adjourned.




FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 8TH, 2 P. M.

Meeting called to order by the President.

THE PRESIDENT: Dr. Metcalf, Chief of the Bureau of Forest Pathology, of
the Department of Agriculture, has been in charge of the investigations
concerning the chestnut blight for a number of years.

DR. HAVEN METCALF: Mr. Chairman and Members of the Society: I will
present, first, a few general facts regarding the present status of the
chestnut bark disease, and, for the greater part of the information you
desire, I will rely on you to ask me questions.

The chestnut bark disease is getting to be an old story, but that plant
hyphenate, that objectionable imported disease, is more of a live issue
today than it ever has been before. All my attention during recent
months has been taken up with another imported plant disease, the white
pine blister rust, of which you have heard, and which does not concern
the special subject matter in which this Association is interested,
unless, perhaps, you may be interested in the pinon nut as the pinon
pine may ultimately be subject to attack by blister rust. However, this
disease, like the chestnut blight, is an example of what a relatively
harmless, or at least, not serious disease in a foreign country can do
when it is permitted to get into the United States.

This brings us to the question of the origin of the chestnut bark
disease, which, although the story has been told many times before, has
been the subject of so much dispute that I probably had better
recapitulate that matter. It has been proved beyond question that the
chestnut bark disease is a native of eastern Asia, China, Japan and
Korea; that it was introduced into this country in the '90's, upon
diseased chestnut nursery stock. It was not critically observed until
1904, but the condition of trees which were observed at that time shows
conclusively (provided the disease progressed in those early years as it
has since) that it was introduced into the country as early as the late
90's. The final demonstration of the fact that the disease is a foreign
disease and a native of Asia we owe to Mr. Frank Meyer, of the Office of
Seed and Plant Introduction, of the Department of Agriculture. Mr.
Meyer's observations are so interesting that I will pass around a few
pictures illustrative of his observations in China, the first picture
showing the country that is the home of the chestnut bark disease. The
second picture shows a chestnut orchard in China where the trees have,
with characteristic thrift, been planted around human burial mounds. The
remaining pictures show how the chestnut blight acts in China--very
differently from the way it acts in this country. In China, it produces,
as the pictures show, definite cankers, which do not girdle the tree,
which kill young trees occasionally, mutilate old trees, kill branches,
but the cankers do not girdle the trees. That disease has been known in
China we have no idea how many years, and, while it does a certain
amount of harm, is said by Mr. Meyer not to be really serious in China.
You can readily see, upon examining these pictures, that there is a
sharp contrast in the behavior of the disease as observed in China and
its behavior as observed in this country, where it will girdle a
comparatively large tree and the fungus spread all through the bark,
completely covering it, and doing that in a very short time. Of course,
then, the chestnut blight is one of those cases of which we have so
many, where a disease, passing to a new country, finds new surroundings,
hosts more favorable to its development, and progresses rapidly.

The natural range of the chestnut bark disease at the present time--that
is, I mean, its range on the native chestnut and the range through which
it is now spreading by non-human agencies, is, on the north, practically
co-extensive with the range of the native chestnut. The disease is found
in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, as far south as Virginia, and as far
west as western Pennsylvania and eastern West Virginia. Throughout this
area it is spreading by what I may call natural means, and the disease
has been shown to be unusually well provided with means of
dissemination. I will speak a little later about the spread of the
disease outside of this area--that is, west and south, since in the West
and in the South it is being spread, as far as we know, exclusively by
human agencies.

The question is often asked me, "What is the future of the
chestnut--that is, the native chestnut--in this country? What is the
course of the disease going to be?" The only way in which we can answer
that is to look in the parts of the country where the disease has been
present longest--Long Island, for example; Westchester county, New York;
Bergen county, New Jersey; Fairfield county, Conn. Upon a recent
examination of those areas I found no chestnut trees surviving in a
healthy condition. We have, of course, from the beginning, hunted, and
hunted hard, to find individual chestnut trees that might be immune to
the disease--native American chestnuts. We expected to find such trees,
but up to date we have not found them. It is a very extraordinary fact
and an almost unparalleled fact, because with the majority of plants
affected, by any given disease, we can find some individuals that are
not only resistant, but immune.

Now, in these old areas, particularly on Long Island, in 1907, when the
disease first came under my observation, I marked certain trees in order
to observe how long the stumps of these trees or the dead trees would
continue to send up sprouts from the ground. It is an interesting fact
that some of those trees which were dead in 1907 are still putting up
sprouts. The sprouting capacity of the chestnut tree is indeed
marvelous, but I am sorry to say that I haven't been able to find any
healthy sprouts over three years old. I haven't been able to find any
living sprouts more than four years old. The disease seems to be
following up the sprouts as it followed up the original stem.

Right there, in the behavior of the disease toward the sprouts, we have
an interesting fact. During the first year of its life the chestnut tree
or the chestnut sprout is immune to this disease, or practically so. You
can rarely find a seedling or sprout of the first year that is attacked
by the disease, and even in the second or third years a comparatively
small per cent of them are attacked. It is thus possible to produce
chestnut nursery stock that for several years does not show the disease.

So far as I can see, the chestnut blight is not stopping naturally in
its course anywhere. I cannot get a particle of reliable evidence that
it is. In this part of the country and to the south of here, in
Virginia, for example, the parasite has more months in the year during
which it can grow, it appears to be utilizing that time in spreading
more rapidly, at least killing trees more quickly, than to the north of
this area. From the standpoint of the grower of nuts, the important
question is, of course, whether the disease can be controlled. I think
your Secretary, in a recent article, summed the situation up as clearly
and briefly as can be done. He said, in an article entitled "The
Progress of Nut Culture in the East:"

"Of the chestnut we have excellent varieties such as the Rochester,
Boone and Paragon, but all development in the culture of this nut is
being held up by the blight. Everybody is awaiting the results of the
government work in breeding immune hybrids. There may be great
opportunities, nevertheless, in chestnut growing outside its native
area, where the blight can be controlled."

There is no doubt that in an orchard tree, in chestnut orchards, the
disease can be controlled within reason by the cutting out method that
has long been advocated, but the point is that the margin of profit on
the chestnut is not sufficient to make that method pay, and whenever
members of this Association or others interested in the propagation of
chestnuts have written to me for advice I have simply advised them not
to plant chestnuts at present. I cannot see at the present time, that
any attempt at control is profitable. That is a very different thing
from saying that it can not be done, or that it may not later become
profitable.

A few words regarding the method of spread of the disease. In 1908, when
the office of which I have charge was first organized, Professor
Collins, who has addressed this Association a number of times regarding
this disease, visited a number of orchards and nurseries in the Eastern
States, going as far as southern Virginia to the south, and west as far
as York county, Pennsylvania, Although that was comparatively early in
the progress of the disease, wherever he went, without exception, where
there was a nursery, he found the disease present and spreading onto the
native trees. There were, however, several established orchards which he
visited where that was not the case, where the disease was not present.
It has been brought out repeatedly that, while the chestnut blight is
marvelously adapted to spread by natural means--wind, birds, insects,
rain, all the ways in which a plant disease ordinarily spreads--the way
in which it spreads over great areas and through great distances is on
chestnut nursery stock.

In that connection, then, I may briefly discuss the present range of the
disease so far as we know it, outside of the natural range of the
chestnut tree. South of Virginia, so far as we know, the disease is
present at only one point (Greensboro, N. C.), where it was introduced
in a nursery and spread to native trees. In stating this area of
distribution, I ought to say that for about a year and a half we have
made no special effort to determine the range of this disease. I mean we
have not gone out of our way to do it. We have simply collected such
evidence as has come to hand casually, and so it may be that there are
now other points of infection in North Carolina, or south of there, but,
if so, we do not know of them. In Ohio, the disease is present at three
points, of which one is a large and serious infection at Painesville. In
Iowa, it is present at one point, Shenandoah, in a nursery. In Indiana,
it is present at five points; in Nebraska, at two points. In Michigan,
one point has been reported. In all of these cases it is in nurseries,
or on very recently planted trees. There is, or was, an interesting
point of infection in British Columbia. Probably the trees there are all
dead by this time, but that point is very interesting as being probably
an independent importation from the Orient.

There needs to be little said as to how the disease is spreading in this
area. Perhaps the best thing I can do is to read some letters that have
come to my attention:

   "MICHIGAN AGRICULTURAL COLLEGE,
   "EAST LANSING,
   "Aug. 18, 1916.

   "Dr. Haven Metcalf,
   "U. S. Dept. of Agriculture,
   "Washington, D. C.

   "Dear Mr. Metcalf:

"Last December, the Forestry Department of this College ordered of Glen
Bros., Glenwood Nurseries, Rochester, New York, five 6-foot trees of the
Sober Paragon chestnut. These were shipped to them April 4th and were
almost immediately planted in the Forestry Nursery here. About six or
eight weeks ago, the Forestry Department noticed that these trees were
dying and called our attention to this matter about four weeks ago. I
examined the trees in company with Mr. J. H. Muncie, one of our
assistants, and found all the external appearances of Chestnut Blight
with, however, only a very few imperfectly developed pycnidia. We
brought pieces of the bark of these trees into the laboratory and made
cultures and obtained the typical mycelium of chestnut blight. The
trees have been removed and we now have them in our laboratory.

"I am calling this to your attention as the trees were doubtless
infected when shipped. I feel that you ought to know that this firm is
sending out diseased trees.

   "Very truly yours,
   "(Signed,) ERNEST A. BESSEY,
   "Professor of Botany."

The following is an extract from a letter from Frank N. Wallace, State
Entomologist of Indiana, dated July 13, 1916:

"My Dear Sir:

"Under separate cover I am sending you some samples of chestnut blight
which I secured from some trees shipped by Mr. C. K. Sober, Lewisburg,
Pa. Mr. Sober doubts that we have even seen a case of chestnut blight
and wanted some samples and I sent him the other half of the samples
which I am sending you.

"I have been trying to check up on some of Mr. Sober's trees and so far
I have found nearly fifty per cent of them have died from chestnut
blight disease."

The samples sent with this letter showed typical chestnut blight.

Some months ago Dr. W. H. Long, of Albuquerque, New Mexico, became
interested in the possibility of growing chestnuts in that country and
communicated with Glen Brothers, of Rochester, N. Y., to secure certain
information regarding them. He secured the information he wanted and
also some that was slightly gratuitous. I will read extracts from the
two letters:

"In regard to the blight, which you call the Eastern Chestnut Canker,
would say that this tree is practically immune from this disease, and
you would stand no more chance of having your chestnut trees infected
with the blight should you plant them, than you would if you planted
apple trees, of having them infected with the San Jose Scale or peach
trees, of the Peach Blight.

"There are over half a million trees at the famous Sober orchard in
Paxinos, Pa., none of which have the blight, and yet the blight rages
all around them in the American Sweet Chestnut groves that are all
through the mountain. Further evidence of its immunity from this disease
we cannot guarantee. We think this speaks for itself.

"We believe that if you would investigate this variety that you would
plant an orchard of Sober Paragon Chestnut trees, even if not a very
large one. We should like very much, indeed, to serve you and shall give
our personal attention to the selection and shipment of such trees as
you may require.

   "Very truly yours,
   "GLEN BROS., INC.
   GM-AB  "(s) JOHN G. MAYO."

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRESIDENT: Would you mind giving us the date of that last letter?

DR. METCALF: That is October 20, 1915.

The other letter signed by Mr. Mayo is as follows, and is dated Oct. 29,
1915:

"Replying to your October 25th letter we do not think that you or your
friend need have the least anxiety on account of the chestnut blight
reaching your section. This disease seems to be confined to a very small
area in northeastern New Jersey, southeastern New York, and southwestern
Connecticut. The disease has been in existence in this country since
1842, it has made very little progress, and the highest authorities now
state that it seems to be on the wane." (Laughter.)

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Do the experiments of the Department show any
possibility of control of the disease?

DR. METCALF: I don't think that there are any methods of control which
can profitably be applied to orchard trees under present commercial
conditions. If a man has a few orchard trees which he regards as
novelties and to which he is prepared to give very careful attention, I
think the disease can be controlled. So far as I can see, the only hope
of commercial control lies in none of the present varieties, but in Dr.
Van Fleet's hybrids, possibly in the Chinese chestnut, and, aside from
the objectionable qualities of the Japanese nut in certain strains of
Japanese. With the rapid withdrawal of the wild chestnuts from the
market, however, the price of chestnuts may rise, and control methods in
orchards become practicable.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. McCoy has been in Pennsylvania and has come back
with the very optimistic idea that the chestnut blight was under
control up there. I took him out on my farm in Maryland and showed him
my trees, and that the only thing that could destroy the trees faster
than the blight is a forest fire.

DR. METCALF: Exactly.

THE PRESIDENT: I believe, Dr. Metcalf, you conducted a series of
spraying experiments recently, and I understand that others have done
the same thing. Mr. P. A. Dupont, I believe, on his fine estate near
Wilmington, tried to spray a few chestnut trees with Bordeaux mixture,
and I understand he gave it up as a physical failure, to say nothing of
the cost. Am I right about that?

DR. METCALF: That is my understanding, that he was dealing with large
trees and failed.

A MEMBER: Well, did you succeed with small ones?

DR. METCALF: In the line of spraying? That is a long story, and I
suggest that Mr. Hunt answer that.

MR. HUNT: In the spraying work conducted on Dr. Smith's place at
Bluemont, Va., we had 2500 numbered trees under observation; about 1500
of them being sprayed. Equal numbers of trees were sprayed with Bordeaux
and with lime-sulphur. The number of sprayings given different lots of
trees varied, but even trees sprayed as often as every fifteen days
blighted in a number of instances. While I did not get a greatly reduced
percentage of blight (approximately 50 per cent) among the sprayed trees
taken as a whole, the difference between individual plots seemed to
depend rather on location in the orchard, as some blocks of unsprayed
trees showed practically no blight and some blocks of sprayed trees
showed considerable blight. I might say that the grafted trees did not
blight nearly so heavily as the ungrafted trees. So far as any real
success is concerned there was none. It would cost over one hundred
dollars per acre per year to spray as often as some of the trees were
sprayed, and it wouldn't control the blight. So I wouldn't consider it
at all practicable.

THE SECRETARY: What is the reason that the grafted trees blighted less
than the ungrafted?

MR. HUNT: Well, I wouldn't pretend to say as to that, except that it is
so. I had each tree numbered and kept an individual record of all the
trees, and I found--I have forgotten the exact figures--but there was
about three-fifths as much blight among the grafted trees as among the
ungrafted trees. Of course, they are an imported variety, I believe, and
it may be that on that account they may have developed some resistance.
But Mr. Van Fleet may know more about that.

DR. METCALF: There seems to be some evidence that the imported European
varieties have a slight degree of resistance, not enough to count, but
enough to show in that fraction that Mr. Hunt gave.

THE SECRETARY: It is only a varietal condition, then, not from the fact
of grafting, but simply because of a different variety?

MR. HUNT: Oh, yes, I think so.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President, in view of this information about the
chestnut, is there the slightest use in the world for this Association
to encourage anybody to plant chestnuts anywhere in the United States?

THE PRESIDENT: Dr. Kellerman is here, and I wish to refer to him Mr.
Littlepage's question with a slight addition. Is there, first, any
prospect of any place staying immune? Second, would it not be to the
advantage of the country if the sale of chestnut stock were stopped?

DR. KARL F. KELLERMAN: Mr. President, to answer those questions involves
a rather large contract on my part. (Laughter). In the first place, the
problem of growing and marketing chestnuts, I think, is one that I could
hardly be expected fairly to discuss. I am here rather to explain the
attitude and action of the Federal Horticultural Board than to try to
give any constructive advice to the nut growers.

The Federal Horticultural Board is a board of five men to advise the
Secretary of Agriculture in establishing plant quarantines, either on
the introduction of plant material into the United States, or on the
movement of plant material inside the United States within the
quarantined areas. The Horticultural Board, therefore, has to deal more
with actual conditions than with outlining such policies as your
chairman has asked me to outline.

THE PRESIDENT: Excuse me, Dr. Kellerman, but we wish to know if there
is, in your opinion, any prospect of any region remaining immune?

DR. KELLERMAN: Well, even that is going rather further than I would like
to go, and yet the negative answer to that question is practically the
basis on which the Federal Horticultural Board decided that it was
impracticable to quarantine infected areas at the present time. The
evidence at hand appears to indicate conclusively that if the trees
that are to be grown are distinctly susceptible to the disease they will
almost certainly have an opportunity to become infected, no matter what
part of the United States they may be grown in. Now, whether that
infection would be a matter of a few months, or a few years, or a few
decades, of course, would be altogether a matter of chance, but, with
the wide distribution of nursery stock that is infected, with native
chestnuts rather generally infected and continuing to be infected, and
with practically no chance of preventing the continuation of the disease
in the native chestnuts, abundant sources for infection of susceptible
material appear to exist. For that reason, it appears to be, from an
economic standpoint, inadvisable to attempt to check the disease through
the establishment of quarantines.

THE PRESIDENT: Dr. Kellerman, you have answered my first question to
perfection, and now I want to ask the second one. If this blight is
practically a sure-kill, isn't it wrong to permit people to spend money
in the hope that, in some way, they are going to escape it? And if that
is the case, why shouldn't the whole traffic in chestnut trees be
stopped, with the possible exception of experimental things, which might
be allowed with the direct permission of some governmental board?

DR. KELLERMAN: That is a question that is very much harder to answer.
There might be favored regions where orchard culture of the chestnut
could go on for a considerable term of years before infections became
general and before the industry would be stifled because of this
disease. That is merely a matter of conjecture, as I see it. We have so
little evidence as to the speed with which a paying orchard business can
be developed in a new locality, so little evidence as to how the disease
may act under widely separated climatic conditions, that I don't feel
that we are prepared to say definitely that the industry is bound to
fail in every place where it is tried. Personally, I think that it ought
to be considered only on an experimental basis, but that represents
merely my personal opinion, and I doubt whether there is any effective
means for establishing a policy of that sort. It might be possible for
the general advice to be given that there was danger in any orchard
planting of chestnuts, no matter where it might be undertaken, and of a
comparatively rapid loss through the chestnut blight. I doubt whether
more than that would be feasible.

THE PRESIDENT: I have been enthusiastic over the chestnut for twenty
years this season, and these are matters in which I am greatly
interested. As I see it, the problem is one that is really much bigger
than the chestnut. The whole field of nut growing, which is now on the
edge of great accomplishments, is likely to be seriously injured,
because the most conspicuous thing in nut growing is the taking
advertisement of the firm whose bad trees have been referred to by Dr.
Metcalf. I think we do not appreciate the seriousness of the situation.
The firm Dr. Metcalf referred to is selling trees that are diseased in
places where they are sure to die quickly. Other men are similarly
selling trees, with less skillful advertising, perhaps, but probably no
less diseased. Most of these nurserymen may be honest in their belief
that they are putting out stock that is not diseased. But in the infant
trees it is almost impossible to detect the blight, so that the tree
goes out looking like a perfectly good one. It may be two or three
seasons before it dies.

Now, the economic aspects are these: Who should stand the loss, the man
in the nursery or the man in the orchard? It is a toss-up, it seems to
me at present, with the results apparently in favor of the nurseryman
rather than in favor of the citizen. The people who have an interest in
nut growing are going to have that interest lessened or destroyed by
beginning with a bad kind of tree. There are possibilities of a great
national injury, as I see it, if we let this thing go on.

DR. KELLERMAN: Well, as a constructive policy for aiding in the
establishment of nut culture, I think your policy is sound, but as a
question of economics of operation, I doubt whether any plan of that
sort can be established, beyond the plan of merely giving the general
advice that such planting is attended with very grave risks.

THE PRESIDENT: Have you not authority, or does not authority exist, to
prohibit shipment?

DR. KELLERMAN: The plant quarantine act gives the Department authority
to quarantine infected areas and to place certain restrictions on
shipments. To place any such restriction, however, it must be plainly
established that beneficial results are going to result, not to a
particular industry necessarily, but to the general public. The
difficulty in establishing a quarantine on the shipment of nursery stock
is the apparent impossibility of saying that that is going to stop the
spread of the disease. That is one question. The other problem is the
difficulty of determining what is infected territory and what is not.
We have very serious difficulty in making regulations, excepting as
between definitely infected territory and definitely clean territory.

THE PRESIDENT: And you don't have the authority to make a sweeping,
blanket prohibition of the shipment of a certain thing?

DR. KELLERMAN: No, we haven't that authority.

MR. M. P. REED: We put a clause in the printed matter that goes out with
all of our shipments saying that chestnuts are subject to blight, and
that we don't recommend their planting. I think if nurserymen all
followed that principle everybody would buy with their eyes open.

THE PRESIDENT: I am sorry you are so lonely in the business. (Laughter.)

MR. LITTLEPAGE: As regards the possibility, or the impossibility, of
doing any good to the chestnut industry by quarantining it, I fully
agree with Dr. Kellerman. I think any attempt of the Board to
quarantine, so far as benefit to the prospective chestnut grower is
concerned, is perfectly useless.

DR. ROBERT T. MORRIS: It seems to me it may be resolved into a very
simple proposition. Now, chestnuts may be raised in orchard form if we
spray with Bordeaux mixture, and cut out blight when it appears. I do
it. They live. Those that are not sprayed die, unless given tiresome
attention. That settles that question for my part. Chestnuts may not be
raised in forest form because it does not pay to spray and cut to that
extent. But chestnuts may be raised profitably in orchard form by people
who are willing to take the trouble to spray them, and to cut out blight
early. It seems to me that people should be properly warned that they
may plant chestnuts in orchard form provided they are willing to look
after them, otherwise we ought to guard against the public buying
chestnut trees, unwarned.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Dr. Morris, were you in when Mr. Hunt made his
statement?

DR. MORRIS: I got in late.

MR. HUNT: I sprayed fifteen times, every two or three days during the
blossoming season.

DR. MORRIS: I used arsenate of lead with my Bordeaux mixture for the
reason that it is convenient. That makes it stick ever so much tighter.
Now, that may be a feature of my confidence. Three or four heavy storms
will not wash off my Bordeaux mixed, applied in that way, with arsenate
of lead.

MR. HUNT: Well, my trees are dying right along.

DR. MORRIS: I am right in the midst of the worst chestnut blight
conditions. The only kinds I have that are not blighted are sprayed
trees, and chestnuts of kind that resist the blight. I had twenty-six
kinds from different parts of the world to test out in the blight
question. One kind from Manchuria is very blight-resistant. I find that
our American chinquapin, both our eastern form and the western tree form
are both blight-resistant. Also the alder-leaf chestnut. That is my
experience. Those four chestnuts are practically immune, and on my
property American chestnuts dying all around them.

I have one particular variety of American chestnut that I think a great
deal of. It was one of the first trees to go down from the blight. Stump
sprouts from this tree I have grafted on other stocks, on the common
American, and recently on chinquapin. The sprayed ones are all alive;
the unsprayed ones are not alive. Now, that is a matter of locality,
perhaps.

THE PRESIDENT: Dr. Morris, I detect a possible explanation for
difference of results. Mr. Hunt's trees were sixteen or seventeen years
old. Dr. Metcalf tells us, however, that young trees are relatively
immune. How old are yours?

DR. MORRIS: Not over twelve years. No grafts on them over four years.
That would make a difference.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Well, Mr. Hunt did a good job of spraying. I saw his
trees, and they were saturated.

MR. WEBER: Do they ever use a sticker in the Bordeaux?

A MEMBER: What preparation of Bordeaux mixture do you use, Dr. Morris?

DR. MORRIS: I use a commercial preparation called Pyrox.

MR. CARL J. POLL: Will the chestnut blight attack any other trees
besides the chestnut?

DR. METCALF: Outside of the chestnut genus, that is, the genus Castanea,
the disease goes on to a few other trees. A curious fact is that it will
go on to the sweet gum, a tree not related at all, and it will go on to
a few oaks, in no case enough to seriously damage them as it does the
chestnuts, but enough so that those trees can easily be carriers of the
disease.

THE PRESIDENT: I think we might pass from this funeral. We have a paper
by Dr. Van Fleet, whose work, I suppose, is known to everybody here. The
paper has been prepared by Dr. Van Fleet and will be read by the
Secretary.




HYBRIDS AND OTHER NEW CHESTNUTS FOR BLIGHT DISTRICTS.

DR. WALTER VAN FLEET, WASHINGTON, D. C.

The sinister spread of chestnut blight, as the bark disease caused by
the fungus _Endothia parasitica_ is popularly called, within little more
than 10 years, from its place of apparent origin near New York City into
13 states, practically reaching the eastern and northern limits of our
native chestnut stands, and sparing in its course no individual trees
exposed to infection, has about convinced even the most optimistic
observers that without the intervention of natural checks the American
chestnut as a forest asset will soon pass away. There is no present
indication of diminution in the virulence of the fungus parasite and
little reason to hope its progress as a timber destroyer can be stayed
by any agency in the control of man. Already the losses, direct and
indirect, occasioned by chestnut blight are computed as high as
$50,000,000, about half of the estimated value of the entire stand.

With the very reasonable assumption that our native chestnut is doomed
to virtual extinction it is well to consider in time if it can be
replaced as a timber and nut-producing tree by other chestnut species or
combinations of species less subject to injury by this disease-producing
organism. The Endothia fungus, as a destructive parasite, is apparently
confined to the chestnut, rarely if ever harmfully affecting genera even
as closely allied as the oak (Quercus) or Castanopsis. Of the various
species of chestnut or Castanea those native to Japan and Central China
appear most resistant, probably having been for ages accustomed to the
presence of the fungus, while the European chestnut, _Castanea sativa_,
our native _C. Americana_, and our chinquapin, fall easy victims when
exposed to infection. Of the Asiatic forms _Castanea crenata_ of Japan
and Eastern China and _C. molissima_ of the interior are most promising
in this respect, though the latter is still an almost unknown quantity
as regards cultivation in this country.

_Castanea crenata_, commonly known as Japan chestnut, in its more
typical forms is highly resistant, so seldom showing material injury
that, for practical purposes, it may be regarded as immune. Japan
chestnut seedlings raised from nuts grown in proximity to our native
chestnut and exposed to the influence of its pollen are at times more
seriously affected, but are rarely destroyed by the bark disease. The
Japan chestnut is of comparatively low growth, of small value for timber
purposes, but as a nut-producer is very fruitful and precocious, bearing
great crops at an early age. The nuts are often very large but usually
of poor quality. The species, however, proves quite plastic in the hands
of the plant breeder, being readily modified in the directions most
desired by the ordinary methods of cross-pollination and selection. It
freely hybridizes with all other chestnut species and varieties that
have been tried, and forms the basis of the most hopeful work in
breeding for disease-resistance that has yet been attempted.

_Castanea molissima_ is of much taller growth and bears nuts of moderate
size, but of really good quality in the types that have reached this
country. It can be infected by _Endothia parasitica_ but the disease
progresses slowly and in some instances results in little harm. The
species has been so recently established in America that practically
nothing is known of its breeding capabilities, but if its
disease-resistance under our climatic conditions is assured it would
appear most hopeful material for replacing our vanishing native species.
Explorers report there is a still more promising chestnut in China,
reaching nearly 100 feet in height under forest conditions, but it has
not yet been secured for trial in this country.

_Castania sativa_, the commercial chestnut of Europe, in many varieties
has long been cultivated in America and for nut production is without
doubt the best of the well-known exotic species. It has no great timber
value, however, and its disease-resistance, though higher than _C.
Americana_, is scarcely great enough to warrant extended use as breeding
material.

The native chinquapin, _Castanea pumila_, in its bush and tree forms
remains as the only promising chestnut not found in the Orient. While
readily inoculated by artificial means, the chinquapins, especially
varieties of the northern bush forms, quite often escape natural
infection, doubtless because of their small size, smooth bark, and less
liability to insect attacks.

Chestnut breeding for nut improvement, chiefly by selection of native
European and Japanese species, has been carried on in several diverse
localities in the United States, with distinctly promising results but
inter-pollinations have also been effected between most species and
varieties, the outcome indicating that rapid improvement along the
desired lines may be expected from crossing the really desirable types.

In 1903 and succeeding years the writer made many careful pollinations
of the native chestnut and the bush chinquapin with European and
Japanese chestnuts in many varieties. Some hundreds of seedlings
resulted, mostly showing a high level of promise as judged by their
initial thrift and vigor of growth, but the appearance in 1907 of the
Endothia disease among the plantings soon put an end to the work with
the native and European chestnuts, as, with scarcely an exception, they
quickly became infected. The crosses of chinquapin and Japan chestnut,
however, showed considerable resistance as a whole, and a number of
individuals have resisted infection until the present time, though
constantly exposed to the disease, both at their locality of origin in
New Jersey and since at Arlington farm, to which they were transferred
in the second and third years of growth. Others have been attacked in
greater or less degree, but show great powers of recuperation, sending
up suckers that often fruit well by the third year. The resistant
varieties show great promise as nut producers, coming into bearing when
three or four years old from seed and producing abundant crops of
handsome nuts, of excellent quality, four to six times as large and
heavy as those borne by the chinquapin parent, ripening in early
September before chestnuts of any kind have appeared in the market.
These nuts have thicker shells than other chestnuts, are much less
subject to attacks of the chestnut weevil and preserve their fresh and
inviting appearance longer when gathered. The flavor varies somewhat
according to the particular pollen parent of the different varieties,
but is always agreeable in the fresh state when the nuts are properly
cured. When boiled or roasted they are particularly sweet and pleasant
to the taste.

The trees are quite vigorous in growth, considering their rather dwarf
type, reaching 10 or more feet in height at 6 to 8 years from the
germination of the seeds and with scarcely an exception bear regular and
increasing crops after the third year. Propagation of the most promising
varieties has been effected by grafting and budding on _Castanea
molissima_ seedlings as resistant stocks, but it cannot be said that
these processes, when performed under greenhouse conditions, give ideal
unions. It is hoped to make fairly extensive trials of _C. molissima and
C. crenata_ as stocks for field grafting the coming season.

But the most encouraging feature of these chinquapin-crenata crosses is
the excellence of their seedlings as grown from chance or
self-pollinated nuts. Fifteen direct or second generation seedlings and
one of the third generation have fruited to date. All have retained in
growth and fruitage the characters of their immediate parent and it
almost appears as if the good qualities of these hybrids may be
perpetuated from seeds, thus dispensing in a great measure with
vegetative propagation--always costly and uncertain with nut trees.

Several hundred of these seedlings are under observation and it scarcely
appears too much to hope that they may inherit the disease-resisting
character of their parents as well as other desirable qualities.

Selection work with a precocious strain of Japan chestnuts of apparently
pure type has been continued through 4 generations of seedlings after an
initial cross-pollination of two particularly desirable varieties had
been made in 1903. These seedlings show greater range of variation than
the hybrids with chinquapin, but all bear nuts of marketable value in 2
to 4 years from germination. None have been attacked by the Endothia
fungus, though many have constantly been exposed to infection.
Notwithstanding their extreme precocity trees of this Asiatic strain
grow steadily and if thickly planted in favorable localities may in time
produce timber of local value, but it is to the taller growing species
of middle China that we must look for material to replace our vanishing
native forest stands. The preservation in this country of the chestnut
as a nut-bearing tree appears assured in view of the progress already
made and it should not be too much to hope that resistant strains of the
timber type may yet be developed by systematic breeding experiments.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRESIDENT: Inasmuch as the author of the paper is not present to
answer questions, the only thing that may be done is to ask further
contributions of knowledge in the same field. Has anyone any
contribution to make?

MISS LOUISE LITTLEPAGE: I would like to ask how long the chestnut tree
has been able to live with the blight?

DR. METCALF: Do you refer to the Asiatic ones or to the ones that grow
here in America?

MISS LITTLEPAGE: The American.

DR. METCALF: It is almost impossible to answer that question because you
have to define just what you mean by "living." If the chestnut tree is
attacked first or early on the trunk, it is girdled and dies shortly,
but if it is attacked first on the top there develop conditions like
what is shown in this picture (showing photograph). I am not certain
that you can see these bunches of suckers a little way up the tree. Now
those trees will sometimes exist four or five years. I can say safely
that I have seen trees last five years.

DR. MORRIS: I can add three years to that.

THE PRESIDENT: If there is no further discussion, we may adjourn.

       *       *       *       *       *

FRIDAY, SEPTEMBER 8TH, AT 8.15 P. M.

Meeting called to order by the President.

THE PRESIDENT: To my mind nut growing is part of a larger field, a field
of conservation, one which is going to develop a whole new series of
tree crops, of which the nuts are but a part.




PRESIDENT'S ADDRESS.

DR. J. RUSSELL SMITH.

Agriculture is usually symbolized by a picture showing a man, a plow,
and a sheaf of wheat. I would make the symbolization double by adding to
it some kind of a nut tree in fruit. I have long had a vision of waving,
sturdy, fruitful trees yielding nuts and other valuable fruit, and
standing on our hilly and rocky land where now the gully and other signs
of poverty, destruction and desolation gape at us. This vision of the
fruitful tree also extends to the arid lands, there also vastly
increasing our productive areas. Beyond a doubt the tree is the greatest
engine of production nature has given us, and in its ability to yield
harvests without soil injury on rough, rocky, and steep lands, and on
arid lands, carries the possibility of the approximate doubling of the
area of first-class cropping land in the United States, also probably in
many other countries.

Twenty-one years ago this spring I began in a small way to bring into
reality this vision of the tree-covered fruitful hills, although my
interest in the matter goes back at least four years further to the time
when I filled my pockets with the large grafted European chestnuts grown
along his lanes by the late Edwin Satterthwaite, of Jenkintown, Pa.

My first essay at nut tree cropping was short but not sweet. I planted
an acre and a half of Persian walnuts, seedlings being the only things
then to be found. There being no one within my reach to guide me much,
if any, I bought such seedlings as were to be had from a New Jersey
nurseryman. I mulched them, and saw them each year grow less and less
until the third season they disappeared. I have, however, some survival
from this attempt in the form of black walnuts, which I had the
foresight to plant as nuts immediately beside the Persian walnuts when
they were planted as trees. Some of these walnuts are now quite sturdy
young trees ready to be top-worked to some good strain.

My second attempt was the Paragon chestnut. In 1897 I started in on a
100-acre tract on the Blue Ridge Mountains, near Bluemont, Va., much of
it too rocky for any cultivated crop, but admirably fitted to native
chestnuts, and covered with a perfect stand. I had a good many acres
well established, when, in 1908, the chestnut blight convinced me that
further extension was perilous. My orchard has since been given over to
the Department of Agriculture as the scene of their experiments in
fighting the chestnut blight, but they have given it up, withdrawn their
efforts, and half the orchard is now cut down and planted to Winesap and
Grimes Golden Apples, which ten year's experience has shown me can be
grown on such land without cultivation if mulched with the weeds and
bushes that grow around them, and given some commercial fertilizer. I
have a number of such young trees planted in 1907 in land of this
character that are now full of fine quality fruit.

My third nut-growing attempt was with more select strains of seedling
English walnuts than the miserable chancelings with which I began. One
tree from the magnificent specimens at 3115 O street, N. W., Washington,
D. C., and several from Pomeroy, promptly perished, apparently from
winter-killing, and my nut hopes were at a very low ebb when the
Northern Nut Growers' Association came upon my intellectual horizon.
From it I have learned how to graft the walnut, the pecan and other
hickories, and I have again started in on the English walnut, using the
Mayette, Franquette, and several of the eastern seedlings. After the
usual disastrous failures at top-working, I was this June in such a
large condition of hope that I was in serious need of being hooped to
keep myself down to normal size. Such artificial aids to the maintenance
of normal size are, however, no longer necessary after this summer's
experiences, during which the bud-worm has cut the ends of my Persian
walnut shoots and the blight apparently has withered up my young grafts
so that an 18 inch shoot of July 1st is now 17 inches black and 1 inch
brownish green, and in other cases entirely dead. Alas what a slaughter!
This apparently puts my Persian walnut hopes into a state of neutrality.
I hope it is benevolent neutrality. So far as actual expecting is
concerned, however, I am not doing any just now. I wait.

The grafted black walnuts, however, have met with none of these
accidents, and these are a substantial and solid hope, as is the pecan,
which is behaving handsomely on its own roots and also on the hickory
roots.


_Tree Crops Insurance._

As my experience with nut trees well shows, there is little doubt that
we are now in a period of great activity of plant enemies. They are
indeed a by-product of the splendid work now being done in bringing to
us the crop plants of all parts of the world. Along with the Chinese and
Japanese products which have already been so valuable and promise us so
much more for American horticulture, we have received the San Jose
scale, the chestnut blight, and probably others will follow. For the
next twenty-five or fifty years while the nut industries are in what may
be properly considered the experimental stage, I wish to urge the great
necessity of some kind of crop insurance for the man who plants out any
kind of nut tree. Say what you please, the nuts are not as well known
and as reliable as the other fruits, such as the apple, and even apples
are uncertain enough.


_Crop Insurance Through Two-Story Farming._

By the term "crop insurance" I mean having something else on the same
land that will make a profit year after year, whether the tree pays or
not. If this is not feasible, there should be something else which can
be quickly converted into a crop if the main hope suddenly disappears.
For the man who is growing nuts on level, arable land, I believe I
cannot emphasize too strongly the pastured pig. Pigs below trees (and
nuts maybe above). This is merely the two-story farming that Europe was
practising when Columbus was a boy. Upon all good nut growers I urge the
pig for the first story. This unromantic but very practical aid to
income for the nut-grower has had the great honor to be accepted by a
president of the Northern Nut Growers' Association, Mr. Littlepage, and
by a president of the National Nut Growers' Association, Colonel Van
Duzee. Colonel Van Duzee, from the financial standpoint, really does not
have to have his pecan trees either to live or bear. He is making money
out of the oats, cowpeas, crimson clover, vetch, soy beans, velvet
beans, and other forage crops which he is growing between the pecan
trees, and which the pigs are harvesting for him and converting into
salable products. Of course this makes the pecan trees grow like weeds,
but I am now talking about the crop insurance aspect of it. This crop
insurance aspect of Colonel Van Duzee's last planting cannot be too
strongly emphasized. He has planted the trees 100 feet apart,
practically four and one-quarter trees to the acre, and has then
proceeded to the hog farming business as though the trees were not
there. This may sound somewhat fantastic to the man of the North.
Perhaps it sounds well-nigh criminal to the man who is trying to sell
pecan tree land to schoolmarms, talking fifty pecan trees to the acre.
When a tree has the habit of spreading two or three or four feet per
year when well fed, and keeping it up an indefinite time, the question
of ultimate size is one to be reckoned with. That the pecan tree can
attain great size in the North, as well as in the South, is attested by
the record of a tree in northern Maryland on Spesutia Island, near the
head of Chesapeake Bay. The tree is described by one of our members, Mr.
Wilmer P. Hoopes, as being eighty-four years old, hale and hearty.

"This tree is 106 feet tall, with a spread of 110 feet, has two limbs,
respectively 57 and 60 feet long and is 13 feet in circumference, 3 feet
above ground, and is an annual bearer of thin shell, nuts that, though
rather small now, are mighty good to eat."

If nut trees are going to grow into that size, we must plant very wide
or make up our minds to a very heroic and very difficult act, one which
many men in the South should do this minute, namely, cut down half or
three-quarters of the nut trees on a given acre.

I wish to emphasize the health aspect from the standpoint of the tree of
this very wide planting. It is generally recognized by horticultural
authority that trees develop sickness and disease when crowded in large
numbers. The pecan trees 100 feet apart may perhaps escape this danger
and have the sun on all parts of their leaf surface, a fact, by the way,
which is necessary to crop production on this and other nut trees.

This wide planting is practically the method followed in most of the
important French Persian walnut districts. With very few exceptions
their trees are isolated, a man having two or twenty, or thirty,
scattered about his farm, usually in the midst of his fields where they
can develop to perfection, take the tillage of the crops, and bring in
some extra money, which one of the owners very significantly told me is
"income without effort." This income without effort aspect of the matter
takes the form of a man having to pay as much rent for a good walnut
tree in the department of Dordogne, as he does for an acre of good wheat
land alongside.


_Rough Land Tree Crops Insurance._

What kind of tree crops insurance might I have had for my chestnuts
grafted nineteen years ago? Had I known then as much as I now know about
nut trees, excepting the chestnut blight, I should have planted that
place thickly with black walnut nuts and northern pecan nuts, unless the
squirrels were too quick for me, in which case I should have used little
seedlings. These I would have kept in a submerged but hopeful condition
by occasionally cutting them down. This would keep them from crowding
the chestnut trees, but would by no means have kept me out of a stand of
vigorous pecans and black walnuts ready to graft at very short notice.
When the blight blew its signal of national alarm in 1908, I could have
gone to grafting those trees and they would by this time probably have
been in bearing and ready to replace the chestnuts which are now dying
with the blight.

If any one wishes to contradict my statement about these trees living
with such treatment, I will admit that I am not speaking from experience
with regard to the pecan, but I believe the experience of others
admirably verifies the statement I have made. I am, however, speaking
literally from my own experience when I refer to the black walnut. For
ten summers past I have in July and August scythed off a certain tract
of stump land planted to apples. Each year black walnuts and butter nuts
have been cut, and now at the end of that time the stubs are still
annually throwing up vigorous shoots 2-1/2 to 4 feet in length, and if
they are allowed to escape for a season, they dart past a man's head so
fast he wonders what has happened.

While I hope to experiment for forty more years on my mountain side in
the attempt to cover it with waving fruitful trees that are so immune to
pests as not to need spraying, I shall never again be caught with only
one possibility upon a given piece of land. If I should top-work my
native hickories to shagbark, which I know involves considerable waiting
and considerable uncertainty, I can, with very little expense, put upon
the same ground a full stand of grafted black walnuts and a full stand
of budded pecans, or if I do not care to go to that much trouble, I can
graft my hickories and plant my native black walnuts and merely keep
them there in submerged condition as reserve trees ready to be grafted
at any time. For a pecan orchard I can do exactly the same thing, using
black walnuts as fillers, possible successors, or as ungrafted reserves.
For the Persian walnut, the black walnut can again come in as a filler
or as a reserve, and for grafted blacks of any variety, other blacks can
be kept waiting for the arrival of possible better varieties which could
easily become the head of the corner.

My experience with transplanting seedling pecans shows that they, too,
can, without serious difficulty, be planted out in such rough land and
kept waiting there for years until the day of possible utilization.

Lastly, I wish to emphasize one more possible crop insurance tree for
the man who is planting nuts on land difficult of cultivation, or
entirely untillable, and that is the persimmon. I have paid my respects
above to the tilled crops and the pastured pig for the arable land, and
for the unarable land I would still emphasize the pig and give him other
sources of food to supplement pasture. Among these possible foods is the
persimmon which as yet has been little appreciated in an extensive way,
although hundreds of thousands of men know it is highly prized forage
and of considerable fattening value. It has a crop insurance virtue,
however, other than its acceptability as pig feed. That is the hardiness
of the tree and the ease of establishing it. In my pasture lot the
Angora goat, even when pushed with hunger, has not touched persimmon
wood or leaves. The same is practically true of the black walnut and of
the butternut. This fact is one of great importance, because it means
that we can keep rough land in pastures, even goat pasture, during the
period when we are planting out tall-headed nut trees of almost any
variety, and at the same time have a perfect stand of two kinds of crop
insurance trees coming along, namely, walnuts and persimmons.

In this connection it is desirable to point out the relation of this
recommendation to the actual practice in nut growing regions of Europe.
They do not plant a little two or three foot tree. They plant an eight
or nine-foot tree often so slight it can not hold itself up, and is kept
in place by one or two stiff poles. This tall-headed fellow stands out
in the middle of the wheat field, the vineyard, the hay field, the goat
pasture, the cow pasture, with its head entirely out of reach of the
pasturing animal, its trunk protected by one or two stout sticks, and in
due time it takes hold. With the trees properly developed in the
nursery, I know of no reason why the same practice cannot prevail here,
and I have at least one Busseron pecan tree that has gone safely through
the first summer of it.

The practice of one pecan grower in Texas, reported in the Nut Journal,
is suggestive of a crop insurance practice capable of wide use in the
North, namely, planting of filler trees of quick-yielding varieties.
There is no reason why the northern nut trees might not be planted 40,
60, or 80 feet apart in peach or even apple orchards, as did the Texas
man with his nut trees 72 feet apart, occupying every fourth place in an
18-foot spaced fig orchard. I would call attention of Northerners,
however, to the desirability of the mulberry, the most rapid growing and
cheapest of all our fruit trees, doing well in Carolina at a space of 30
feet, which would enable the Northerner, by a little variation of the
interval between his mulberry trees, to plant nut trees anywhere from 60
to 100 feet apart.


_Sod Mulch Nut Orchards._

I know that any suggestions of the production of trees without plowing
is unorthodox, and therefore not likely to be heard straight, and
particularly perilous in the presence of professional horticulturists in
state or national employ. To such I wish to call attention to the fact
that I have emphasized in this matter, first, the tillage methods, and
that I am making no knock against cultivation. We all know that it works
under some conditions, and we all also know that there are some
conditions in which it will not work. If I lived on level, sandy loam,
I'd be a furious tiller of tree crops fifteen times a year. But I was
born upon a rocky hill, and now I live upon another that is higher and
rockier, and I don't believe in tilling it fifteen times a year. Must I
abandon it, or adopt uses to its conditions? Out of these conditions
mulch orcharding has come. Despite the orthodox, I know that the growing
of some kinds of fruit trees without cultivation has passed the
experimental stage. At this moment millions of barrels of apples are
approaching perfection in orchards in Virginia and other eastern states
that have not been plowed for more than one, and sometimes for more than
five seasons. The application of this method to nut trees is still in
the embryonic stage, with theoretic factors favoring it.

I do not know how far the mulch-fertilizer method can go, but I am sure
it may go much farther than most professional horticulturists will
admit. I find that the pecan tree starts off nicely under the mulch
fertilizer conditions of the apple. The walnut tree has certainly done
it for ages with less aid, and I believe it is up to us to find methods
of handling land and trees and moisture which will enable us to avoid
the danger, costs, and difficulties of plowing rough land and still get
good trees. For example, the absence of cultivation does not necessarily
imply the absence of fertilizer. The way a few black walnut trees in my
apple orchard have snapped their buds and grown in response to the
nitrate of soda that has been put upon the apple trees beside has been
little short of astounding. The way a poor little starveling persimmon
wakes up when the same treatment comes along, is equally interesting. I
cannot speak definitely yet about the influence of fertilizer on the
Persian walnut or the pecan.

In connection with the fertilization matter, it is well known that a
crop of clover or other legumes is very important as a part of the
rotation of crops in plow agriculture. Similarly I expect great value
can be obtained in our pastured and fertilized nut orchards if we so
treat the soil with lime, phosphorous, and whatever else is needed, to
give a good mat of white clover and other legumes which are undoubtedly
a good nitrogen supply for trees whose roots interlace with theirs.

Similarly I see great possibilities in the interplanting of some
leguminous crop tree such as the honey locust or the Kentucky coffee
bean in our nut orchards. It is true neither of these trees has yet been
selected and developed to the crop point, but they are much more
promising than Sargent says the wild Persian walnut was at its
beginning. It is an established fact that a non-leguminous plant can
take nourishment from the nitrate-bearing nodules on the roots of
adjacent living legumes, to say nothing of its well-known ability to
feed upon the nitrate collections of legumes that have lived in past
seasons within reach of its roots. Thus the interplanting of a legume
and a nut tree seems to promise a continuous supply of the all-important
nitrates for the nut tree.


_The Question of Moisture._

It is not necessarily true that a tree gets a low percentage of the
local rainfall because it is not plowed. The last palliation, or is it
provocation, that I would throw into the camp of the orthodox and the
worshippers of the plow, is the water-pocket, or small field reservoir,
draining a few square rods and holding hard by the roots of a tree a few
gallons or a few barrels of water which would otherwise run away. I
showed this association a number of photographs of these water-pockets
last year. Their most extensive American user, Dr. Mayer, considers them
successful from the tree's standpoint and profitable from the economic
standpoint. Since the great virtue of cultivation is the conservation of
moisture, I will submit that this device, worked out and used for three
centuries by the olive growers of Tunis, for twenty years by Dr. Mayer,
of Pennsylvania, and about the same length of time by Colonel Freeman
Thorpe, Minnesota, can from the point of theory and perhaps also from
the point of practice, equal tillage on some soils, and with less labor
and much greater economy in farm management, for the making of water
pots is a job for odd times, the bane of agriculture, and tillage all
comes in a pile--another bane of agriculture.

Upon the whole, I think my 21 years of nut loving have run me directly
and indirectly into ten thousand hard earned, and as yet, partly not
earned dollars. Rather a deep sting for a pedagogue. When the last of my
grafted chestnut trees come down next year, I will have little to show
for that ten thousand, but an experimental nursery and some experimental
trees scattered about the hillside. But the experiments are still
interesting. I still have hope, and I still love trees. I am still
ahead.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE PRESIDENT: I believe every other man here today has defended his
thesis. I will not claim any exemption.

DR. STABLER: The President has mentioned the combination of apple and
walnut trees. I would like to ask him if he has seen any deleterious
effects upon the apple from the proximity of walnut roots. Now, some of
my friends in Montgomery county have the idea that an apple tree will
not live within fifty feet of a walnut tree. I have, myself, seen a
number of apple trees die, apparently because they were neighbors of
walnut trees. I wasn't sure that that was the cause of death, but they
died, and walnut trees situated in an apple orchard will have a ring of
dead apple trees around them. Now that is one case that I know of where
the walnut tree acts injuriously upon the vegetation to which it is
neighbor. All of the farm crops, wheat, corn, grass, and oats, and rye,
etc., seem to thrive just as well under the limbs of a black walnut as
they do away from it. In fact, frequently you see the grass greener and
more luxuriant right up to the trunk of the tree than anywhere else, but
it doesn't seem to be true of the apple. Now, I would like to hear from
the President.

THE PRESIDENT: I simply made that as a suggestion and referred to this
instance as an illustration of the effect of fertilization on the
walnut.

DR. AUGUSTUS STABLER: Well, how are those apple trees doing?

THE PRESIDENT: I had enough trouble without looking for more by mixing
walnut and apple trees. The walnut trees are small, merely the growth
from stubs repeatedly cut.

The next on our program is a paper by Mr. McMurran, of the Department of
Agriculture, upon the question of diseases of the English walnut. Mr.
McMurran.

MR. S. M. MCMURRAN: I am sorry that in this, my first appearance before
this Association I haven't a more optimistic and encouraging subject to
talk on than diseases. You men and women who are burdened with
establishing this industry have enough on you without contending with
diseases, and it was not my intention to talk upon diseases at this
meeting, but Mr. Littlepage, Mr. C. A. Reed, and Mr. Jones, and several
others, have been urging the matter strongly, which explains my
appearance at this time.

Walnut blight is a very common and serious disease on the Pacific Coast.
It may be a native disease, though it has never been reported on native
black walnuts, and it has proved a very serious menace to the seedling
English walnut groves on the Pacific Coast.

This little piece of work I want to tell you about tonight was done
through the co-operation of Mr. Jones and Mr. Rush, at Lancaster, Pa.,
and has just been completed within the last few days. I made a trip
through New Jersey, Delaware, and Pennsylvania, about the first of
August, and found a number of nuts that had all the appearance of being
infected with the walnut blight germ. They had the same appearance as
those nuts that you saw this afternoon in Georgetown. I brought them
back here and made cultures from them in the laboratory, and after that
the problem was absurdly easy. The germ was obtained without difficulty,
I obtained a pure culture, and then I went up to Mr. Rush's place, at
Lancaster, and made a number of inoculations, of which these few I have
here are typical. This nut that you see here was inoculated from a pure
culture along with a number of others, and the condition is as you see
it, after about a month. Inoculations were also made into twigs, and I
will pass these around for your examination.

The one marked, inoculated, has a little canker on it, and on the other
you will have difficulty in finding the needle punctures, but you will
see them if you look closely.

Now, I hardly know what to say about this disease at this time. As I
have stated before, my work has been in the South for the past several
years, and no work has been done on this disease in the East prior to
this summer. That it must have been here for a long time seems almost a
foregone conclusion, because of its wide distribution. Mr. Jones was a
little bit conscience-stricken for fear he brought it here with him.
Still it is in Delaware and Maryland as well as Pennsylvania, and you
can't blame Mr. Jones for that. I think, too, it is less actively
pathogenic than on the Pacific Coast, or we would have heard of it
before. That it should prove a serious menace to the development of the
walnut industry in the East, is too much to assume at this time. It will
undoubtedly eliminate a number of the varieties that are considered
promising now, but the course that will have to be taken will be to
propagate only varieties which are highly resistant or totally immune to
the disease. Just what these varieties are going to be in the East we do
not know as yet, of course. We should avoid the mistakes that the
growers on the Pacific Coast have made of planting seedling trees, and
taking the chance of their being resistant to the disease. A great many
varieties will be automatically eliminated when the nurserymen bear in
mind that this disease is one to be considered, and I want to say, that,
in addition to this, the Department will take pleasure in making
artificial inoculations and tests on all those concerning which there
is any question. We have the germ in culture now and will maintain it,
and anyone who discovers a new variety, or has an old one they would
like to propagate, can communicate with us, and we will take pleasure in
testing its susceptibility.

I think that is about all that can be said on the subject at this time.

This disease has been studied very carefully on the Pacific Coast and a
number of publications issued from the California Experiment Station
concerning it.

For those who are interested in looking the literature up, I have here
the following references: Cal. Station Bulletins, 184, 203, 218, 231,
and Circulars 107 and 131.

A MEMBER: Is spraying of any avail?

MR. MCMURRAN: It has helped somewhat, but it has not proved economical
on the coast.

A MEMBER: In order to have that test made, would it be necessary to send
the things to the Department?

MR. MCMURRAN: No; it would be necessary for me to come to you and test
them on the trees.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Did those walnuts in Mr. Brown's yard look to you as
though they had the blight?

MR. MCMURRAN: Yes, they looked like this (showing specimen).

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Did you notice that tree just across the fence? The
reason I ask the question is that if that is blight out there, then that
tree right across the fence is very likely resistant, because I have
noticed that those walnuts have had this on and off for six or seven
years. The limbs of the two trees are within twenty feet of each other.

MR. MCMURRAN: Well, that is a very encouraging point.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: I didn't think that was blight. All those trees at
Georgetown that I have observed have that condition on them, more or
less, except that one tree.

MR. MCMURRAN: Yet, isn't it true that they bore pretty good crops of
nuts, nevertheless?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Oh, yes.

MR. MCMURRAN: Well, that was the point I had in mind. Of the two trees
one bears every other year, and the other bears heavy crops every year.

DR. MORRIS: You see the same thing at the Experiment Station in southern
California. One tree will be absolutely resistant to blight; the other
will be all killed. And down at Whittier, perhaps, seven-tenths of all
the trees will be badly affected with the bacteriosis, and the others
not very much affected, so that, apparently, it is largely a matter of
this cynips, which introduces the bacteria, selecting certain trees.
Certain walnuts are very much affected, and the involucre looks very
much like that of these nuts (showing specimens), but, on examining
them, I found a very large number of small larvae beneath the involucre.
I sent some of them to the Connecticut Experiment Station and some to
Washington, but they didn't tell me what they were. Those same larvae I
found in one black walnut on my place, which is very heavily infested
with them. Most of the nuts drop because of the injury to the involucre.
I haven't determined the species yet. I don't know whether the larvae
come first and the bacteriosis second, or whether it's the other way
around.

THE PRESIDENT: Are there other persons who wish to give themselves a
chance of asking Mr. McMurran a question? I have a question that is
troubling me. Perhaps the house can throw light upon it. I had a number
of Persian walnuts, Vrooman Franquette and Mayette, grafted on black,
and by the Fourth of July they were growing nicely, with tops all the
way from four to twenty-four inches long, and then the tip got black and
the blackness went down. I sent a sample to Mr. McMurran. The leaves
first died and then the twigs.

MR. MCMURRAN: I received that, but it was so dried when I got it it was
impossible to make anything out of it. I have seen the same thing on
pecans, only in those cases the leaves just got black and fell off, and
we never have been able to assign a reason for it.

THE PRESIDENT: Am I the only man that has had that experience?

A MEMBER: I had this year the same thing on the Vrooman Franquette, but
it recovered and has made excellent growth since.

MR. MCMURRAN: Have yours subsequently lived?

THE PRESIDENT: No, they subsequently died. (Laughter.)

MR. J. F. JONES: I had that experience this summer. The new growth was
very tender and took blight very readily.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, this doesn't appear to be blight.

MR. JONES: If the English walnut starts late and the tender growth comes
in the hot weather, the sun will kill it.

THE PRESIDENT: You have described my conditions. These are late grafts.
Have you had that same experience with late grafts and not with early
ones?

MR. JONES: Yes, sir. The blight will show itself in the specks on the
twig.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, do you mean on this sunburn?

MR. JONES. No, sir.

THE PRESIDENT: There were no specks in this case. Has any other member
any question on the blight? I want to call attention to the fact that we
have here in this room tonight nearly every one who is studying the
question in the eastern United States.

MR. MCMURRAN: Mr. President, I would like to say that we would like to
get all the information we can on it.

A MEMBER: According to my observation, the blight is not going to do
much to the tree, because the tree here makes its growth and hardens up
before the blight comes. The blight, you see, must have moisture and
heat to work, but it comes in just right to catch the nuts.

MR. R. L. MCCOY: Mr. President, some mighty strange things happen with
grafted and budded English walnuts, and I believe I could ask questions
that would puzzle a school of wise men. Now, none of the answers here
will stand up very well. For instance, Mr. Jones says this dieing back
is due to late grafting. Well, I had some Holdens that we budded this
last June a year ago, that suddenly, all at once, along in July this
year, proceeded to quit business, and quit clear down, and the root
died, too, the black walnut root. It is a serious question in my mind
whether the black is the best stock to be used or not. Mr. Jones and Mr.
Reed have good success grafting the English on the black. We don't down
our way. Both of those men are in regions where the land is inclined to
be alkali. The land where my orchard is, and where Mr. Littlepage's and
Mr. Wilkinson's orchards are, is inclined to be acid. I am of the
opinion that, to make a success of the English walnut, we are going to
have to use lime, and use it extensively, not only in the nursery, but
until the time when the trees begin to bear.

THE PRESIDENT: It is one of the common pieces of knowledge of all the
agriculturists of France that the walnut does well on lime soils, and
they don't expect it to do well on acid soils.

MR. JONES: Mr. President, I think, if Mr. McCoy will examine his trees,
he will find that the root dies first.

MR. MCCOY: Well, why should they rot?

MR. JONES: That is like a good many other things, Mr. McCoy. We don't
know why.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: A pecan top-worked on a water hickory will sometimes
kill the whole tree, top and all. It is the top that does it.

MR. M. P. REED: This year we made some observations of different
varieties, as to time of leafing out, and we found the Eastern varieties
leafed out about the first of April, and the Franquette and Mayette
about the fifth of May, and one variety we got from the Department, No.
39,884, didn't leaf out until the twenty-fifth of May. That seemed to
indicate that the French varieties were going to prove better than the
Eastern varieties, because late frosts cannot hurt the blossoms.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: That is correct. I watched them this spring at Mr.
McCoy's. Franquette and Mayette, over there and with us, were anywhere
from ten days to two weeks later leafing out. Some of the buds were
entirely dormant and some just bursting when many of our Eastern
varieties were in full leaf. But my experience here in Maryland on
walnut trees from all sections was that every one winter-killed except
one Nebo tree and a top-worked Potomac. I have a Potomac which has made
ten to twelve feet of growth, and it didn't winter-kill the slightest,
and my Nebo tree hasn't winter-killed any, but the Franquette, the
Meylan, the Rush, the Holden, and several others winter-killed very
badly. At least, Mr. McMurran said that was what it was, and I thought
it was, too.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, Mr. Littlepage, isn't "winter-killing" rather a
relative term, dependent partly upon the climate and partly upon the
condition of the tree at the end of the growing season? Was there
anything back of your statement, any late growing, or something of that
sort?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Well, they didn't grow any later than the Potomac grew,
but that tree was top-worked about five or six feet above the ground and
I think that makes them hardier.

A MEMBER: Were the winter-killed trees cultivated late?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Yes; and fertilized heavily.

THE PRESIDENT: Haven't you answered your own question?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Well, I won't grow trees if they do not grow better than
that.

MR. MCCOY: Mr. Littlepage may think he has answered this question, and
these other gentlemen may think they have answered it in a different
way, but there are some rather peculiar phenomena there. I don't
question the sincerity of these gentlemen, but I don't think they have
answered the question. Whenever you transplant these trees and whenever
you get to growing them in big quantities, you will have certain
peculiar phenomena that you are not certain at first as to just what is
the cause. Mr. White is just as near right when he says they kill in
July as Mr. Littlepage when he says they winter-kill in December. And I
will just say to people who buy walnut trees from our firm that when
they transplant them under the same conditions as Mr. Littlepage, they
may expect similar results.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: I have never seen a northern pecan winter-kill.

MR. MCCOY: Oh, I have.

MR. MCMURRAN: Mr. President, this term "winter-killing" is a little bit
misleading, and it has been a matter of discussion in the National Nut
Growers' Association for several years and a great loss to many Southern
pecan growers. A very common statement that one hears down there is
"Why, our trees don't winter-kill. We don't have cold severe enough to
kill them." But they do. It isn't a question of severity of cold, but
suddenness of change. For instance, in southern Georgia one year, we had
a rainy period in October; about November 20th there was a hard freeze.
A number of orchards which had been fertilized late in the fall were
almost wiped out. If it were not due to the fact that the term is too
long, and we could say "damage due to sudden temperature change," it
would convey the idea exactly. I saw trees injured in the fall of 1914
that didn't die until September of the following year, and I have a
number of photographs in my office.

DR. STABLER: I believe, Mr. President, that the stimulation of growth
late in the season has a great deal to do with the winter-killing of
trees and other plants. I have noticed it in clover and alfalfa, and I
have noticed it in peach trees.

THE PRESIDENT: I think Dr. Stabler has stated a very well-known
principle, not only of horticulture, but also of agriculture. Last year
we questioned Mr. W. C. Reed as to the condition of a certain
top-worked, heavily forced, black-walnut we had seen the year before at
Vincennes. We were confirmed in our belief that the tree was dead, but
that another tree budded at the same time with the same bud-wood and not
forced, lived. We had a dry summer that year, a wet fall, twenty degrees
below zero at Christmas, dead apple trees. I suspect that Mr. Littlepage
has a problem in the balance of tillage and top-working.

DR. STABLER: I think if he visits his neighbor, Professor Waite, he will
find out how to manage trees so they won't winter-kill, because he knows
how to fix it. (Laughter.)

MR. LITTLEPAGE: I treated the trees just like the pecan. I have never
seen it possible yet to over-stimulate a pecan and winter-kill it. I
don't say it isn't possible, but I have never seen it.

THE PRESIDENT: I can show you a few.

MR. M. P. REED: Mr. President, we have that condition in the nursery
row.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Well, those are grafted, are they not?

MR. M. P. REED: Grafts and buds, both.

DR. MORRIS: In regard to the grafting of the Persian walnut upon black
walnut stock. In Connecticut, we have three species of mice--the common
field mouse, the pine mouse, and the white-footed mouse. These mice all
follow in the holes of the moles, and they are very fond of the bark of
the Persian walnut, and will destroy a good many of them. Now, with the
black walnut, on the other hand, when one of these mice comes along and
takes a bite of that, he shuts one eye, cleans his teeth, and then goes
on to something else. (Laughter.)

Now, in our country the soil is practically all acid. The black walnut
will grow in pretty acid soil. The Persian walnut almost demands a
neutral or alkaline soil. So, for Connecticut there is no doubt that we
really need the black walnut stock for the Persian walnut.

THE PRESIDENT: Any further problems that are vexing the orchardist with
regard to the Persian walnut? If not, I think this is a suitable time to
bury it until next year. Col. Van Duzee, a man who has had more
experience with the pecan than almost any one else in the room, has
kindly consented to make his contribution at this time. Col. Van Duzee.

COL. VAN DUZEE: There is a longing on the part of a large percentage of
men and women that I meet to escape from conditions which do not seem to
be especially favorable in the large cities, and to get away into the
safety of the country. I believe that nut tree growing offers one of the
safest of those outlets. I believe that a nut orchard should be a part
of a general farming operation. I want to give you my ideas about
inter-crops. Fifteen years ago the doctors gave me three months to live,
drove me out of my business, and away from my home to prolong the agony
for a few weeks or months, and I found, among my orchard trees, a
reasonable amount of health which, to me, repays a greater value than I
could reckon in dollars and cents. It has given me the privilege and the
opportunity of removing myself from the turmoil of the city and the
conflict of the business world to a peaceful, quiet existence, that, to
me, is very much more satisfactory. Now, that is an inter-crop.

Down in Florida, when we used to get together in our citrus seminars and
in our horticultural and agricultural meetings we used to try and make a
man say on what class of soil his home or orchard was located, so that
we might get his viewpoint. For the successful nut orchardist, in a
small way, must, of necessity, be a successful agriculturist. He must
understand soils. You can't have successful inter-cropping without
understanding soils, and, therefore, I can't tell you definitely what
would be good for your northern soils. But I can tell you this, that the
first thing to do when you have an orchard problem to consider is to
make an exhaustive survey of the character of the soil. If it is a
fresh, recently cleared piece of fertile soil, under favorable
conditions, I am satisfied you don't need very much in the way of
inter-cropping. On the other hand, if you select for your orchard site a
piece of land that has been worked to death, I believe it would be well
to inaugurate a system of inter-cropping that would have for its object
the building up of that soil and the improvement of the environment for
the roots of those trees. In the South, we are favored with twelve
months of growing weather. We plant our crops throughout the year. I am
just about beginning now to plow for my oat planting. I am going to
pasture those oats all winter with hogs and cattle. We will harvest our
oats in May. We then follow them with a legume which will restore the
fertility to that soil. In the present condition of the market for
commercial fertilizers, I believe we have gone beyond the point where
any man can afford to use commercial fertilizers to any great extent on
ordinary crops. I believe it is possible to go too far in the
stimulation of a growing orchard. My opinion is that a series of
inter-crops that results eventually in a large deposit of nitrogen, such
as we get from several leguminous crops plowed under, will have a
tendency to bring that orchard into a condition--I am speaking now, you
understand, of the pecan---where it will be susceptible to disease and
winter-killing.

If you have followed me as far as I have gone in this, you will begin to
see at once that the men who are going to be successful in solving these
problems are the men who are going to learn the game. Among the human
family, you know, we have a stock phrase that we use sometimes when a
man dies and we don't understand the cause of his death. We say "He died
of heart failure." That is a convenient thing to hide behind.
"Winter-killing," to my mind, is another such term. It is used, for
instance, in a case where an individual tree, for some reason or other
not quite understood, "passed away." (Laughter.)

I have been fifteen years in the growing of pecan trees in the South,
and I am free to confess that the most disturbing element in my life at
the present time is the fact that we "have known so many things that
weren't true." We have gone ahead fully believing that our course was
justified, that it was well digested, desirable in every way, and
suddenly waked up to find that we were radically wrong, or, at least,
that there was a very open question as to whether we were not absolutely
wrong.

To the person of limited means the idea of being able to produce a nut
orchard at very little expense is very attractive, and my heart goes out
to people in that condition because I have been in that condition myself
and passed through it. Ten years ago I bought a piece of land for forty
dollars an acre, and planted seventeen pecan trees on each acre. It cost
me twenty-five dollars an acre to lay off the land, dig the holes, and
plant the trees nicely, with about a half pound of bone meal mixed in
the soil in each hole. I carried that nut orchard on, using some
inter-crops, up to one year ago, when it finished its eighth year of
growth, and, without burdening you with the minute figures, I am going
to say we have sixty-five dollars charged up to it, and it will take
$185 more. Now, there is $250, if I haven't made any mistake. I planted
among those trees nursery stock, and I sold off, during the time that
those trees were growing, nursery stock to the value of, we will say,
$250, making my inter-crops pay the expense of cultivation and interest
on the investment up to that time. So don't forget that. Now, this is a
case where we are going to balance our books, as every business man
does, and every farmer ought to. I have, up to the time those trees were
eight years of age, invested approximately $250, and have received back
not only that, but the interest on the investment. So, at eight years of
age the orchard cost me nothing. Now, that would be the way a great many
people would figure that proposition. I can't do it that way. I am going
to charge that orchard with $250 an acre for supervision. Now, above
that line (indicating on black-board) it looks as though that orchard
had been built up for nothing, and below the line you see a debit of
$250 charged against that orchard. There is not one man in a hundred
that contemplates a proposition of this kind that is willing to charge
his orchard up with the gray matter that he puts into it. But there was
an inter-crop in that orchard, of health and satisfaction, which is
worth more to me than my services, so I will put that in here as $250.
(Laughter and applause.) Now, I walked across this morning--I like to
walk, and I came across the park. I saw a monument right over here in a
little iron circular enclosure, erected in honor of Andrew Jackson
Donald, a man who died several years ago, the man who was partly
responsible for the magnificent landscape gardening effect of which this
building is a part. It said on the monument this: "His life was devoted
to the improvement of the national taste in rural art." Down below it
said: "His mind was singularly just, penetrating and original." Any man
ought to be proud to have that sort of thing engraved upon his monument,
and, gentlemen, any man who will go out and plant nut trees like those
you saw this afternoon, ought to have a monument under those trees
expressing sentiments similar to these, because he has done something
which remains after him, and it is one of the most worth-while things
that any human being can do. That is one of the other valuable things
about a nut orchard.

Now, this nut orchard--this is no myth--this is a practical proposition.
I was practically bankrupt when I went there. It is paying now in a
small way, and will pay more later on, and I am going to leave it to my
children as one of the safest and sanest investments that I could leave
them, and I want to say, ladies and gentlemen, that the consciousness of
possessing something of that sort, which can't be stolen, can't run
away, is another inter-crop that is grown among those trees.

I sometimes tell a story of a little two-horse farm down in the South. I
drove fourteen miles out into the wilderness to find some seed nuts to
plant this nursery with years ago. I found there an old home which was
the central home of a large plantation in days gone by, and there were
half a dozen--perhaps seven or eight--magnificent, great pecan trees
about the lot, and a vegetable garden at the back of the home. Those
trees were loaded with nuts. There was a young man there--one of the
most pitiful things that I ever saw in my life--a fine young
man--magnificent character, and recently married, making his home in
this old tumble-down house, making his start in the world there. He
didn't own this land--rented this fifty or sixty acres of open land, and
these trees went with the two-horse farm. I said, "My friend, you must
receive quite a little income from those nuts." "Yes," he said, "I sell
the nuts from those trees every year, for more money than I make from
the two-horse farm."

I heard of another case down in north Florida where two girls were left
absolutely dependent upon their own exertions, and they were girls who
had been reared, as some of the Southern ladies have been reared, to be
dependent on others. They didn't know how to go and fight the world for
a place. They were a little too far along, perhaps, to take up that sort
of battle. There were two pecan trees in front of that old homestead,
and the old homestead was all that was left of the family fortune. It
was furnished, had a cow in the back yard, and a garden, and a few
Scuppernong grape vines. These two pecan trees in the front yard gave
those two women approximately three hundred dollars worth of nuts per
annum. They were magnificent, great, big pecan trees, and they lived
from them the balance of their lives practically, with the help of the
other things I have mentioned.

Inter-crops are nothing more nor less than the evidences of the master
mind directing the problem of handling the soil in which the orchard is
growing. Now, just simply go right down deep under everything, pay
absolutely no attention to the wonderful stories that the promoters tell
you (laughter), keep your money, save it, use it, and spend it--yes, but
recognize this one thing, that the most important element in success in
the small orchard, as part of the rural or suburban home, is a knowledge
of agriculture and horticulture. It is one of the most fascinating
studies in the world, and I have no doubt but what you will find that
you can go right along inter-cropping with vegetables and other crops,
bush fruits, strawberries, and all those things for the first few years
after you plant your nut trees, and even if they all die you will have
been able to break even on the commercial side of the proposition, and
then you will have the additional years of experience, which no nut
orchardist can dispense with. You can't buy it with money or get it out
of books. You have got to dig it out of the ground yourself. (Applause.)

THE PRESIDENT: I am going to take the liberty of emphasizing one point
the Colonel made. He told you about the great number of things they knew
down South that were not so. I wish to give some geographical spread to
his generalities. We are in the same condition in the North. If you will
stop and look clear through an agricultural idea, you will be
astonished, ladies and gentlemen, absolutely astonished, to see how,
mostly, we don't know it. The other day I happened to be walking through
an apple orchard with the official horticulturist, and in response to
some remark he made I asked: "Do you know that, or do you think it?"
"Has that been experimentally proven?" He answered: "No, it has not."
Most of the things we read in the books and hear in this place and other
places we don't know. We think we know, but when we come to a show-down
we really haven't got experimental data. I know of no people to whom
that thing needs to be emphasized more than to the Northern Nut Growers'
Association.




SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 9TH, AT 10.30 A. M.

Meeting called to order by the President.

THE PRESIDENT: The first order of business, I believe, will be the
report of the Nominating Committee.

THE SECRETARY: The report of the Nominating Committee is the following:
For President, W. C. Reed, Vincennes, Indiana; Vice-President, W. N.
Hutt, Raleigh, North Carolina; Secretary-Treasurer, Dr. W. C. Deming,
Georgetown, Connecticut.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President, I move that the report of this Nominating
Committee be accepted and adopted, and these officers declared elected.

THE PRESIDENT: Do I hear a second?

A MEMBER: Second the motion.

THE PRESIDENT: The nomination of this list is moved and seconded. Is
there any discussion? If not, all those in favor will say "aye;"
opposed, like sign, it is carried, and they are elected.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: While I am on the floor, I want to read a resolution
which I have drafted, and I will read the clauses separately:

"Owing to the fatal character, the unchecked and rapid spread of the
chestnut blight," is there any question about that? If that is not true,
let somebody hold up his hand.

"Owing to the fact that it has been widely disseminated through the
shipment of nursery stock;" is that correct?

"Owing to the fact that in the first stages the disease cannot be easily
detected;" is that true?

"Owing to the fact that the young trees apparently have a temporary
immunity from the disease;"

"Therefore, the Northern Nut Growers' Association believes that the
continued free shipment of chestnut nursery stock will be productive of
endless destruction of property in those places where the chestnut trees
haven't yet the disease." If that is unsound, why, somebody say so.

"Therefore, be it resolved, that we, the Northern Nut Growers'
Association, suggest that the Secretary of Agriculture prohibit the
shipment of chestnut nursery stock, except in the localities known to
have the blight, and that with each permit for shipment shall go a
bulletin or circular giving the important facts about the chestnut
blight. The only exception to this regulation shall be the shipments for
experimental purposes, and such shipments must have the above mentioned
permit, and the name of the nursery from which such trees have come, and
must be inspected by Federal inspectors." I assume, of course, that
inspection is a general inspection. I don't mean each particular
shipment. If there are any questions about that, why, I will let the
chair answer them.

DR. ULMAN: Mr. Littlepage, I would like to ask a question, or, rather,
offer a criticism. If I understand you rightly, you say, "except in the
districts where blight is prevalent." As a matter of fact, sir, the
particular nursery that advertises the chestnut tree works within a
radius of possibly 250 miles of Rochester, in a district where there are
many prospective horticulturists. One of the things that impressed me
more than anything else in the report of the Secretary was the fact that
we have lost a large number of members, and that we haven't attracted to
ourselves many new members. So far as my personal experience goes, if I
were to choose the one method of being most thoroughly disliked, it
would be to ask my neighbors, particularly those who do not know me, to
become members of any kind of a nut association. There is a glamour
about planting, and it is a sort of a disease with some people, year
after year, to seek for novelties. These nut tree advertisements that
read so well attract many purchasers. Right here in this section people
are buying nut trees that they are going to plant in a blighted
district, and these people, when they see what utter failures they have,
will be so disgusted with nut growing that when you approach them you
cannot talk nuts to them, and you will never have them join the
Association. More and more are leaving the Association, and very few new
ones are coming in to take their places. So I think the resolution ought
to be changed.

THE PRESIDENT: In what respect would you have it changed?

DR. ULMAN: To apply generally.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Yes. Well, I agree very largely with what the doctor
says. I have always felt that the success of this organization--the
success of the nut industry as a whole--depended upon its being upon an
entirely truthful, fair and honest basis. I would rather see a crooked
cashier in a bank than a crooked nurseryman or tree man. The cashier you
can check up at 4:30 every afternoon; you can't check up the crooked
tree man for about ten years. I think the worst of all discouraging
things to people who want to go to the country to build up farms and
homes is to run into alluring, but misleading, advertisements. I have an
abounding faith in tree culture. I think that the pecan tree, the black
walnut, varieties of the English walnut and of a number of other nut
trees, are going to make it most possible and more desirable for men to
go to the country, but I think the success of those things depends upon
giving those people, as far as possible, facts, and not misleading them.
Wherever a man sets a tree that is a failure you have a man as a failure
generally as a tree man, and wherever you get a man to set a tree that
succeeds, you have a living, walking advocate of the tree business.
This Association has been fortunate all along in its policies. It has
always stood against the fraudulent promotions; it has always stood
against fraudulent nursery stock; it has always stood against fraudulent
representations, and I think, for that reason, that its future is
reasonably safe, assuming that is its continued policy.

THE PRESIDENT: Do you accept Dr. Ulman's amendment?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: I accept it.

MR. JONES: As I understand the resolution, it applies to nurseries in
the infected areas.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Yes.

MR. JONES: I believe it is practically impossible to grow trees in an
infected area without sending out the blight, but if a man is isolated,
like Mr. Riehl, at Alton, Illinois, he can grow trees without danger of
sending out the blight.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, the resolution permits him to do that.

MR. M. P. REED: Did I understand Mr. Kellerman to say the Department
hasn't authority to quarantine against such things?

THE PRESIDENT: No. The point brought up was the theory that lay back of
the quarantine. The speaker made the point that shipment of infected
trees was killing the tree aspirations of the people who ought to be
developing the nut industry. Every time a man buys a chestnut tree and
it dies with blight that man is chilled out of business. Now this
resolution doesn't cover that man. It is based on the ground of injury
to the industry. You can't very well define the limits of where the
blight is not, but it can be fairly well defined as to where it is, and
that is up to the Department.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: The resolutions are offered in a suggestive way, Mr.
President. If the Secretary wants to turn the suggestion down, we will
meet again next year any way.

PROF. CLOSE: I would like some information as to how you propose to take
this matter up with the Department. I was present a year or so ago at a
hearing before the Federal Horticultural Board--I don't know whether any
one else present was there at the time--but the whole thing hinged
largely on Colonel Sober's attitude in propagating and sending out the
Paragon chestnut, and I think the Department--the Federal Horticultural
Board--originated the question that you are discussing now, and Colonel
Sober came there with a whole lot of pretty good information, and people
to back up what he said, and the Department put up a mighty poor show,
I tell you. I was ashamed of what the Department men had to say, and
Colonel Sober won out hands down. Now, if this question comes up again,
it will be referred, no doubt, to the Federal Horticultural Board, and
you will need a good, strong representation, with plenty of facts back
of you, and if you can put up a strong enough case there is no doubt but
what you can establish this quarantine. But I would hate to see the
question taken up again and floored as easily as it was at that time.

THE PRESIDENT: Prof. Close, I have read part of the testimony.--I was
not present at the meeting--and when one considers the number of things
that were said at that meeting that are not so, and the amount of other
evidence that has come up since, I think the defenders of the public
will have the material to make a much stronger presentation than they
did then, and, what is more, I think some of them will be there. Of
course, when a man has a possibility of getting a quarter of a million
dollars out of a lot of junk, he can spend money to hire people to say
things, and when "the dear public" is paying nobody to go, as was the
case last time, nobody goes. If that hearing comes again, I think some
from this Association will be present.

PROF. CLOSE: That is just the point I want to bring up. You have got to
be there with the information.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: I just want to say a word, rather endorsing what
Professor Close has had to say. The Department of Agriculture, the
quarantine board, or anybody else, can't go out of their limitations and
get testimony. If we think there ought to be a quarantine, then,
whenever there is a public invitation sent out, such as was sent out
before, we ought to have the nerve to go down there before the
Department officials and tell them the truth. It is very easy for us to
stand up here and write papers and articles criticising the quarantine
board and the Department of Agriculture. If we have anything to say
about these things we ought to go down there and say it. If other people
come there and present facts as a matter of record, the Board can't
entirely go outside of those facts and decide a case right out of the
clear sky. If this organization wants to be effective, it ought to
appoint a committee to present those things before that Board.

Resolution adopted.

THE SECRETARY: I have had in mind some time the idea involved in this
resolution, which I have hastily drawn up.

"Since the principles underlying the successful and economical
propagation of nut trees are not yet thoroughly understood or generally
known, and much effort is being wasted and much disappointment incurred
in unsuccessful or partially successful efforts in propagation.

"Resolved, that it is the sense of this meeting that systematic and
controlled experiments be made, under the direction of the Department of
Agriculture, for the purpose of determining the principles underlying
the successful propagation of nut trees in all sections of the country."

DR. ULMAN: Second that motion. (Carried.)

MR. C. A. REED: I would like to present an invitation to meet at Battle
Creek.

MR. ROPER: Petersburg invites us to meet at Petersburg.

THE PRESIDENT: Those matters are settled by the Executive Committee.

MR. T. P. LITTLEPAGE: Would it not be well, Mr. President, to determine
upon a meeting place now, and let it be known, so that everybody can
prepare for it? Being a member of the Executive Committee, I would
prefer myself that the Association take the responsibility for deciding
the meeting place. If these meeting places are selected in advance, it
makes it possible for a good many people to plan their vacation trips to
fit in. In order to get the matter before the Association, I move that
the Society determine right now the next meeting place. (Seconded.)

MR. OLCOTT: I think Mr. Littlepage's motion is of more than ordinary
importance. The Association, heretofore, has left that matter, very
properly, perhaps, to the Executive Committee. The result is that little
or no attention is given to the place of meeting until thirty or ninety
days before the date of that meeting. It would be very much better if we
knew several months ahead about the meeting, and I think we would have a
larger attendance and more enthusiasm. The American Association of
Nurserymen names the date at the time of their meeting for the following
meeting, and most other organizations do the same, and the results are
quite perceptible.

(Motion carried.)

THE SECRETARY: We have an invitation from the Evansville Chamber of
Commerce, one from the San Francisco Convention League, to meet at San
Francisco, one from Sears, Roebuck & Company, to meet in Chicago, and
enjoy a luncheon at their expense and a trip through their plant; one
from Dr. Morris to meet at his place, or to meet at Stamford and spend
as much time as possible on his place. We could meet in New York City
and visit Dr. Morris' place very comfortably. We have an invitation from
Petersburg, Va.; one to meet with Dr. Kellogg, at Battle Creek, Mich.,
and one from Mr. Rush to meet at Lancaster, Pa. We have had under
consideration a proposition to meet somewhere in the South, possibly
with the Southern Nut Growers. Those are all the invitations that I know
of.

MR. C. A. REED: May I make a remark right here? It seems to me that
before we decide on the place of meeting we ought to take into
consideration what we are going to any of these places to accomplish,
and the time of year that we want to go there. Now, if we go to
Lancaster, or to almost any of these other places, we ought to have a
summer meeting when we can go out and see the trees, but if we go up to
Battle Creek we could just as well go there in the winter time. The
purpose of going there, as I understand it, would be to lay emphasis on
the subject of nuts for food. Whether we want to take our time now for a
meeting, to emphasize that, or whether we want to see nut trees growing
and discuss cultural problems, is a question to be decided.

THE PRESIDENT: In the absence of a definite method of procedure on this
question, which we never before handled in this way, the chair is
entirely willing to receive instructions, but I suggest that we have a
rising vote for one place after another, and that the place receiving
the greatest number of votes gets the convention.

MR. M. P. REED: We have seen trees in nurseries for several years, and I
think that now we ought to select some place where we can get other and
broader ideas on nuts. I think Battle Creek would be the best place.

THE PRESIDENT: Does any other favorite son or neighbor wish to make a
speech in favor of his own or nearby city?

MR. HENRY STABLER: It appeals to me very strongly to see Dr. Morris'
experimental grounds at Stamford, Connecticut. As I understand it, he
has the greatest collection of nut-bearing trees in the United States,
and looking over this would help us in a fine way.

MR. JAMES H. KYNER: Mr. President, I am not a member of this
Association, but for a number of years I have been trying to grow nuts.
I am very much interested in the subject, and I would like to know if I
have any rights on this floor.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: It costs you two dollars to vote.

MR. KYNER: All right, I will just give two dollars.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: I move that the gentleman be accepted as a full member
now and have full authority to make speeches. (Laughter.)

THE PRESIDENT: The gentleman will proceed to the making of his speech.

MR. KYNER: I have no speech. I simply want to vote "aye" for Stamford
and New York.

(Vote taken.)

THE SECRETARY: The result is as follows: For Evansville, 2; Stamford,
10; Battle Creek, 3; Petersburg, 3; Lancaster, 1; for Chicago, San
Francisco and the National Nut Growers, 0.

THE PRESIDENT: We are now ready, I believe, to proceed with the
technical part of the programme. The chair would like to call for
information as to the relative behavior of the Northern pecans,
top-worked or transplanted. Is there, for example, any evidence anywhere
as to the fruiting of any Northern pecan except on the parent tree?

MR. MCCOY: Mr. Wilkinson, in Indiana, has some top-worked bearing trees.

THE PRESIDENT: Unfortunately, they are right at home. What varieties has
he?

MR. MCCOY: The Major.

THE PRESIDENT: And how old was it before he top-worked it?

MR. MCCOY: Three years, I think.

THE PRESIDENT: On pecan?

A MEMBER: Yes, sir.

THE PRESIDENT: The Major bore the fourth year, three years old. I
believe that is the first record we have of that sort. Has any other
borne?

MR. MCCOY: A good many of my young trees bloom in the nursery, but I
don't think they succeeded in setting any nuts.

MR. M. P. REED: We have had some two-year trees in nursery, grafted.
Most all of them bloomed when two years old--the staminate but not the
pestillate blossoms.

THE PRESIDENT: I had a staminate blossom the third season on Butterick
in northern Virginia.

MR. HENRY STABLER: Is there any difference between trees budded from
young trees in the nursery row which are not in bearing, which have a
growth very much resembling water-sprouts, and those budded from bearing
trees?

PROF. HUTT: Mr. President, I can't give any experimental data on that
line, but the common practice of nurserymen in taking their bud-wood
from the nursery stock has been in use for years and years, as with
peaches. Very seldom do the nurserymen go to the original trees and get
their buds, but it is cut from nursery stock, because it is in a fine
condition to work. I think that trees propagated from young, vigorous
wood, cut in the nursery, are all right. I am not so sure as to how long
it is before they come into bearing.

MR. HENRY STABLER: I don't mean to say it is an undesirable practice to
bud from the nursery row, but is there any difference in the time of
coming into bearing?

THE PRESIDENT: I spent a very considerable amount of time and money in
that belief, but at State College, they made an elaborate test, and they
have found no difference between the tree from a water-sprout and one
from the bearing tree.

MR. JONES: It is not practicable to propagate very largely from young
trees, either fruit trees or nut trees, but there is a good deal in
maturity of the wood. The plan we follow is to have mature plots and
graft from these old trees. That gives the best wood for nursery
propagation.

THE PRESIDENT: Keeping the same tree?

MR. JONES: Yes, right along. That costs a little more money than to
propagate from the nursery, but we think it is better. We get better
results.

THE PRESIDENT: How have the different varieties of the northern pecan
shown up with regard to speed of growth? At the present time we are
practically ignorant as to which of seven or eight named and propagated
varieties to count on. Apparently, the Busseron has the record for early
bearing, with the Major as second. What about the record of the trees
for making wood, not in the nursery row, but after it has been
transplanted and put in the field? Is there any distinct leadership of
one Northern pecan over another in making wood?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: If the members who go out to my place this afternoon
will observe closely they will have a chance to see something of the
tree growth for the first three years. They will have a chance to
observe the Indiana, the Busseron, the Kentucky, the Green River, the
Major and the Posey, with three year's growth. They will see a row of
Green Rivers, some trees nine feet high, and others that haven't grown
two feet. That is the individual tree variation, however. They will see
certain characteristics running clear through.

THE PRESIDENT: Well, Mr. Littlepage, it is a job to go and get exact
results from another man's experimental ground. Which is the winner for
speed, Mr. McCoy?

MR. MCCOY: Well, I know more about how they grow in the nursery than I
do when transplanted. I haven't transplanted as many trees as Mr.
Littlepage, but, of course, the tree will act very similarly in the
nursery to what it does after you transplant it. We have learned at a
glance to tell the difference in the varieties. We don't have to go to
the books or to the stakes to tell each particular variety, as each
variety has its distinguishing characteristics. For instance, the
Kentucky and the Butterick and the Busseron are all inclined to grow up.
I don't know why that should be true, but they all have the lumber
characteristics. The Kentucky grows in the river bottoms surrounded by
lumber trees. Now, the Posey doesn't grow very tall, but it grows a
wonderful stocky, sturdy tree, and has leaf stems as long as my arm in
the nursery. Of course, each particular wood has its color
characteristics. But one thing I observed was that in the other
nurseries they don't color up as they do in mine. For instance, at Mr.
Jones', it will puzzle me sometimes to tell which variety it is by
looking at the wood. Of course, after he would say "This is Butterick"
or "Busseron," I could see, probably, the characteristics, but there is
a little difference in the color of the wood.

THE PRESIDENT: Have you found any difference between these three trees
as to attainment of height?

MR. MCCOY: Well, I suspect that the Butterick is the fastest grower of
them.

THE PRESIDENT: What is the slowest?

MR. MCCOY: The Indiana, I guess.

A MEMBER: How does the Major behave?

MR. MCCOY: The Major is a very slender, tall tree. The Green River is
inclined to be spreading.

THE PRESIDENT: That testimony as to the Indiana being a slow
grower--does anybody verify it?

MR: LITTLEPAGE: Same thing in Maryland, Mr. President--slowest grower I
have.

THE PRESIDENT: Is that sufficiently marked to make it best for us to
hold up its propagation until it has shown some reason for being grown?

MR. LITTLEPAGE: I don't know. The Busseron and the Indiana, which is
supposed to be a seedling of the Busseron--the Busseron outgrows the
Indiana in Maryland five times. But the Indiana is a thin-husked nut.
The Busseron, on the other hand, is a thick-husked nut, a fine place for
the nut worm if he ever gets bad. There are a lot of such things that
you have to think of.

MR. MCCOY: I visited most of these parent trees this year. They are all
centered around Evansville. There is no crop on the Busseron. The
Indiana will, perhaps, have a peck. In the month of May, in Kentucky,
and Indiana, and Illinois, we had rains continually. I have often heard
the expression from the Southern nurserymen that "the pecan is caught
with the frost." Now, that is clear out of place with us. We all smile
at the idea that an Illinois, Indiana or Kentucky pecan would be caught
with the frost, which never affects them. But the rains always affect
them. If the month of May is a beautiful, dry, clear month, you can
gamble on the pecan crop. Now, this year we won't have much of a crop.
The Warwick will have a gallon or two, and the Kentucky crop is a
failure. The Green River and Major we didn't get to, but I suspect that
very few of our own trees will have a crop this year.

MR. M. P. REED: Mr. McCoy, I was up there last week, and the Busseron
has probably four times as many nuts as the Indiana. It has a light
crop, while the Indiana has a very light crop. (Laughter.)

MR. MCCOY: When were you there, Mr. Reed?

MR. M. P. REED: Last Sunday.

MR. JONES: You can't judge a pecan by the growth of the tree. You take a
pecan that makes a thick head and lots of limbs, and it is very likely
to be a heavy bearer. On the other hand, a nurseryman likes a variety
that makes a tree, you know.

THE PRESIDENT: On your criterion of a bunched top, which of these eight
varieties we are now propagating is the most promising?

MR. JONES: The Butterick appeals to me.

THE PRESIDENT: Is the Posey in the same class?

MR. JONES: The Indiana makes a thick head.

THE PRESIDENT: Does any other do that?

MR. JONES: The Green River is inclined to on the mature block, but not
the first year in the nursery.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President, in view of the fact that this meeting is
reported, and that what we say will go into the official records to be
read by lots of people who can't come and examine us, it might be
understood that there would be some question about the bearing of these
Northern pecan trees. As a matter of fact, I am surprised that any of
them bore any nuts this year when I think how hard Mr. McCoy and Mr.
Reed and myself have cut them for bud-wood. As a matter of fact, our
opinion is that these Northern pecan trees are all excellent bearers, as
the bearing reputation goes with pecan trees. I have watched them pretty
carefully, and the best evidence of what I think of them is that I am
setting them in my orchard. For fear that the minutes may leave the
impression with some casual reader later that these trees bear a quart,
and two gallons, I just want to say that if these gentlemen put into the
record the amount of nuts that they know the Green River, the Butterick,
the Posey and Major have borne--for instance, six weeks ago I bought
sixty pounds of Posey nuts from a certain tree. The man who counted them
counted 120 pounds on the tree, and if the boys around were as active as
when I was a boy, I bet he didn't get more than half of them.

THE PRESIDENT: This is the time of year when the squirrels get nuts, and
I expect they got after the trees, too.

MISS LOUISE LITTLEPAGE: Why does the rain affect the nuts, and why in
that certain one month?

MR. MCCOY: In our latitude the pecan blooms somewhere near the twentieth
of May, from that probably up to the twenty-fifth, and the pollen is
scattered by the winds, and, if it rains at that particular time, the
female bloom perishes, and we have no pecans. I think the pecan depends
entirely upon the winds.

THE PRESIDENT: We have been hoping all the time that we would have a
chance to hear from Prof. Hutt on the relation of the hickory stock to
the pecan top. A good many persons have experimented with it, and
papers are giving, from time to time, glowing accounts of the pecan tree
on hickory roots. We would like to hear from Prof. Hutt.

PROF. HUTT: We haven't much data matured on that at present, Mr.
President. It takes so long to get data on those subjects. We have a lot
of trees budded on the stocks of water hickory and on the pecan, and we
are testing them out. My theory was that the _Hicoria aquatica_, growing
in wet, sour lands, would enlarge the range of probable production of
pecans on such lands, and on lands on which the pecan, on its own roots,
could not normally be grown, but our data are not matured yet. I think
they have been three years in the nursery and two years set in the
orchard. It will probably be four or five years before we get any exact
data on that subject.

THE PRESIDENT: Perhaps, Mr. C. A. Reed has investigated some of the
later top-worked hickories.

MR. C. A. REED: That is an old question--pecan on hickory. It has been
tried all over the South and the Southwest, and you will see some this
afternoon at Mr. Littlepage's place. As a usual thing, the enthusiasm
over pecan on hickory has run high while the experiment was new. The
propagator has found that it was not a difficult thing to make the
scions live, and, so long as the hickory stock is larger than the pecan
scion, so that the feeding capacity is equal to, or even greater than,
the consuming capacity of the scion, the outlook has been very
satisfactory and encouraging, and while that stage has been going on a
great deal has been written. A little later you hear less about it, and
less and less, until, finally, you hear almost nothing. But I will say
this, that there are sections in the Southwest where there is
considerable enthusiasm over it just now. Just recently an article was
published by Judge Frank Gwynn which was quite encouraging, and from his
point of view it is. He is on high, hilly land, where he has no pecan
trees, and he has been able to get nuts considerably sooner by
top-working these dryland hickories--the mocker nut, or "bull nut," as
it is known down there--and so far he is getting very satisfactory
crops. But it is the consensus of opinion over the entire South, so far
as I have observed it, that where there are pecan trees suitable for
top-working, they answer much better, and the final outcome is very much
more satisfactory with pecan on pecan than with pecan on hickory. Now,
with pecan on _Hicoria aquatica_, which Prof. Hutt spoke of, I can cite
you one instance which is very interesting south of Morgan City,
Louisiana. Mr. Frank Beadle, I believe, was the name, top-worked a
number of trees that were standing in water, and he also top-worked some
that he had transplanted from the wet bottom to higher land. Those that
were transplanted lived and bore nuts for quite a number of years. The
last I knew they were bearing quite satisfactory crops, but those that
were allowed to remain in the standing water died very shortly after the
pecan top began to develop. The entire tree died.

THE PRESIDENT: That is, the pecan top killed the native right in its own
habitat.

MR. C A. REED: That's right.

DR. STABLER: How about the acidity of the soil on that higher land? Was
that tested?

MR. C. A. REED: Well, there would be so very little difference in the
level of the soil that I imagine the acidity would be about the same.
When I said "high land" I meant land that wasn't over-flowed.

DR. STABLER: Oh, yes.

THE PRESIDENT: Mr. Reed, you made the qualified statement awhile ago
that where a man had a choice between hickory and pecan stock for
top-working, he should take the pecan. Now, in the North there are
magnificent stands of native hickory--the Appalachians are full of it
from end to end. Would you advise him not to bother with that?

MR. C. A. REED: There is another question that enters there. I don't
believe that you can grow good pecans on hickory stocks on uplands where
there is not moisture enough in the soil to grow good pecans on pecan
stocks. It takes moisture to make pecans, and if there isn't enough in
the upland soil to grow pecan trees on pecan roots I don't believe there
is any evidence to indicate that you can get them on hickory roots.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President, the hickory only grows about six or eight
weeks every summer, and the pecan grows all summer. I think that answers
the question.

PROF. HUTT: A case came up last year in the National Nut Growers'
Association that was quite interesting. Mr. Smithwick, of Americus,
Georgia, brought to the meeting and exhibited a number of varieties of
pecan grown on hickory--fourteen varieties, standard varieties, grafted
on a hickory tree, and they were remarkable for their small size. They
were remarkably small--smaller than ordinary, woods-grown seedling
pecans. There were Schleys and Delmas, and various other varieties that
you could recognize by the form of the nuts, but exceedingly small. I
believe Mr. Reed's point is the crux of the whole situation, that if you
have a good supply of moisture they will make nuts of a pretty fair
size, but unless the moisture supply is very large you get diminutive
nuts. These were matured in the South. The hickory is such a slow grower
in comparison with the pecan--that is, the common varieties--that it
can't keep up with the pecan top.

MR. C. A. REED: Some of the nuts from that tree were on exhibition where
you were this morning.

THE PRESIDENT: Then you have, practically, a dwarfing, with the dwarfing
manifesting itself in the fruit rather than in the wood.

MR. C. A. REED: It did in that one instance, but, on the other hand, we
have seen pecans grown on top-worked hickories that you could hardly
tell from typical specimens of pecans grown on pecan stocks.

THE PRESIDENT: Isn't the bitternut several times as rapid in growth as
the shagbark, or some others? That is, probably, one of the best stocks
for the hickories if one wishes to experiment.

MR. C. A. REED: AS Colonel Van Duzee said last night, "there are a lot
of things we don't know." This is one of them. I might quote a number of
men who are right here in this audience to convince you that we don't
any of us know much about nut culture today. I will quote Dr. Morris and
Mr. Littlepage. We were talking about hickory nut varieties in Dr.
Morris' office one night about the first of this year, when Mr.
Littlepage made the remark that "the man who didn't change his mind
every three years on nut culture didn't keep up with the game," and Dr.
Morris replied that he had changed his mind so much in the last five
years he had no respect for any man who believed what he said. Now, when
you can't believe Dr. Morris, Colonel Van Duzee, or Dr. Smith, what are
you going to do with the rest of us?

COL. VAN DUZEE: Mr. Reed, I didn't say what you said I did. I said:
"There are so many things you already know that are not true."
(Laughter.)

MR. C. A. REED: Well, now, I will quote another man, Dr. Curtis, one of
the best known pecan men in the South. It was Dr. Curtis that I went to
for my initial experience in pecans. The first I ever saw were in his
orchard in Florida, and I asked him quite a good many questions, and he
would tell me a story and go away. And I called him up one day, went
into his orchard in harvest time when he was gathering the nuts in the
hulls and taking them to the packing house. And I said "What is that
for?" And he said "Don't you see those shuck worms all through the hulls
here? I am throwing them out there to let the chickens get them."
"Well," said I, "can you say you are getting rid of the shuck worms by
doing that?" And he replied, "I can see, one year with another, that
they are gradually getting less." A year later I went down there before
he did. He was in Maine at the time, but his orchard trees were just
alive with shuck worms, every variety almost eaten up with them. I said
to him, when he came back, "I thought you were going to get rid of those
shuck worms by feeding them to the chickens?" "Well, there it goes," he
said, "you get a nice theory all worked out and some one comes along and
asks you a simple little question that knocks it all in the head." And
that is almost the unanimous experience. What you know you have got to
qualify if you talk at all. I am getting to be such a pessimist I am not
much good in the government any more. (Laughter.)

THE PRESIDENT: The one hope a college professor of my acquaintance has
is when a student comes around and says he believes he doesn't know
much. He regards that as the beginning of knowledge, and I think that
Mr. Reed's confessions, and incriminations of the rest of us, show one
thing, perhaps, better than anything else, and that is the great
necessity of organizations of this sort in which many men who are trying
many things in many ways come together and give the results of their
observations. No doubt, this whole question of agriculture in general,
and nuts in particular, is so complex, it is so run through and through
with so many different controlling factors, and, with them, so many new
things are constantly coming along, that we are all going to be handing
down to our children and grandchildren a great and, perhaps, increasing
host of problems to be investigated, and new realms in which knowledge
can be piled up for the benefit of those who wish to use it.

COL. VAN DUZEE: Mr. President, may I talk half a minute? I can't help
but feel that, perhaps, there may be some good brother or sister who may
have been over-impressed with the difficulties, who might have been
discouraged, who might have left this meeting, perhaps, and failed to
see what this meeting is for--to stimulate the planting of nut trees.
Notwithstanding the emphasis that has been put on all these things,
notwithstanding the difficulties and disappointments that we are all
laboring under at the present time, I feel that we have a wonderful
industry ahead of us. I can't see any reason in the world why we should
not go on within our means, wisely planting nut trees. It doesn't make
any difference if you are seventy-five or eighty years old, plant nut
trees, because they will be a constant pleasure to you, and, ultimately,
a benefit to some one else.

MR. LITTLEPAGE: Mr. President--

THE PRESIDENT: This is Mr. Littlepage, ladies and gentlemen. (Laughter.)

MR. LITTLEPAGE: That is a very important suggestion that you just made.
If you were to ask the average groceryman in Washington City whether he
wanted his son to go into the grocery business he would say no. If you
asked a lawyer if you should make a lawyer out of your son, if the
lawyer looks back over the drudgery and years of toil that it takes to
make a lawyer, he would undoubtedly hesitate to recommend it, and if you
asked a doctor or a college professor a similar question, they, no
doubt, would steer you clear away from a university. And so, Mr.
President, if you stand back on the difficulties in these things, there
would be not only no grocerymen, but no lawyers, no doctors, no
dentists, and, perhaps, nobody working for the government. (Laughter and
applause.)

THE PRESIDENT: I want to take the liberty of using thirty seconds in
this period of exhortation and confession to come in on the same strain.
After all, what is life for? How many of us want the thing that is dead
easy, and how many of us want the job with nothing to do? We all, in a
certain lazy mood, say we want something easy and want to rest, but if
there is anything on earth that a man shuns above all else it is that
little room with absolutely nothing to do, namely, a cell. When they
want to break a man they don't put him at hard labor on the stone pile;
they put him in a little room with nothing to do. The youngster who
plays doesn't want a dead easy game. He builds a house, and, when he has
done with it, bang, he doesn't want the house he wanted to build. And I
must confess that if it were perfectly plain sailing and you could plant
out all these nut trees and have them grow like fury, it would not be
much fun. It is a fact that men like to achieve and experiment; men
like effort. Suppose everybody in this country retired and could put up
his feet and do nothing, there wouldn't be a name in the paper the next
morning. Mr. Hughes, President Wilson, Mr. Taft, Mr. Brandies, and all
of the great men who are doing things in this world would all be gone
fanning themselves quietly. This world is run by men who don't have to
work; they work for fun. So I wish to submit that the tree--if a man
happens to be built to love plants that grow--that the tree is one of
the great avenues of fun.

MR. WEBER: Mr. President, along the same line of thought, I wish to
express my views with what Colonel Van Duzee has had to say. If we were
to attend a convention of surgeons and hear different diseases and
ailments of the body discussed, we would probably all be disposed to
think that we were standing on the tip-end of the diving board into
eternity beyond. But people keep on living just the same,
notwithstanding the knocking of the doctors, and the diseases to which
we are subject, and trees will keep on growing just the same,
notwithstanding their diseases and various other troubles, and so I
think no one should be discouraged.

THE SECRETARY: I just want to add my little encouragement. In spite of
all the failure that I have had, and they have been many, in spite of
the reports of failures of others and the pessimism of others, I have
the same abiding faith in the future of nut growing, and just the same
enthusiasm for it that I had in the beginning, if not greater.
(Applause.)

MR. KYNER: Mr. President, I came here to get information on a matter
that I am very much interested in. At seventy years of age I have become
interested in nut growing--in nut culture. (Applause.) I am not planting
particularly for myself, not that I expect to get any harvest from these
trees, but I do want to see them bear fruit--bear nuts. I want to plant
the right kind of trees. I have joined this Association; I intend to
retain a membership in it as long as the Association lives. (Laughter.)

THE PRESIDENT: My dear sir, that will cost you twenty dollars for a life
membership. (Laughter.)

MR. KYNER: And I want to get all the information that the Association
has. Now, if I can get it in fifteen or twenty minutes, why, let me have
it. (Laughter.) I bought Persian walnuts at a nursery, cultivated them,
and watched them, walked around them and looked at them, and along came
a winter and killed them. I bought them from a Rochester nursery. Now,
they didn't grow them there. They must have grown them somewhere else.
If they had been grown in a Rochester nursery they would have withstood
the severity of a Maryland winter. Now, there is something wrong there.
This Association should take this matter up with that nursery. They
should not be allowed to take people's money and give them chaff for it.
I am saying this for the benefit of some of our members here who are
growing nut trees for sale.

THE PRESIDENT: May I give you a bit of information here? We have a list
of accredited nurserymen. This Association has a list of nurserymen in
whose trees we think we can place more confidence than in some others.

MR. KYNER: I would like to get that. But now I have set out a whole lot
of these Persian walnuts, and pecans, filberts, Japanese walnuts, etc.,
and I guess every one of them is a seedling, and I don't know what I
have, and I don't know how many varieties of Japanese walnuts there are.
I supposed a Japanese walnut was a Japanese walnut, and that that was
all there was to it. But I get some trees from one nursery, and some
from another, and they grow up and aren't alike at all. Now, I haven't
so very awfully long to be in the business of setting out nut growing
trees, and I want to get the right kind, and I want this Association's
assistance in that matter, and while you are assisting me you are
assisting people all over the country. Men and women everywhere are
interested in nut growing. They want nut trees, but how are they going
to know that they are getting what they want? I believe it is up to this
Association to help them get the right kind of stuff. I came in here
purposely to get your help.

THE PRESIDENT: You go on the excursion this afternoon and you will find
plenty of men there that will take pleasure in explaining some of these
things to you. Our plan is to go at one o'clock from the corner of
Fourteenth and H streets to the grounds of Mr. Littlepage, who has
practically all the good varieties of northern pecans growing there, and
on the trip will be men who can answer most every question you want to
know. I think that brings us to the point of adjournment.

COL. VAN DUZEE: Mr. President, I move we adjourn.

A MEMBER: Second the motion.

THE PRESIDENT: The meeting stands adjourned.




APPENDIX.

_Letter From W. C. Reed, Vice-President of the Association._

FELLOW MEMBERS AND FRIENDS:

It is with the deepest feelings of regret that I am compelled to be
absent from what I trust may be one of the most profitable meetings of
the Association. It is impossible for me to be present, owing to the
fact that I have been summoned on a case in court in Wisconsin.

Having been honored as your Vice-President, I felt it my duty to attend
and do what I could to help make this our best meeting, but fate ruled
otherwise. Though absent in person, I assure you my thoughts and best
wishes will be with you while wandering about the Nation's Capital,
viewing its magnificent parks and basking under the shade of its stately
Persian walnuts.

The interest in nut culture is widespread. We have had inquiries from
many foreign countries, one of the last from near Bombay, British India.

I have arranged with the Indiana Apple Show, which is to be held at West
Baden, Indiana, November 14th to 20th, for ample space for a nut
exhibit. Anyone having nuts for exhibition should send them to me at
Vincennes prior to these dates, or write for information, and I will try
and arrange for premiums.


REVIEW OF PAST YEAR.

The present summer has been of extremes, very cold and wet early,
followed by extreme heat and drouth. Foliage of all kinds not as good as
usual. Nut trees, however, have made a very good growth, not as heavy as
last year on younger trees.

Winter, 1915-16, while not extremely cold, was very hard on many kinds
of trees, owing to the fact that the previous summer and fall were very
wet. Most fruit trees went into winter full of sap, with buds in
weakened condition. Pecan buds came through in good shape with a very
fair stand in nursery, and one-year trees were not injured a particle.
Pecan bloom was very fair, crop, generally seems to be light, in fact
such is the case with all kinds of nut trees, generally, and most fruit
trees. Pecan trees set in orchard 2 and 3 years ago are making a good
growth.


ENGLISH WALNUTS.

Stand of buds in nursery poor; stand of grafts this spring very good
where we used good, strong scions of well matured wood, 60 to 75 per
cent, and in some cases Mayette was better than that. Where Eastern
scions were used from old trees, stand of grafts very poor. All one-year
English walnut trees in nursery came through in good shape. Eastern
varieties began to vegetate or burst into growth April 15; Mayette and
Franquette, May 1; Parisienne, May 5, and one tree from Grenoble,
France, grown from scion sent from Department of Agriculture, May 25.
These French varieties, I feel, are very promising, owing to the fact
that they will escape late frosts. English walnut trees in orchard set 3
years ago, fourth summers growth, doing splendidly, 2 to 4 feet of
growth, foliage perfect, varieties, Hall, Rush, Nebo and Burlington.
Top-worked trees, 3-year tops doing nicely of Hall, Rush, Mayette and
two or three other Eastern varieties. Grafting in nursery done from May
15 to 25, was best after stocks were in full leaf.


PECAN GRAFTING.

We have usually had best success grafting May 5 to 12, but this year,
being a late spring, we did not commence general grafting of pecans
until the 12th, and it seems to have been too late. Stand very poor, a
few grafts set early in May with old wood, about 40 per cent. stand. We
find old wood gives much better stand on pecans, and new wood on English
walnuts.


BLACK WALNUTS.

Grafted quite a number of Stabler Black Walnuts, which were almost a
failure. Thomas done better, but still poor. However, larger scions gave
best results and have made splendid growth, many 5 to 6 feet, very
strong. Buds of Thomas set last fall failed to start well. It seems we
have something to learn in the propagation of the Black Walnut, as it
has proved more difficult than the English.


HARDY ALMOND.

Two years ago we received some buds of the Ridenhauer Almond from
Department of Agriculture. Some of these buds were set on a bearing
peach tree; these have borne a good crop this summer, and were gathered
August 20, some of which are on the exhibition tables. These seem to
bear very young, of good quality, a very strong grower and very hardy;
do not consider them of any commercial value, but for family use are
very good.


BEARING PECANS IN NEBRASKA.

During the past year I have received photographs and description of the
pecan trees 12 miles south of Lincoln, Nebraska, and of two trees on the
grounds of E. Y. Grupe, of Lincoln. These trees are 20 years old, some
having been bearing regular crops for the past 10 years. This season's
crop is a failure owing to continuous cold rain at blooming time. The
nuts on one of these trees are of fair size and quality.

With kindest regards to the many friends in the Association, and
trusting that I may have the pleasure of greeting all at our next annual
meeting, I am,

   Respectfully yours,

   W. C. REED.




THE FOOD VALUE OF NUTS.

DR. J. H. KELLOGG, BATTLE CREEK, MICHIGAN.


Of all really valuable foodstuffs nuts are the least used and the least
appreciated. In fact, nuts can hardly be said to constitute a part of
the national bill of fare for the reason that when eaten at all they are
taken as luxuries or deserts and not as staple foods. But the nut
possesses special properties which entitle it to first consideration as
a foodstuff, and the writer has no doubt that some time in the future
nuts will become a leading constituent of the national bill of fare, and
in so doing, will displace certain foodstuffs which today are held in
high esteem, but which in the broader light of the next century will be
regarded as objectionable and inferior foods and will give place to the
products of the various varieties of nut trees which will then be
estimated at their true worth, the very choicest of all substances
capable of sustaining human life. Botanically, a nut is a fruit, but
nuts differ so widely both in composition and appearance from the foods
commonly called fruits that they are properly placed in a class by
themselves.

In nutritive value the nut far exceeds all other food substances; for
example, the average number of food units per pound furnished by half a
dozen of the more common varieties of nuts is 3231 calories, while the
average of the same number of varieties of cereals is 1654 calories,
half the value of nuts. The average food value of the best vegetables is
300 calories per pound and of the best fresh fruits grown in this
country is 278 calories. The average food value of the six principal
flesh foods is 810 calories per pound, or one-fourth that of nuts.

The superior nutritive value of nuts is clearly shown by the
accompanying tables based upon the analyses of Atwater and other
authorities.

 TABLE I.

 COMPOSITION OF NUTS (C. F. LANGWORTHY).

                                       Composition and Fuel Value of the Edible Portion.
                                                                                   Food
                              Edible                             Carbohy-          Value
                     Refuse.  Portion. Water.  Protein. Fats.    drates.   Ash.   per lb.
                     Per ct.  Per ct.  Per ct. Per ct.  Per ct.  Per ct.   Per ct. Cal.

 Almonds              64.8     35.2     4.8    21.0     54.9     17.3      2.0     3,030
 Brazil nuts          49.6     50.4     5.3    17.0     66.8      7.0      3.9     3,328
 Filberts             52.1     47.9     3.7    15.6     65.3     13.0      2.4     3,432
 Hickory nuts         62.2     37.8     3.7    15.4     67.4     11.4      2.1     3,495
 Pecan nuts           53.2     46.8     3.0    11.0     71.2     13.3      1.5     3,633
 English walnuts.     58.0     42.0     2.8    16.7     64.4     14.8      1.3     3,305
 Chestnuts, fresh.    16.0     84.0    45.0     6.2      5.4     42.1      1.3     1,125
 Chestnuts, dried.    24.0     76.0     5.9    10.7      7.0     74.2      2.2     1,875
 Acorns               35.6     64.4     4.1     8.1     37.4     48.0      2.4     2,718
 Beechnuts            40.8     59.2     4.0    21.9     57.4     13.2      3.5     3,263
 Butternuts           86.4     13.6     4.5    27.9     61.2      3.4      3.0     3,371
 Walnuts              74.1     25.9     2.5    27.6     56.3     11.7      1.9     3,105
 Cocoanuts            48.8     51.2    14.1     5.7     50.6     27.9      1.7     2,986
 Cocoanuts, shredded, ...     100.0     3.5     6.3     57.3     31.6      1.3     3,125
 Pistachios, kernels  ...     100.0     4.2    22.6     54.5     15.6      3.1     3,010
 Pine nuts or pinons  40.6     59.4     3.4    14.6     61.9     17.3      2.8     3,364
 Peanuts, raw         24.5     75.5     9.2    25.8     38.6     24.4      2.0     2,560
 Peanuts, roasted     32.6     67.4     1.6    30.5     49.2     16.2      2.5     3,177
 Litchi nuts          41.6     58.4    17.9     2.9       .2     77.5      1.5     1,453


 TABLE II.

 COMPOSITION OF MEATS (ATWATER AND LANGWORTHY).

                                                 Calories
                     Water.  Protein.   Fat.     per lb.
 Beef ribs           43.8    13.9       21.2     1,135
 Porterhourse steak  52.4    19.1       16.1       975
 Veal cutlet         68.3    20.1        7.5       695
 Mutton              51.2    15.1       14.7       890
 Mutton chops        42.     13.5       28.3     1,415
 Lamb                52.9    15.9       13.6       860
 Pork chops          41.8    13.4       24.2     1,245
 Ham, smoked         34.8    14.2       33.4     1,635
 Bacon, smoked       17.4     9.1       62.2     2,715
 Sausage, Frankfort  57.2    19.6       18.9     1,155
 Beef soup           92.9     4.4        0.4       120
 Chicken (fowl)      47.1    13.7       12.3       765
 Goose               38.5    13.4       29.8     1,475
 Turkey              42.4    16.1       18.4     1,060
 Duck                51.7    14.3       33.4     1,805
 Squab               58.     18.6       22.1     1,480
 Guinea hen          69.1    23.1        6.5       870
 Quail               65.9    25.         6.8       935

 TABLE III.

 COMPOSITION OF CEREAL FOOD (LANGWORTHY).

                                                        Carbohy-            Food
                                     Protein.  Fat.     drates.    Ash.     Value
                                     Per ct.   Per ct.  Per ct.    Per ct. per lb.
 Flour, meal, etc.:
   Entire wheat flour                  13.8    1.9      71.9       1.0      1,650
   Graham flour                        13.3    2.2      71.4       1.8      1,645
   Wheat Flour, patent roller process
   --high grade and medium             11.4    1.0      75.1        .5      1,635
   Macaroni, vermicelli, etc.          13.4     .9      74.1       1.3      1,645
   Wheat breakfast food                12.1    1.8      75.2       1.3      1,680
   Buckwheat flour                      6.4    1.2      77.9        .9      1,605
   Rye flour                            6.8    0.9      78.7        .7      1,620
   Corn meal                            9.2    1.9      75.4       1.0      1,635
   Oat breakfast food                  16.7    7.3      66.2       2.1      1,800
   Rice                                 8.0     .3      79.0        .4      1,620
   Tapioca                               .4     .1      88.0        .1      1,650
   Starch                                ..     ..      90.0        ..      1,675


 TABLE IV.

 COMPOSITION OF VEGETABLES (EDIBLE PORTION).

                                                                Carbohy-
                                      Water.  Protein.  Fat.    drates.  Calories
                                      Per ct. Per ct.   Per ct. Per ct.   per lb.
 Beans, dried                         12.6    22.5      1.8     59.6      1,520
 Beans, lima                           ...     ...       ..      ...       ....
 Beans, string                        83.0     2.1       .3      6.9      170
 Beets                                70.0     1.3       .1      7.7      160
 Cabbage                              77.7     1.4       .2      4.8      115
 Celery                               75.6      .9       .1      2.6       65
 Corn, green (sweet), edible portion  75.4     3.1      1.1     19.7      440
 Cucumbers                            81.1      .7       .2      2.6       65
 Lettuce                              80.5     1.0       .2      2.5       65
 Mushrooms                            88.1     3.5       .4      6.8      185
 Onions                               78.9     1.4       .3      8.9      190
 Parsnips                             66.4     1.3       .4     10.8      230
 Peas                                 74.6     7.0      0.5     16.9      440
 Potatoes                             62.6     1.8       .1     14.7      295
 Rhubarb                              56.6      .4       .4      2.2       60
 Sweet potatoes                       55.2     1.4       .6     21.9      440
 Spinach                              92.3     2.1       .3      3.2       95
 Squash                               44.2      .7       .2      4.5      100
 Tomatoes                             94.3      .9       .4      3.9      100

 TABLE V.

 COMPOSITION OF FRUITS, YEARBOOK OF DEPT. OF AGRICULTURE, 1915.

 (C. J. LANGWORTHY).


 Kind of Fruit.                                  Nitrogen- Carbo-                  Fuel
                                        Ether    free      hy-     Crude           value
                       Water.  Protein. extract  extract.  drates. fiber.  Ash.    per lb.
 Fresh Fruits.         Per ct. Per ct.  Per ct.  Per ct.   Per ct. Per ct. Per ct. Cal.

 Apples                84.6    0.4       0.5     13.0        ...    1.2    0.3      290
 Apricots              85.0    1.1       ...      ...       13.4    ...     .5      270
 Avocado               81.1    1.0      10.2      ...        6.8    ...     .9      512
 Bananas               75.3    1.3        .6     21.0        ...    1.0     .8      460
 Blackberries          86.3    1.8       1.0      8.4        ...    2.5     .5      270
 Cactus fruit          79.2    1.4       1.3     11.7        ...    3.7    2.7      375
 Cherries              80.9    1.0        .8     16.5        ...     .2     .6      365
 Cranberries           88.9     .4        .6      8.4        ...    1.5     .2      215
 Currants              85.0    1.5       ...      ...       12.8    ...     .7      265
 Figs                  79.1    1.5       ...      ...       18.8    ...     .6      380
 Gooseberries          85.6    1.0       ...      ...       13.1    ...     .3      255
 Grapes                77.4    1.3       1.6     14.9        ...    4.3     .5      450
 Guava                 82.9    1.3        .7      8.0        ...    6.6     .5      315
 Huckleberries         81.9     .6        .6      ...       16.6    ...     .3      345
 Lemons                89.3    1.0        .7      7.4        ...    1.1     .5      205
 Mango                 87.4     .6        .4      9.9        ...    1.2     .5      220
 Muskmelons            89.5     .6       ...      7.2        ...    2.1     .6      185
 Nectarines            82.9     .6       ...      ...       15.9    ...     .6      305
 Olives                67.0    2.5      17.1      5.7        ...    3.3    4.4      407
 Oranges               86.9     .8        .2      ...       11.6    ...     .5      240
 Peaches               89.4     .7        .1      5.8        ...    3.6     .4      190
 Pears                 80.9    1.0        .5     15.7        ...    1.5     .4      163
 Persimmons (Japanese) 80.2    1.4        .6     15.1        ...    2.1     .6      174
 Pineapples            89.3     .4        .3      9.3        ...     .4     .3      200
 Plums                 78.4    1.0       ...      ...       20.1    ...     .5      395
 Pomegranates          76.8    1.5       1.6     16.8        ...    2.7     .6      461
 Prunes                79.6     .9       ...      ...       18.9    ...     .6      370
 Raspberries (red)     85.8    1.0       ...      9.7        ...    2.9     .6      255
 Rhubarb stalks        94.4     .6        .7      2.5        ...    1.1     .7      105
 Strawberries          90.4    1.0        .6      6.0        ...    1.4     .6      180
 Watermelons           92.4     .4        .2      ...        6.7    ...     .3      140

With the exception of smoked bacon, there is no flesh food which even
approaches the nut in nutritive value, and bacon owes its high value to
the fact that it consists almost exclusively of fat.

That the nut is appreciated as a dainty is attested by the frequency
with which it appears as a desert and the extensive use of various nuts
as confections. That nuts do not hold a more prominent place in the
national bill of fare is due chiefly to two causes; first, the popular
idea that nuts are highly indigestible, and second, their comparatively
high price.

The notion that nuts are difficult of digestion has really no foundation
in fact. The idea is probably the natural outgrowth of the custom of
eating nuts at the close of a meal when an abundance, more likely a
superabundance, of highly nutritious foods has already been eaten and
the equally injurious custom of eating nuts between meals. Neglect of
thorough mastication must also be mentioned as a possible cause of
indigestion following the use of nuts. Nuts are generally eaten dry and
have a firm hard flesh which requires thorough use of the organs of
mastication to prepare them for the action of the several digestive
juices. Experiments made in Germany showed that nuts are not digested at
all but pass through the alimentary canal like foreign bodies unless
reduced to a smooth paste in the mouth. Particles of nuts the size of
small seeds wholly escaped digestion.

Having been for more than fifty years actively interested in promoting
the use of nuts as a staple food, I have given considerable thought and
study to their dietetic value and have made many experiments. About
twenty-five years ago it occurred to me that one of the above objections
to the extensive dietetic use of nuts might be overcome by mechanical
preparation of the nut before serving so as to reduce it to a smooth
paste and thus insure the preparation for digestion which the average
eater is prone to neglect. The result was a product which I called
peanut butter. I was much surprised at the readiness with which the
product sprang into public favor. Several years ago I was informed by a
wholesale grocer of Chicago that the firm's sales of peanut butter
amounted on an average to a carload a week. I think it is safe to
estimate that not less than one thousand carloads of this product are
annually consumed in this country. The increased demand for peanuts for
making peanut butter led to the development of "corners" in the peanut
market and more than doubled the price and must have had an equally
marked influence upon the annual production.

I am citing my experience with the peanut not for the purpose of
recommending this product, for I am obliged to confess that I was soon
compelled to abandon the use of peanut butter prepared from roasted
nuts, for the reason that the process of roasting renders the nut
indigestible to such a degree that it was not adapted to the use of
invalids, but simply as an illustration of the readiness with which the
public accepts a new dietetic idea when it happens to strike the popular
fancy. Ways must be found to render the use of nuts practical by
adapting them to our culinary and dietetic customs and to overcome the
popular objections to their use by a widespread and efficient campaign
of education.

Attention has already been called to the superior nutritive value of the
nut. It has other excellencies well worthy of consideration; for
example, the protein of nuts is of the very choicest character. Recent
investigations by Rubner, Osborne, Mendel, and others have shown that
every plant produces its own special varieties of proteins. There is
indeed a wide difference even between the proteins of various cereals
and the proteins of many vegetables differ so widely in character from
those of the human body that it is doubtful whether to any extent they
can be utilized for human nutrition. Fortunately the potato is in this
regard an exception and furnishes a very excellent type of protein. This
objection does not apply to nuts. The proteins of nuts are in fact so
very closely allied to those of the animal body that food chemists of a
generation ago referred to the protein of nuts as vegetable casein
because of its exceedingly close resemblance to the protein of milk.

The fats of nuts, their leading food principle, are the most digestible
of all forms of fat. Having a high melting point, they are far more
digestible than animal fats of any sort. The indigestibility of beef and
mutton fat has long been recognized. The fat of nuts much more closely
resembles human fat than do fats of the sort mentioned. The importance
of this will be appreciated when attention is called to the fact that
fats entering the body do not undergo the transformation changes which
take place in other foodstuffs; for example, protein in the process of
digestion is broken into its ultimate molecular units. Starch is
transformed into sugar, which serves as fuel to the body, but fats are
so slightly modified in the process of digestion and absorption that
after reaching the blood and the tissues they are reconstructed into the
original form in which they are eaten; that is, beef fat is deposited in
the tissues as beef fat without undergoing any chemical change whatever;
mutton fat is deposited as mutton fat; lard as pig fat, etc. When the
body makes its own fat from starch and sugar, the natural source of this
tissue element, the product formed is _sui generis_ and must be better
adapted to the body uses than the animal fat which was _sui generis_ to
a pig, a sheep, or a goat. It is certainly a pleasant thought that one
who rounds out his figure with the luscious fatness of nuts may
felicitate himself upon the fact that his tissues are participating in
the sweetness of the nut rather than the relics of the sty and the
shambles. It is true that nuts are poor in carbohydrates; that is, they
contain no starch and little sugar, but this deficiency can be easily
supplied by fruits, as will be readily seen by reference to Table V.

Of the three great food principles required for human nutrition,
protein, fats, and carbohydrates, the nut supplies two--protein and fats
in rich abundance, and of very finest quality. The amount of protein
found in fruits with very few exceptions is so small as to be
insignificant; fats are practically wholly absent from fruits, while
sugar and dextrine are abundant. Fruits are thus the natural complement
of nuts.

The amount of protein contained in nuts is, with two or three
exceptions, small as compared with meats, and even some of the cereals;
but the studies of nutrition which have been made within the last score
of years by Chittenden and numerous other investigators have clearly
established the fact that protein which is chiefly represented in the
ordinary bill of fare by lean meat, is needed only in very small amount.
If the amount of protein eaten equals ten per cent of the total ration
the body will receive an abundant supply of material for repairing its
nitrogenous tissues, the only function for which protein is essential.
Some nuts, as the pine nut and the peanut, are rich in protein. A pound
of pine nuts contains as much protein as a pound and a half of lean
meat, besides furnishing the equivalent to two-thirds of a pound of
butter. The almond is also rich in protein.

But nuts have another special excellence which is worthy of
consideration. Recent researches have shown the paramount importance of
vitamines--certain subtle elements which are needed to activate or set
in operation various processes within the body which are essential to
complete nutrition. The vitamines of rice and other cereals are removed
with the bran; hence an exclusive diet of polished rice gives rise to
_beriberi_. Meat contains vitamines in very small amounts, for vitamines
are produced only by plants. The vitamines found in flesh foods
represent only the small residue of the supplies which the animal
gathered from the grass, corn and other vegetable products which
constitute its food.

Twenty years ago, when the diet of sailors consisted chiefly of salt
pork, _scurvy_ was a dread scourge which often disabled whole ship crews
and sent many a poor seaman into "Davy Jones' locker." The cooking of
animal foods destroys the vitamines which they contain. Infants suffer
from scurvy when fed on sterilized or pasteurized milk. There is good
reason for believing that _pellagra_ is due to a deficiency of
vitamines, which are conspicuously absent from a dietary consisting of
"sow belly," molasses, tea, coffee, lard, cornmeal, fine flour and
polished rice.

Nuts are rich in vitamines. In fact, the nut consists of the choicest
aggregation of all the materials essential for the building of sound
human tissues, done up in a hermetically sealed package ready to be
delivered by the gracious hand of Nature to those who are fortunate
enough to appreciate the value of this choicest of all earth's bounties.

As already noted, nuts consist almost wholly of the two principles, fat
and protein. The same is true of meats. Nuts contain more fat and less
protein and in this particular as well as others which have been
mentioned are better prepared to serve as nutrients to the body than are
meats. Besides, nuts have the advantage of being clean, free from the
products of disease and putrefaction. Meats of all sorts, as found in
the market, with the exception of canned meats, abound with putrefactive
bacteria to an astonishing degree. This is true of dried, smoked and
salted meats as well as of the fresh meats and game which are displayed
upon the walls of the meat shop. An examination of various meats made
some time ago by A. W. Nelson, bacteriologist of the Battle Creek
Sanitarium, showed the presence of putrefactive bacteria in almost
unbelievable numbers, as will be seen by an inspection of the following
table:

   TABLE VI.

                              No. Putrefactive
       Specimen.              Bacteria per ounce.

    1. Large sausage          12,600,000,000
    2. Small sausage          19,890,000,000
    3. Round steak            16,800,000,000
    4. Roast beef             16,800,000,000
    5. Smoked ham              1,293,600,000
    6. Hamburger steak         3,870,000,000
    7. Pork                    3,781,200,000
    8. Porterhouse steak         900,000,000
    9. Sirloin steak          11,340,000,000
   10. Tenderloin (well done)    756,000,000
   11. Tenderloin (rare)       5,040,000,000

Repeated subsequent examinations have given similar results. These
results also agree with observations made by various other German and
American bacteriologists. Decomposition of animal flesh begins
immediately after the animal dies. Within twenty-four hours after
killing, even though the carcass is kept in an ice box or refrigerater,
the whole mass is permeated with putrefactive bacteria. Refrigeration
even to a point close to freezing delays but does not prevent the growth
of putrefactive organisms although at lower temperatures the usual
volatile products which give notice of the presence of putrefaction by
an odor of decay are not produced. Persons whose stomachs manufacture a
liberal amount of hydrochloric acid, an essential constituent of healthy
gastric juice, are able to disinfect even highly putrescent meat, so
that they apparently do not suffer any immediate injury when such meat
enters the stomach. In a stomach which produces little or no
hydrochloric acid, the process of putrefaction continues all the way
through the alimentary canal, giving rise to the same poisonous
substances which are present in the putrefying carcass of a dead rat or
any other dead animal, and produces intestinal or alimentary toxemia
with the multitude of mischiefs which grow out of this condition, among
which may be mentioned all sorts of skin troubles, high blood-pressure,
apoplexy, premature senility, Bright's disease, heart failure,
gallstones--a list which might be increased by the addition of scores of
other common, chronic maladies.

When one recalls the statement made before the congressional committee
by the chief of the United States meat inspection service that if all
animals, any part of which was diseased, were rejected by inspectors,
not more than one in a hundred would pass muster; and when one also
reflects upon the wide prevalence of tuberculosis in animals,--at least
ten per cent of all the cows in the country are known to be
tuberculous,--and the growing prevalence of tapeworm and trichinae,
diseases which are exclusively derived from the eating of flesh, and
then contemplates the purity and perfection of the choice little food
packets which we call nuts, it is easy to be persuaded that a
substitution of nuts for flesh foods, even on a very large scale, would
be not only a perfectly safe procedure, but one which would be followed
by the most desirable results.

The use of nuts as a staple article of food is not an experiment. All
the higher apes, man's nearest relatives in the animal world, thrive on
nuts. Many savage tribes live almost entirely on nuts. The Indians of
the foothills of California gather every fall large quantities of nuts
which they store for winter use. The early settlers of California
reported also that many tribes of Indians in that part of the United
States lived almost wholly upon acorns. Before the great oak forests of
this country were cut down for lumber, millions of hogs were fattened on
mast, and the price of pork depended more upon the acorn crop than on
the corn crop. The peasantry of southern France and northern Italy
during half the year make two meals a day on chestnuts.

The objection commonly urged, that nuts are too expensive to enter
largely into the ordinary bill of fare, at first sight appears to be
valid, but upon examination this objection almost, if not wholly,
disappears. For example, a pound of pine nuts which is more than the
equivalent in nutritive value to two and a half pounds of the best
beefsteak and two-thirds of a pound of butter, can be bought wholesale
for twenty-five cents. The cost of the equivalent food value in meat and
butter would be at least sixty to seventy cents, or more than double the
cost of the nuts. A pound of almonds can be bought at wholesale for
forty cents, and has food value equal to that of meat which would cost a
dollar or more. A pound of peanuts can be bought at wholesale for seven
or eight cents, and furnishes nutritive value equivalent to more than a
pound of beefsteak and a half a pound of butter, which would cost
forty-five to fifty cents, or seven times as much. No objection can be
offered to the fact that we are comparing wholesale with retail prices,
for the reason that nuts do not readily spoil as do meat and butter, but
will keep in perfect condition for months. Further it is entirely
reasonable to suppose that the price of nuts may sometime in the future
be considerably reduced when the cultivation of nuts becomes more
general, and especially when the United States Forestry Department
becomes convinced that it would be a sensible thing to cover with nut
trees some of the large areas which have in the last fifty years been
laid waste by deforestation. The planting of nut trees along all the
public highways of the country would in less than twenty years result in
a crop, the food value of which would be greater than that at present
produced by the entire livestock industry of the country.

The high price of meat of which so much complaint has been made in
recent years is not likely to recede. The high price is not due to
manipulations of the market, but to natural causes, the chief of which
is the limitation of pasturage and is the consequence of a decrease in
the number of livestock. As the country becomes more and more densely
settled, the difficulty of supplying the demand for meat will increase,
and in time the necessity for utilizing every foot of ground in the most
efficient manner, will necessarily bring about a change in the dietetic
habits of the people. Not a single example can be found in the world of
a densely populated country dependent upon its own resources in which
flesh foods constitute any considerable part of the national bill of
fare. Since Germany has been nearly shut off from the outside world by
the present war, the government has found it necessary to restrict the
consumption of meat to one-half pound per week for each adult. All other
European countries are equally dependent on outside sources for their
meat supply.

The time will certainly come when nuts and nut trees will become a most
important food resource. If a reform in this direction could be effected
within the next ten years, the result would be a disappearance to a
large extent of the complaint of the high cost of living. Mr. Hill said
the basis for complaint was not the high cost of living, but the cost of
high living. I should prefer to say that the real cause for complaint
was wrong living rather than high living, or necessarily high cost. With
right living the cost will be automatically reduced. For example,
suppose a person were content to choose the peanut as his source for
protein and fat, the elimination of the butcher's bill for meat and the
grocer's bill for butter would at once cut out two-thirds of the expense
incurred for food.

When a student in college more than forty years ago, I was already
making dietetic experiments and lived three months on a diet such as I
have suggested, at an average expense of exactly six cents a day. This
was the total amount expended for raw foodstuffs. I paid my landlady
five times as much for preparing and serving the food, and had reason
for believing that some portion of my supplies was utilized by others
than myself. As evidence of the fact that the experiment was not
dangerous, I may add that I have pursued the same meatless dietary
during my entire lifetime since, as I had done for ten years before, and
I am still alive and hard at work. Man is naturally a frugivorous
animal. According to Cuvier, the great French naturalist, the natural
diet of human beings, like that of those other primates, the
orangoutang, the chimpanzee, and the gorilla, consists of fruits, nuts,
tender shoots and cereals. A sturdy Scotch highlander informed me that
his diet consisted of brose, bannocks, and potatoes, and that he rarely
ever tasted meat. When asked what he fed his dogs, he replied, "The same
as I eat myself, sir." The high-bred foxhounds of the southern states
are fed on cornmeal, oatmeal and bread, and rarely taste flesh of any
sort. Dogs thus fed are hardier, healthier, have more endurance, better
wind, keener scent, greater intelligence, and are more easily trained
than meat-fed dogs. A diet which is safe for carnivorous animals, must
certainly be safe for human beings, who belong to a class of animals all
representatives of which, with the exception of man are flesh
abstainers.

Some years ago I experimented with various sorts of carnivorous animals
for the purpose of ascertaining whether nuts could be made a complete
substitute for meat. Among the various animals utilized for the
experiment was a young wolf from the northwest that had never eaten
anything but fresh raw meat. After giving the animal one day to get
accustomed to its new surroundings and to acquire a good appetite, I
gave him a breakfast of nuts properly prepared and was delighted to find
that he took to the new ration without the slightest hesitation and
remained in excellent health during the several months of the
experiment. I succeeded perfectly in substituting nuts for meat with all
the animals experimented upon, including a fish hawk, with the single
exception of an old bald-headed eagle, which refused to be converted.

I have a suspicion that the so-called carnivorous animals were all at
some remote time nut eaters; the so-called carnivorous teeth would be as
useful in tearing off the husks of cocoanuts and similar fruits, as for
tearing and eating flesh.

An economic argument for the general adoption of nuts as a suitable
article of food is the enormous increase in food resources which such a
change would bring about. Some years ago, an experienced stock-raiser
informed the writer that it takes two acres of land and two years to
produce a steer weighing 600 pounds when dressed. Fresh meat is
three-fourths water; hence the food material actually represented by
such an animal would be considerably less than one hundred and fifty
pounds, allowing for the weight of the bones. The food value, estimated
as dried meat, would be about sixteen hundred calories per pound, or the
same as an equal quantity of wheat meal. That is, an acre of land would
produce in the form of beef, the food equivalent of seventy-five pounds
of wheat in two years, whereas, a single acre of grain would produce on
an average, even when poorly cultivated, in two crops not less than
thirty-two bushels of more than 1900 pounds of wheat, or more than
twenty-five times as much food as the same land would produce in the
same length of time in the form of beef. Humboldt showed that the banana
would furnish sustenance for twenty-five times as many people as could
be nourished by the wheat produced by the same area of land; and
according to Hutchinson, the chestnut tree is capable of producing on a
given area a still larger amount of nutrient material than the banana.
In other words, an acre of ground covered with chestnut trees in full
bearing will furnish food for more than six hundred times as many people
as could be supported by the same area devoted to meat production.

As a source of protein and fats the nut is vastly superior to the ox and
the pig. The nut is sweeter, cleaner, safer, healthier and cheaper than
any possible source of animal products.

This choicest product of Nature's laboratory is just beginning to be
appreciated. When the Nut Growers' Association celebrates its one
hundredth anniversary, it is safe to predict that the descendants of the
present generation of nut growers who have followed the example of their
forebears, will be living in opulence and will be regarded as the
saviors of their country, while the great abattoirs and meat packing
establishments will have ceased to exist, and the merry click of the nut
cracker will be heard throughout the land.




EXTRACTS FROM A LETTER FROM COLONEL J. C. COOPER, OF McMINNVILLE,
OREGON, PRESIDENT OF THE WESTERN WALNUT ASSOCIATION.

(Prepared by W. J. SPILLMAN, Chief of the Office of Farm Management U.
S. Dept. of Agr., to be read at the 7th Annual Meeting of the N. N. G.
A.)


It is probable that the prominence given the walnut growing industry in
Oregon and the Northwest is greater than the finished product will
justify at present, yet it is growing all the time in spite of the
methods in use. I say in spite of the methods rather than because of the
methods in use, for the reason that hundreds of thousands of trees have
been set out in the last ten or twelve years, a majority of which have
failed to meet the expectations of the would-be growers. These
expectations, however, have been based largely on the statements of boom
literature of those who have trees and lands for sale. We have much land
in Western Oregon that is suited to the growing of walnuts, and some
trees and orchards that are doing well, but there are more individual
trees that are giving their owners profits than there are orchards.

The industry will continue to grow, I will repeat again, in spite of the
cultural methods we use, but we must certainly change our methods or our
trees, or both. The excellence of the Oregon walnut is beyond question.
The gold and silver medals that we have captured, as well as the
testimony of dealers who are bidding for our product for their fancy
trade, is evidence of its excellent quality. But there are many things
that enter in the making of the perfect nut. Even after the tree has
cast down its golden shower of the finest product, the gathering,
washing and drying makes for the sweetness of the nut. When I see men
who make a success in other lines of horticulture and farming pulling
out walnut trees because they have planted a cheap lot or are too
impatient for the harvest, and others bringing sackfulls of the finest
nuts to market, discolored and dirty from having lain on the wet ground
for days and weeks, I sometimes think that it is a long, long way to
Tipperary.

But my heart's right there, and our association is doing heroic work,
although but two years old; we get our committees together two or three
times a year, compare notes and crack the whip for another run. Then
when we get together in annual convention there is something doing. We
cut out the frills and get at once to business. No welcomes by the mayor
and response by Colonel Long Bow with a brass band, but rather like the
women at the fish market: "Have yees any nice fish, Mrs. Maloney?"
"Indade, I have, Mrs. Flanigan." "They stink." "You lie." And that is
the way our fight usually starts, only not so vigorously, of course.

We have one committee that is all important and is doing fine work. The
committee on seedling varieties is making a survey of the western states
to find a variety or varieties best suited to the soil and climate of
the different localities. This committee includes the best men available
for that work; H. M. Williamson, secretary of our state board of
horticulture, chairman; C. I. Lewis, chief of division of horticulture,
Corvallis; Leon D. Batchelor, experiment station, Riverside, California;
A. A. Quarnberg, grower and experimenter, Vancouver, Washington; E. W.
Mathews, extensive planter, Portland, and Charles L. McNary, planter,
Salem. Mr. McNary told me yesterday that he had made a survey of
thirty-five very fine trees, on blank cards similar to the one enclosed.
We expect to have the record of at least 200 trees by the time of our
convention. Only those that approach the standard wanted are listed.

To give the product of the walnut crop of the state would only be a wild
guess. The system and machinery that we have for finding out how much we
raise is only in embryo. The estimates reach all the way from 100,000 to
500,000 pounds. There is a good crop this year and the output for the
market is growing rapidly. We need education more than we do growers.
But we are learning.

I want to give you some facts of things that I find. Yesterday at the
orchard of Alex Lafollette, State Senator from Marion county, and peach
king of the Willamette Valley, I found seven-year-old walnut trees
planted in rows among his peach trees, walnut trees planted sixteen feet
apart! He said that his trees were full of little walnuts in the spring,
but they all dropped off, and he did not think they would do well there.
He said there were no catkins on the little trees, which accounts for
the failure of his crop. This he did not know. And he did not know that
the trees would produce the catkins in a year or so and remedy the
failures. In the famous Dundee orchards I picked up handfuls of little
fibrous roots, photo of which I sent you, that had been torn up by the
plow and harrow when cultivating the walnut trees. Bales of these roots
could be gathered up from the ground under the trees. The owner said
that it did the trees good to treat them that way. Another black walnut
tree that I visited in a cultivated field of good deep, rich soil, I
found walnut roots protruding from the plowed ground as far away as 108
feet from the tree. The tree was thirty or forty years old.

It would add greatly to the walnut industry of the future if the Forest
Service would plant black walnuts in the hills and mountains between
here and the coast. You know in that burnt timber section and various
localities in the coast mountains there are many places where eight or
ten nut trees to the acre would soon give a good account of themselves.
If properly planted, in five or ten years they could be topgrafted to a
good English variety and add greatly to the value of the public domain
as well as the food products of the nation. We have no native walnuts,
but almost every variety under the sun will grow here.

   WESTERN WALNUT ASSOCIATION.

   SEEDLING WALNUT TREE RECORD.

   No....... Made............. 191........ by.........................
   Owner..............................................................
   P. O.................... State.............. Route.................
   Exact location.....................................................
   NUT--Origin........................................................
   Variety..................................... planted...............
   TREE--Origin................................ age now...............
   Transplanted 19................ Dia. trunk.........................
   Height................................. spread.....................
   DATES--of budding out..............................................
   catkin blooms......................... nut blooms..................
   leaves fall........................... nuts fall...................
   in 1-lb. kernel wt............... oz. shell wt................. oz.
   NUTS--Per tree........... lbs.  In cluster............ in lb.......
   round,.. oval,.. pointed,.. smooth,.... not well sealed............
   KERNEL--light, dark, not easily removed from shell. Tannin--little
   excessive.
   Tree vigor............ Blight................ per cent.............



PRESENT AT 1916 MEETING

   L. H. Ott, 1746 T St., Washington
   J. C. Smith, House of Rep. P. O.
   Fred. L. Fishback, 609 Union Trust Bldg., Washington
   Mr. and Mrs. W. E. Chamberlin, 44 R St., N. E.
   Dr. Taylor, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture
   Dr. True, U. S. Dept. of Agriculture
   Miss F. Cadel, Shepard St., Chevy Chase, Md.
   F. S. Holmes, Ag. Ex. Sta., College Park, Md.
   Dr. Hassall, Bowie, Md.
   M. P. Reed, Vincennes, Ind.
   Carl Poll, Danville
   Harry R. Weber, Cincinnati
   J. Russell Smith, Round Hill
   E. B. Crockett, Monroe, Va.
   R. T. Morris, N. Y. City
   W. C. Deming, Conn.
   Mrs. W. C. Deming
   Jacob L. Rife, Camp Hill, Pa., R. D. 1
   Paul White, Bowie, Md.
   John H. Fisher, Jr.
   Mrs. John H. Fisher, Jr., Bradshaw, Md.
   Miss Ellen M. Littlepage
   Miss Louise Littlepage
   John Littlepage
   C. A. Van Duzee
   W. N. Hutt
   W. N. Roper
   R. T. Olcott
   T. P. Littlepage
   Dr. Van Fleet, Glendale, Md.
   A. C. Shepherd, Washington
   Chas. S. Hayden, Baltimore
   C. A. Reed, Washington
   Mrs. Reed
   W. Bathon, Star reporter
   Henry Stabler, Washington
   H. M. Simpson, Vincennes
   C. S. Ridgway, Lumberton
   Mrs. Ridgway
   C. P. Close
   M. B. Waite
   R. L. McCoy
   Dr. Ira Ulman
   Rev. E. N. Kirby, Ballston, Va.
   S. M. McMurran, Washington
   Dr. Augustus Stabler, 45 R St., N. E., Washington
   C. M. Stearns, 1833 Dumont St., Washington
   E. C. Pomeroy
   A. D. Robinson, Washington
   James Tindaw, Waterbury, Md.
   Miss Katherine Stuart, Alexandria, Va.
   Henry T. Finley, Rockville, Md.
   Mrs. Finley
   Mrs. F. L. Mulford, Washington, D. C.
   B. Eyre, Washington
   Mrs. Eyre
   J. G. Rush
   J. F. Jones
   Dr. Kellermann
   Dr. Haven Metcalf
   Miss Martha Rush
   Miss Sarah Garvin, Lancaster
   H. A. Stewart, Jeannerette, La.
   Mr. Bryan, Bowie
   Miss Edna McNaughton, Middleville, Mich.
   Mr. C. E. Emig, Washington, D. C.
   A. C. Brown, Lanham, Md.


   Vincennes Nurseries

   W. C. REED, Proprietor

   VINCENNES, INDIANA, U. S. A.

   PROPAGATORS AND INTRODUCERS

   _Budded and Grafted Pecans, Hardy Northern Varieties_
   _English (Persian) Walnut Grafted on Black Walnut_
   _Best Northern and French Varieties_
   _Grafted Thomas Black Walnut_
   _Grafted Persimmons, best sorts   Hardy Almonds_
   _Filberts and Hazelnuts_
   _Also General Line Nursery Stock_

   SPECIAL NUT CATALOGUE ON REQUEST

          *       *       *       *       *

   JONES' PENNSYLVANIA GROWN

   NUT TREES WILL SUCCEED WITH YOU.

   WRITE FOR A COPY OF MY 1917 CATALOGUE
   AND NEW PRICE LIST

   _If interested in the propagation of nut
   trees or top-working seedling trees, ask
   for a copy of my booklet on propagation
   and list of tools..._

   J. F. JONES, The Nut Tree Specialist

   LANCASTER, PA.


   _Northern Nut Trees_

   _Why Plant Nut Trees?_

   _Varieties_:

   PECANS.
   BLACK WALNUTS.
   ENGLISH WALNUTS.
   HICKORY NUTS.

   WHEN TO SET NUT TREES.
   HOW TO SET NUT TREES.
   DISTANCE APART TO SET NUT TREES.
   SOIL FOR NUT TREES.
   FERTILIZER FOR NUT TREES.
   NUT TREES AS ORNAMENTALS.
   NUT TREES FOR PROFIT.

   Do you want to know about all of the above? If
   so, write for our beautiful illustrated catalogue for
   1917.

   _Maryland Nut Nurseries_

   BOWIE, MARYLAND.

   THOMAS P. LITTLEPAGE        PAUL WHITE

   P. S. We forgot to say that we not only have the
   answers to the above but we also have the trees.
   M. N. N.


   CHESTER VALLEY NURSERIES

   ESTABLISHED 1853

   Choice Fruit and Ornamental Trees, Cherry Trees
   on Mazzard Roots, Hardy Evergreens, Flowering
   Shrubs, Hedge Plants, etc. Originators of the

   THOMAS BLACK WALNUT

   JOS. W. THOMAS & SONS,  King of Prussia P. O.,  MONTGOMERY CO., PENNA.

          *       *       *       *       *

   A GOOD WAY TO KEEP POSTED IS TO READ THE MONTHLY

   AMERICAN NUT JOURNAL

   OFFICIAL JOURNAL OF THE NORTHERN ASSOCIATION

   SUBSCRIPTION--$1.25 per year;   ADVERTISING-16 Cents per Agate
   three years, $3.00; Canada       line; $2.10 per inch.
   and foreign, 50c. extra.

   AMERICAN FRUITS PUBLISHING CO., Inc., ROCHESTER, N. Y.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Northern Nut Growers Association,
Report of the Proceedings at the Seventh Annual Meeting, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NORTHERN NUT GROWERS ASSOC. 1916 ***

***** This file should be named 25597.txt or 25597.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/5/9/25597/

Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
