Project Gutenberg's Stories of King Arthur's Knights, by Mary MacGregor

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Stories of King Arthur's Knights
       Told to the Children by Mary MacGregor

Author: Mary MacGregor

Editor: Louey Chisholm

Illustrator: Katharine Cameron

Release Date: May 31, 2008 [EBook #25654]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF KING ARTHUR'S KNIGHTS ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Lindy Walsh, Suzan Flanagan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net







TOLD TO THE CHILDREN SERIES
EDITED BY LOUEY CHISHOLM


       KING ARTHUR'S KNIGHTS




                TO
          MARIE WINIFRED




[Illustration: BESIDE HER STOOD HER BEAUTIFUL DAUGHTER

Page 7]




            STORIES OF

       King Arthur's Knights

      TOLD TO THE CHILDREN BY

          MARY MACGREGOR

         WITH PICTURES BY

         KATHARINE CAMERON

           [Illustration]

     LONDON: T. C. & E. C. JACK
     NEW YORK: E. P. DUTTON & CO.




ABOUT THIS BOOK


More than four hundred years ago there lived a diligent man called
Sir Thomas Malory, who wrote in English words many of the beautiful
Welsh tales about King Arthur's Knights, that the people of Wales
loved so well.

All the stories in this little book were found in Malory's big
book, except 'Geraint and Enid.' But it, too, is one of the old
Welsh tales that tell of the brave knights and fair ladies of King
Arthur's court.

Many times, since Sir Thomas Malory wrote his book, have these
stories been told again to old and young, but perhaps never before
have they been told to the children so simply as in this little
book.

                                                  MARY MACGREGOR.




LIST OF STORIES

                                      Page

     Geraint and Enid,                   1

     Lancelot and Elaine,               29

     Pelleas and Ettarde,               45

     Gareth and Lynette,                61

     Sir Galahad and the Sacred Cup,    88

     The Death of King Arthur,         107




LIST OF PICTURES


     GERAINT AND ENID.

     Beside her stood her beautiful daughter,  _Frontispiece_

                                                      At page

     Through woods and swamps Enid and Geraint rode
     silently,                                             20


     LANCELOT AND ELAINE.

     The Lily Maid of Astolat,                             44


     PELLEAS AND ETTARDE.

     Sir Pelleas was always at his lady's side,            50


     GARETH AND LYNETTE.

     Sometimes the birds and beasts, his woodland
     friends, would call to him,                           62

     The Lady Lyonors,                                     84


     SIR GALAHAD AND THE SACRED CUP.

     'My strength is as the strength of ten
     Because my heart is pure,'                           102


     THE DEATH OF KING ARTHUR,                            114




GERAINT AND ENID


Queen Guinevere lay idly in bed dreaming beautiful dreams. The
sunny morning hours were slipping away, but she was so happy in
dreamland, that she did not remember that her little maid had
called her long ago.

But the Queen's dreams came to an end at last, and all at once she
remembered that this was the morning she had promised to go to the
hunt with King Arthur.

Even in the hunting-field, the King was not quite happy if his
beautiful Queen Guinevere were not there. This morning he had
waited for her in vain, for in dreamland the Queen had forgotten
all about the hunt.

'If I dress quickly, I shall not be very late,' thought the Queen,
as she heard the far-off sound of the hunting-horn. And she was so
quick that in a very short time she and her little waiting-maid
were out, and riding up to a grassy knoll. But the huntsmen were
already far away. 'We will wait here to see them ride homewards,'
said the Queen, and they drew up their horses to watch and listen.

They had not waited long, when they heard the sound of horse's
hoofs, and turning round, the Queen saw Prince Geraint, one of
Arthur's knights. He was unarmed, except that his sword hung at his
side. He wore a suit of silk, with a purple sash round his waist,
and at each end of the sash was a golden apple, which sparkled in
the sunlight.

'You are late for the hunt, Prince Geraint,' said the Queen.

'Like you, I have come, not to join the hunt, but to see it pass,'
said the Prince, bowing low to the beautiful Queen. And he asked to
be allowed to wait with her and the little maid.

As they waited, three people, a lady, a knight and a dwarf, came
out of the forest, and rode slowly past. The knight had his helmet
off, and the Queen saw that he looked young and bold.

'I cannot remember if he is one of Arthur's knights. I must know
his name,' she said. And she sent her little maid to find out who
the strange knight was.

But when the little maid asked the dwarf his master's name, the
dwarf answered rudely that he would not tell her.

'Then I will ask your master himself,' said the maid. But as she
stepped towards the knight, the dwarf struck her with his whip, and
the little maid, half-angry and half-frightened, hurried back to
the Queen, and told her how the dwarf had treated her.

Prince Geraint was angry when he heard how rude the dwarf had been
to the Queen's little messenger, and said that he would go and find
out the knight's name.

But the dwarf, by his master's orders, treated the Prince as rudely
as he had treated the little maid. When Geraint felt the dwarf's
whip strike his cheek, and saw the blood dropping on to his purple
sash, he felt for the sword at his side. Then he remembered that
while he was tall and strong, the dwarf was small and weak, and he
scorned to touch him.

Going back to the Queen, Geraint told her that he had not been able
to find out the knight's name either, 'but with your leave, I will
follow him to his home, and compel him to ask your pardon,' said
the Prince. And the Queen allowed him to follow the knight.

'When you come back, you will perhaps bring a bride with you,' said
the Queen. 'If she be a great lady, or if she be only a
beggar-maid, I will dress her in beautiful robes, and she shall
stand among the fairest ladies of my court.'

'In three days I shall come back, if I am not slain in battle with
the knight,' said Geraint. And he rode away, a little sorry not to
hear the merry sound of the hunter's horn, and a little vexed that
he had undertaken this strange adventure.

Through valleys and over hills Geraint followed the lady, the
knight and the dwarf, till at last, in the evening, he saw them go
through the narrow streets of a little town, and reach a white
fortress. Into this fortress the lady, the knight and the dwarf
disappeared.

'I shall find the knight there to-morrow,' thought Geraint 'Now I
must go to an inn for food and a bed,' for he was hungry and tired
after his long ride.

But all the inns in the little town were full, and every one seemed
too busy to take any notice of the stranger.

'Why is there such a bustle in your town this evening?' asked
Geraint, first of one person and then of another. But they hurried
past him, muttering, 'The Sparrow-hawk has his tournament here
to-morrow.'

'The Sparrow-hawk! that is a strange name,' thought Geraint. But he
did not know that this was one of the names of the knight he had
followed so far.

Soon Geraint reached a smithy, and he looked in, and saw that the
smith was busy sharpening swords and spears. 'I will go in and buy
arms,' thought Geraint.

And because the smith saw that the stranger was dressed like a
Prince, he stopped his work for a moment to speak to him.

'Arms?' he said, when Geraint told him what he wanted. 'There are
no arms to spare, for the Sparrow-hawk holds his tournament here
to-morrow.'

'The Sparrow-hawk again!' thought Geraint. 'I wonder who he can
be.' Then he turned to the smith again and said, 'Though you cannot
give me arms, perhaps you can tell me where to find food and a
bed.'

'The old Earl Yniol might give you shelter. He lives in that
half-ruined castle across the bridge,' said the smith. And he
turned again to his work, muttering, 'Those who work for the
Sparrow-hawk have no time to waste in talk.'

So Geraint rode wearily on across the bridge and reached the
castle. The courtyard was quite empty and looked very dreary, for
it was all overgrown with weeds and thistles. At the door of the
half-ruined castle stood the old Earl.

'It is growing late. Will you not come in and rest,' said Earl
Yniol, 'although the castle be bare, and the fare simple?'

And Geraint said he would like to stay there, for he was so hungry
that the plainest food would seem a feast.

As he entered the castle, he heard some one singing. The song was
so beautiful, and the voice was so pure and clear, that Geraint
thought it was the sweetest song in all the world, and the old
castle seemed less gloomy as he listened.

Then Earl Yniol led Geraint into a long low room, and this room was
both dining-room and kitchen.

The Earl's wife sat there, and she wore a dress that must have been
very grand once, but now it was old.

Beside her stood her beautiful daughter, and she wore a faded silk
gown, but Geraint thought he had never seen so fair a face.

'This is the maiden who sang the beautiful song,' he thought. 'If I
can win her for my bride, she shall come back with me to Queen
Guinevere. But the brightest silks the Queen can dress her in, will
not make her look more fair than she does in this old gown,' he
murmured to himself.

'Enid,' said the Earl, 'take the stranger's horse to the stable,
and then go to the town and buy food for supper.'

Geraint did not like the beautiful girl to wait on him, and he got
up eagerly to help her.

'We are poor, and have no servants, but we cannot let our guest
wait upon himself,' said the Earl proudly. And Geraint had to sit
down, while Enid took his horse to the stall, and went across the
bridge to the little town to buy meat and cakes for supper.

And as the dining-room was the kitchen too, Geraint could watch
Enid as she cooked the food and set the table.

At first it grieved him that she should work at all, but afterwards
he thought, 'She touches everything with such grace and gentleness,
that the work grows beautiful under her white hands.'

And when supper was ready, Enid stood behind, and waited, and
Geraint almost forgot that he was very hungry, as he took the
dishes from her careful hands.

When supper was over, Geraint turned to the Earl. 'Who is this
Sparrow-hawk of whom all the townspeople chatter? Yet if he should
be the knight of the white fortress, do not tell me his real name.
That I must find out for myself.' And he told the Earl that he was
Prince Geraint, and that he had come to punish the knight, because
he allowed his dwarf to be so rude to the Queen's messengers.

The Earl was glad when he heard his guest's name. 'I have often
told Enid of your noble deeds and wonderful adventures,' he said,
'and when I stopped, she would call to me to go on. She loves to
hear of the noble deeds of Arthur's knights. But now I will tell
you about the Sparrow-hawk. He lives in the white fortress, and he
is my nephew. He is a fierce and cruel man, and when I would not
allow him to marry Enid, he hated me, and made the people believe I
was unkind to him. He said I had stolen his father's money from
him. And the people believed him,' said the Earl, 'and were full of
rage against me. One evening, just before Enid's birthday, three
years ago, they broke into our home, and turned us out, and took
away all our treasures. Then the Sparrow-hawk built himself the
white fortress for safety, but us he keeps in this old half-ruined
castle.'

'Give me arms,' said Geraint, 'and I will fight this knight in
to-morrow's tournament.'

'Arms I can give you,' said the Earl, 'though they are old and
rusty; but you cannot fight to-morrow.' And the Earl told Geraint
that the Sparrow-hawk gave a prize at the tournament. 'But every
knight who fights to-morrow must have a lady with him,' said the
Earl, 'so that if he wins the prize in fair fight from the
Sparrow-hawk, he may give it to her. But you have no lady to whom
you could give the prize, so you will not be allowed to fight.'

'Let me fight as your beautiful Enid's knight,' said Geraint. 'And
if I win the prize for her, let me marry her, for I love her more
than any one else in all the world.'

Then the Earl was pleased, for he knew that if the Prince took Enid
away, she would go to a beautiful home. And though the old castle
would be more dreary than ever without her, he loved his fair
daughter too well to wish to keep her there.

'Her mother will tell Enid to be at the tournament to-morrow,' said
the Earl, 'if she be willing to have you as her knight.'

And Enid was willing. And when she slept that night she dreamed of
noble deeds and true knights, and always in her dream the face of
each knight was like the face of Prince Geraint.

Early in the morning Enid woke her mother, and together they went
through the meadows to the place where the tournament was to be
held.

And the Earl and Geraint followed, and the Prince wore the Earl's
rusty arms, but in spite of these, every one could see that he was
a Prince.

A great many lords and ladies and all the townspeople came to see
the tournament.

Then the Sparrow-hawk came to the front of the great crowd, and
asked if any one claimed his prize. And he thought, 'No one here is
brave enough to fight with me.'

But Geraint was brave, and he called out loudly, 'I claim the
prize for the fairest lady in the field.' And he glanced at Enid in
her faded silk dress.

Then, in a great rage, the Sparrow-hawk got ready for the fight
with Enid's champion, and they fought so fiercely that three times
they broke their spears. Then they got off their horses, and fought
with their swords. And the lords and ladies and all the townspeople
marvelled that Geraint was still alive, for the Sparrow-hawk's
sword flashed like lightning round the Prince's head.

But Geraint, because he was fighting for the Queen, and to win the
gracious Enid for his bride, brought down his sword with all his
strength on the Sparrow-hawk's helmet. The blow brought the knight
to the ground, and Geraint put his foot on him, and demanded his
name.

And all the pride of the Sparrow-hawk was gone because Enid had
seen his fall, and he quickly told Geraint his name was Edyrn.

'I will spare your life,' said Geraint, 'but you must go to the
Queen and ask her to forgive you, and you must take the dwarf with
you. And you must give back to Earl Yniol his earldom and all his
treasures.'

Edyrn went to the Queen and she forgave him; and he stayed at the
court and grew ashamed of his rough and cruel deeds. At last he
began to fight for King Arthur, and lived ever after as a true
knight.

When the tournament was over, Geraint took the prize to Enid, and
asked her if she would be his bride, and go to the Queen's court
with him the next day. And Enid was glad, and said she would go.

In the early morning, Enid lay thinking of her journey. 'I have
only my faded silk dress to wear,' she sighed, and it seemed to her
shabbier and more faded than ever, as it hung there in the morning
light. 'If only I had a few days longer, I would weave myself a
dress. I would weave it so delicately that when Geraint took me to
the Queen, he would be proud of it,' she thought. For in her heart
she was afraid that Geraint would be ashamed of the old faded silk,
when they reached the court.

And her thoughts wandered back to the evening before her birthday,
three long years ago. She could never forget that evening, for it
was then that their home had been sacked. Then she thought of the
morning of that day when her mother had brought her a beautiful
gift. It was a dress, made all of silk, with beautiful silk flowers
woven into it. If only she could have worn that, but the robbers
had taken it away.

But what had happened? Enid sat up and rubbed her eyes. For at that
moment her mother came into the room, and over her arm was the very
dress Enid had been thinking of.

'The colours are as bright as ever,' said the mother, touching the
silk softly. And she told Enid how last night their scattered
treasures had been brought back, and how she had found the dress
among them.

'I will wear it at once,' said Enid, a glad look in her eyes. And
with loving hands her mother helped her to put on the old birthday
gift.

Downstairs the Earl was telling Geraint that last night the
Sparrow-hawk had sent back all their treasures. 'Among them is one
of Enid's beautiful dresses. At last you will see her dressed as a
Princess,' said the Earl gladly.

But Geraint remembered that he had first seen and loved Enid in the
faded gown, and he thought, 'I will ask her to wear it again to-day
for my sake.'

And Enid loved the Prince so dearly, that when she heard his wish,
she took off the beautiful dress she had been so glad to wear, and
went down to him in the old silk gown. And when Geraint saw Enid,
the gladness in his face made her glad too, and she forgot all
about the old dress.

All that day Queen Guinevere sat in a high tower and often glanced
out of the window to look for Geraint and his bride. When she saw
them riding along the white road, she went down to the gate herself
to welcome them. And when the Queen had dressed Enid in soft and
shining silk, all the court marvelled at her beauty.

But because Geraint had first seen and loved her in the old faded
silk, Enid folded it up with care and put it away among the things
she loved.

And a feast was made for the wedding-day, and in great joy Geraint
and Enid were married.

Day by day Geraint loved his wife more dearly. And Enid was happy
in this strange new life, and she wondered at the merry lords and
ladies, and she loved the beautiful Queen, who was so kind to her.

And Geraint was glad that Enid was often with the Queen, till one
day he heard some people say that though the Queen was very
beautiful, she was not good. And Geraint heard this so often, that
he learned to believe it.

'I must take Enid away from the court,' he thought, 'for she
worships the Queen and may grow like her.'

So Geraint went to King Arthur, and asked to be allowed to go to
his own country. He told the King that robbers trampled down his
cornfields, and carried away his cattle. 'I wish to go and fight
these robbers,' he said. And King Arthur allowed him to go.

And Enid left the Queen and the lords and ladies gladly, to go with
Geraint.

But all the time Geraint could not help thinking, 'Enid is longing
for the knights and ladies she knew at the court.'

When Geraint reached his own country, he forgot all about the
robbers, who were destroying his land. He forgot to go to the hunt,
or the tournament, or to look after the poor people. And this was
all because he loved Enid so much. He thought, 'I will stay with
her all day. I will be so kind to her that she will forget the gay
lords and ladies, and be happy here, alone with me.'

But Enid grew sadder and paler every day. She did not wish Geraint
to wait on her and forget every one else. She wanted him to be a
true knight.

And the people began to scoff and jeer whenever Geraint's name was
spoken. 'The Prince is no knight,' they said. 'The robbers spoil
his land and carry off his cattle, but he neither cares nor
fights. He does nothing but wait on the fair Lady Enid.'

Enid knew what the people said, and she thought, 'I must tell
Geraint, and then surely he will be ashamed, and become a brave
knight once more.' But always her courage failed.

'I think I could buckle on his armour and ride with him to battle,'
thought Enid, 'but how can I tell him he is no worthy knight?'

And her tears fell fast, and Geraint coming in, saw her weeping,
and thought, 'She weeps for the gay lords and ladies of Arthur's
court.'

Then all at once he hated his idle life. 'It has only made Enid
despise me,' he thought. 'We will go together into the wilderness,
and I will show her I can still fight.' And half in anger and half
in sadness he called for his war-horse.

Then Geraint told Enid to put on her oldest dress and ride with him
into the wilderness. And because he was angry with himself for
thinking that Enid wept for the gay knights and ladies at Arthur's
court, he would not ride with her, but told her to go on in front,
and 'whatever you see or hear, do not speak to me,' he said
sternly.

Then Enid remembered the old faded silk gown. 'I will wear that,
for he loved me in it,' she thought.

Through woods and swamps Enid and Geraint rode in silence. And
while Enid's heart cried, 'Why is Geraint angry with me?' her eyes
were busy glancing into every bush and corner, in case robbers
should attack her lord.

At last in the shadow of some trees, Enid saw three tall knights.
They were armed, and she heard them whisper, when they saw Geraint,
'This is a craven-looking knight. We will slay him, and take his
armour and his maiden.'

And Enid thought, 'Even if it makes Geraint angry, I must tell him
what the knights say, or they will attack him before he knows they
are there.' And Enid turned back. Geraint frowned as he saw her
coming to speak to him, but Enid said bravely, 'There are three
knights in front of us. They say they will fight with you.'

'I do not want your warning,' said Geraint roughly, 'but you shall
see I can fight.'

Sad and pale, Enid watched the three knights spring suddenly out of
their ambush and attack her lord.

But Geraint threw his spear at the tallest knight, and it pierced
his breast. Then with two sword thrusts, he stunned the other two.

Geraint dismounted, and took the armour of the three fallen
knights, and tied it round their horses. Twining the three bridle
reins into one, he gave it to Enid.

'Drive these horses in front, and whatever you see or hear, do not
speak to me,' said Geraint. But he rode a little nearer Enid than
before, and that made her glad.

Soon they came to a wood, and in the wood Enid again saw three
knights. One was taller and looked stronger than Geraint, and Enid
trembled as she looked at him.

'The knight hangs his head, and the horses are driven by a girl,'
she heard them mutter. 'We will kill the knight, and take his
damsel and his horses for ourselves.'

[Illustration: THROUGH WOODS AND SWAMPS ENID AND GERAINT RODE IN
SILENCE

Page 19]

'Surely,' thought Enid, 'I may warn Geraint this time, for he is
faint and tired after the last battle.'

And Enid waited till Geraint rode up to her, and told him there
were three evil men in front of them. 'One is stronger than you,'
she said, 'and he means to kill you.'

And Geraint answered angrily, 'If you would but obey me, I would
fight one hundred knights gladly.' Yet Geraint loved Enid all the
time, though he spoke so roughly.

Then Enid stood out of the way, and she hardly dared to look as the
strongest knight attacked Geraint. But Geraint hurled his spear
through the strong knight's armour, and he fell over and died.

The other two knights came slowly towards Geraint, but he shouted
his battle-cry, and they turned and fled. But Geraint caught them,
and killed them.

Again Geraint tied the armour of the three slain knights round
their horses. Then he twisted the three reins together, and handed
them to Enid.

'Drive these on in front,' said Geraint. And now Enid had six
horses to drive, and Geraint saw that they were difficult to
manage. Then he rode nearer Enid.

They had left the wood behind them now, and were riding through
cornfields, where reapers were busy cutting down the waving corn.

Coming down the path towards them, they saw a fair-haired boy. He
was carrying food to the reapers. Geraint thought Enid looked
faint, and he was very hungry, so he stopped the lad and asked for
food.

'I can give you some of this; it is the reapers' dinner,' said the
boy. 'But it is coarse and plain food,' and he glanced doubtfully
at the lady with the sad eyes and her stern-looking knight.

But Geraint thanked him, and took the food to Enid. And to please
him she ate a little, but Geraint was so hungry that he finished
all the reapers' dinner.

'I will reward you,' said Geraint, for the lad was dismayed to find
nothing left for the reapers to eat. And he told him to take one
of the horses, with the suit of armour bound round it.

Then the boy was full of glee, and thought himself a knight, as he
led the horse away.

Geraint and Enid then went to the little village near the
cornfields, and lodged there for one night.

The country they were in belonged to a cruel Earl. He had once
wanted to marry Enid. When he heard that she was in his country, he
made up his mind to kill Geraint, and make Enid marry him after
all.

'I will go to the inn while they are still asleep,' thought the
Earl, 'and kill the knight and take Enid away.'

But Geraint and Enid had got up very early that morning, and had
left the five horses and the five suits of armour with the
landlord, to pay him for their food and shelter.

By the time the Earl reached the inn Geraint and Enid had ridden a
long way into a wild country.

Then the wicked Earl galloped after them, and Enid heard the sound
of horse's hoofs coming nearer and nearer. As the horseman dashed
down upon Geraint, Enid hid her face, and asked God to spare her
dear lord's life once more.

The fight was long and fierce, but at last Geraint overthrew the
Earl, and left him lying half-dead in the dust.

Still a little in front, Enid rode silently on, and Geraint
followed, but he had been wounded in the fight with the Earl,
though he did not tell Enid. And the wound bled inside his armour,
till Geraint felt very faint, and suddenly everything seemed black
in front of him. He reeled and fell from his horse on to a bank of
grass.

Enid heard the crash of his armour as he fell, and in a moment she
was beside him. She unbuckled the armour and took off his helmet
Then she took her veil of faded silk and bound up his wound. But
Geraint lay quite still.

Enid's horse wandered into a forest and was lost, but Geraint's
noble war-horse kept watch with Enid, as if he understood.

About noon, the Earl, in whose country they now were, passed along
with his followers. He saw the two by the wayside, and shouted to
Enid, 'Is he dead?'

'No, no, not dead; he cannot be dead. Let him be carried out of the
sun,' she entreated.

And Enid's great sorrow, and her great beauty, made the Earl a
little less rough, and he told his men to carry Geraint to the
hall. 'His charger is a noble one, bring it too,' shouted the Earl.

His men unwillingly carried Geraint to the hall, and laid him down
on a stretcher there, and left him.

Enid bent over him, chafing his cold hands, and calling him to come
back to her.

After a long time Geraint opened his eyes. He saw Enid tenderly
watching him, and he felt Enid's tears dropping on his face. 'She
weeps for me,' he thought; but he did not move, but lay there as if
he were dead.

In the evening the Earl came into the great hall and called for
dinner, and many knights and ladies sat down with him, but no one
remembered Enid. But when the Earl had finished eating and
drinking, his eye fell on her. He remembered how she had wept for
her wounded lord in the morning.

'Do not weep any more, but eat and be merry. Then I will marry you,
and you shall share my earldom, and I will hunt for you,' said the
wild Earl.

Enid's head drooped lower, and she murmured, 'Leave me alone, I
beseech you, for my lord is surely dead.'

The Earl hardly heard what she said, but thought Enid was thanking
him. 'Yes, eat and be glad,' he repeated, 'for you are mine.'

'How can I ever be glad again?' said Enid, thinking, 'Surely
Geraint is dead.'

But the Earl was growing impatient. He seized her roughly, and made
her sit at the table, and he put food before her, shouting, 'Eat.'

'No,' said Enid, 'I will not eat, till my lord arises and eats with
me.'

'Then drink,' said the Earl, and he thrust a cup to her lips.

'No,' said Enid, 'I will not drink, till my lord arises and drinks
with me; and if he does not arise, I will not drink wine till I
die.'

The Earl strode up and down the hall in a great rage. 'If you will
neither eat nor drink, will you take off this old faded dress?'
said the Earl. And he told one of his women to bring Enid a robe,
which had been woven across the sea, and which was covered with
many gems.

But Enid told the Earl how Geraint had first seen and loved her in
the dress she wore, and how he had asked her to wear it when he
took her to the Queen. 'And when we started on this sad journey, I
wore it again, to win back his love,' she said, 'and I will never
take it off till he arises and bids me.'

Then the Earl was angry. He came close to Enid, and struck her on
the cheek with his hand.

And Enid thought, 'He would not have dared to strike me, if he had
not known that my lord was truly dead,' and she gave a bitter cry.

When Geraint heard Enid's cry, with one bound he leaped to where
the huge Earl stood, and with one swing of his sword cut off the
Earl's head, and it fell down and rolled along the floor.

Then all the lords and ladies were afraid, for they had thought
Geraint was dead, and they fled, and Geraint and Enid were left
alone.

And Geraint never again thought that Enid loved the gay lords and
ladies at King Arthur's court better than she loved him.

Then they went back to their own land. And soon the people knew
that Prince Geraint had come back a true knight, and the old
whispers that he was a coward faded away, and the people called him
'Geraint the Brave.'

And her ladies called Enid, 'Enid the Fair,' but the people on the
land called her 'Enid the Good.'




LANCELOT AND ELAINE


Her name was Elaine. But she was so fair that her father called her
'Elaine the Fair,' and she was so lovable that her brothers called
her 'Elaine the Lovable,' and that was the name she liked best of
all.

The country people, who lived round about the castle of Astolat,
which was Elaine's home, had another and a very beautiful name for
her. As she passed their windows in her white frock, they looked at
the white lilies growing in their gardens, and they said, 'She is
tall and graceful and pure as these,' and they called her the 'Lily
Maid of Astolat.'

Elaine lived in the castle alone with her father and her two
brothers, and an old dumb servant who had waited on her since she
was a baby.

To her father Elaine seemed always a bright and winsome child,
though she was growing up now. He would watch her serious face as
she listened to Sir Torre, the grave elder brother, while he told
her that wise maidens stayed at home to cook and sew. And he would
laugh as he saw her, when Sir Torre turned away, run off wilfully
to the woods.

Elaine spent long happy days out of doors with her younger brother
Lavaine. When they grew tired of chasing the butterflies and
gathering the wildflowers, they would sit under the pine-trees and
speak of Arthur's knights and their noble deeds, and they longed to
see the heroes of whom they talked.

'And the tournament will be held at Camelot this year,' Lavaine
reminded his sister. 'If some of the knights ride past Astolat, we
may see them as they pass.' And Elaine and Lavaine counted the days
till the tournament would begin.

Now Arthur had offered the prize of a large diamond to the knight
who fought most bravely at the tournament.

But the knights murmured to each other, 'We need not hope to win
the prize, for Sir Lancelot will be on the field, and who can stand
before the greatest knight of Arthur's court?'

And the Queen heard what the knights said to each other, and she
told Lancelot how they lost courage and hope when he came on to the
field. 'They begin to think some magic is at work when they see
you, and they cannot fight their best. But I have a plan. You must
go to the tournament at Camelot in disguise. And though the knights
do not know with whom they fight, they will still fall before the
strength of Lancelot's arm,' added the Queen, smiling up to him.

Then Lancelot disguised himself, and left the court and rode
towards Camelot. But when he was near Astolat he lost his way, and
wandered into the old castle grounds, where Elaine stood, with her
father and brothers.

And as Elaine's father, the old Baron, welcomed the knight, Lavaine
and Elaine whispered together, 'This is better than to see many
knights passing on their way to Camelot.'

And Lancelot stayed at Astolat till evening, and he told many tales
of Arthur's court.

As Elaine and Lavaine listened to his voice, and looked at his
face, with the scars of many battles on it, they loved him. 'I will
be his squire and follow him,' thought Lavaine, and Elaine wished
that she might follow the strange knight too. But Sir Torre, the
grave elder brother, looked gloomily at the stranger, and wished he
had not come to Astolat.

In the evening Sir Lancelot told the Baron how he was going in
disguise to the tournament, and how, by mistake, he had brought his
own shield with him. 'If you can lend me another, I will leave my
shield with you till I come back from Camelot,' said the knight.

Then they gave him Sir Torre's shield, for Sir Torre had been
wounded in his first battle, and could not go to the tournament.
And Elaine came running gladly to take the strange knight's shield
under her care. But none of them knew that it was Sir Lancelot's
shield, for he had not told them his name.

And Elaine, carrying the shield with her, climbed the tower stair,
up to her own little room. And she put the shield carefully into a
corner, thinking, 'I will sew a cover for it, to keep it safe and
bright.' Then she went downstairs again, and saw that the knight
was going, and that Lavaine was going too.

'He has asked the knight to take him as his squire,' she thought.
'But although I cannot go,' she murmured sadly, 'I can ask him to
wear my favour at the tournament.' For in those days a knight often
wore the colours of the lady who loved him.

Very shyly Elaine told the knight her wish. Would he wear her
favour at the tournament? It was a red sleeve, embroidered with
white pearls.

Lancelot thought how fair Elaine was, as she looked up at him with
love and trust in her eyes, but he told her gently that he had
never yet worn a lady's favour, and that he could not wear hers.

'If you have never worn one before, wear this,' she urged timidly.
'It will make your disguise more complete.' And Lancelot knew that
what she said was true, and he took the red sleeve embroidered with
pearls, and tied it on his helmet.

So Elaine was glad, and after the knight and Lavaine had ridden
away, she went up the turret stair again to her little room. She
took the shield from the corner, and handled the bruises and dints
in it lovingly, and made pictures to herself of all the battles and
tournaments it had been through with her knight.

Then Elaine sat down and sewed, as Sir Torre would have wise
maidens do. But what she sewed was a beautiful cover for the
shield, and that Sir Torre would not have her do, for he cared
neither for the strange knight nor his shield.

Lancelot rode on towards Camelot, with Lavaine as his squire, till
they came to a wood where a hermit lived. And they stayed at the
hermitage all night, and the next morning they rode on till they
reached Camelot.

And when Lavaine saw the King sitting on a high throne, ready to
judge which knight was worthy to have the diamond, he did not think
of the grandeur of the throne, nor of the King's marvellous dress
of rich gold, nor of the jewels in his crown. He could think only
of the nobleness and beauty of the great King's face, and wish that
his fair sister Elaine might see him too.

Then many brave knights began to fight, and all wondered why Sir
Lancelot was not there. And they wondered more at the strange
knight, with the bare shield and the red sleeve with pearls on his
helmet, who fought so bravely and overthrew the others one by one.

And the King said, 'Surely this is Sir Lancelot himself.' But when
he saw the lady's favour on the knight's helmet, he said, 'No, it
cannot be Sir Lancelot.'

When at last the tournament was over, the King proclaimed that the
strange knight who wore the red sleeve embroidered with pearls had
won the prize, and he called him to come to take the diamond.

But no one came, and the knight with the red sleeve was nowhere to
be seen. For Sir Lancelot had been wounded in his last fight, and
when it was over, had ridden hastily from the field, calling
Lavaine to follow. And when they had ridden a little way into the
wood, Sir Lancelot fell from his horse. 'The head of the spear is
still in my side,' he moaned; 'draw it out, Lavaine.'

At first Lavaine was afraid, for he thought of the pain it would
give the knight, and he was afraid too that the wound would bleed
till his knight bled to death. But because Sir Lancelot was in
great suffering, Lavaine at last took courage, and pulled the head
of the spear out of Lancelot's side. Then he, with great
difficulty, helped the knight on to his horse, and slowly and
painfully they rode towards the hermitage.

They reached it at last, and the hermit came out and called two of
his servants to carry the knight into his cell; and they unarmed
him and put him to bed. Then the hermit dressed the knight's wound
and gave him wine to drink.

When King Arthur found the strange knight had disappeared, and
heard that he was wounded, he said that the prize should be sent to
so gallant a victor. 'He was tired and wounded, and cannot have
ridden far,' said the King. And turning to Sir Gawaine, he gave him
the diamond, and told him to go and find the knight and give him
the prize he had won so bravely.

But Sir Gawaine did not want to obey the King. He did not want to
leave the feasting and merriment that followed the tournament. Yet
since all Arthur's knights had taken a vow of obedience, Gawaine
was ashamed not to go, so sulkily, like no true knight, he left the
feast.

And Sir Gawaine rode through the wood and past the hermitage where
the wounded knight lay; and because he was thinking only of his own
disappointment, his search was careless, and he did not see the
shelter Sir Lancelot had found. He rode on till he came to
Astolat. And when Elaine and her father and her brother Sir Torre
saw the knight, they called to him to come in and tell them about
the tournament, and who had won the prize.

Then Sir Gawaine told how the knight with the red sleeve
embroidered with white pearls had gained the prize, but how, being
wounded, he had ridden away without claiming it. He told too how
the King had sent him to find the unknown knight and to give him
the diamond.

But because Elaine was very fair, and because he did not greatly
wish to do the order of the King, Sir Gawaine lingered there,
wandering in the old castle garden, with 'the Lily Maid of
Astolat.' And he told Elaine courtly tales of lords and ladies, and
tried to win her love, but she cared for no one but the knight
whose shield she guarded.

One day, as Elaine grew impatient with the idle Sir Gawaine, she
said she would show him the shield the strange knight had left with
her. 'If you know the arms engraved on the shield, you will know
the name of the knight you seek, and perhaps find him the sooner,'
she said.

And when Sir Gawaine saw the shield he cried, 'It is the shield of
Sir Lancelot, the noblest knight in Arthur's court.'

Elaine touched the shield lovingly, and murmured, 'The noblest
knight in Arthur's court.'

'You love Sir Lancelot, and will know where to find him,' said Sir
Gawaine. 'I will give you the diamond, and you shall fulfil the
King's command.'

And Sir Gawaine rode away from Astolat, kissing the hands of the
fair Elaine, and leaving the diamond with her. And when he reached
the court he told the lords and ladies about the fair maid of
Astolat who loved Sir Lancelot. 'He wore her favour, and she guards
his shield,' he said.

But when the King heard that Sir Gawaine had come back, without
finding the strange knight, and leaving the diamond with the fair
maid of Astolat, he was displeased. 'You have not served me as a
true knight,' he said gravely; and Sir Gawaine was silent, for he
remembered how he had lingered at Astolat.

When Elaine took the diamond from Sir Gawaine she went to her
father. 'Let me go to find the wounded knight and Lavaine,' she
said. 'I will nurse the knight as maidens nurse those who have worn
their favours.' And her father let her go.

With the grave Sir Torre to guard her, Elaine rode into the wood,
and near the hermitage she saw Lavaine.

'Take me to Sir Lancelot,' cried the Fair Elaine. And Lavaine
marvelled that she knew the knight's name.

Then Elaine told her brother about Sir Gawaine, and his careless
search for Lancelot, and she showed him the diamond she brought for
the wounded knight.

'Take me to him,' she cried again. And as they went, Sir Torre
turned and rode gloomily back to Astolat, for it did not please him
that the Fair Elaine should love Sir Lancelot.

When Lavaine and Elaine reached the hermitage, the hermit welcomed
the fair maid, and took her to the cell where Lancelot lay.

'The knight is pale and thin,' said Elaine; 'I will nurse him.'

Day by day and for many nights Elaine nursed him tenderly as a
maiden should, till at last one glad morning the hermit told her
she had saved the knight's life.

Then when Sir Lancelot grew stronger, Elaine gave him the diamond,
and told him how the King had sent him the prize he had won so
hardly. And Lancelot grew restless, and longed to be at the King's
court once more.

When the knight was able to ride, he went back to Astolat with
Elaine and Lavaine. And as he rested there, he thought, 'Before I
go, I must thank the Lily Maid, and reward her for all she has done
for me.'

But when he asked Elaine how he could reward her, she would answer
only that she loved him, and wished to go to court with him, as
Lavaine would do.

'I cannot take you with me,' said the knight courteously; 'but
when you are wedded, I will give you and your husband a thousand
pounds every year.'

But Elaine wanted nothing but to be with Sir Lancelot.

'My Lily Maid will break her heart,' said her father sadly, 'unless
the knight treats her less gently.'

But Sir Lancelot could not be unkind to the maid who had nursed him
so tenderly. Only, next morning when he rode away, carrying his
shield with him, though he knew Elaine watched him from her turret
window, he neither looked up nor waved farewell. And Elaine knew
she would never see Sir Lancelot again.

Then day by day she grew more sad and still. 'She will die,' said
her father sadly, as he watched her; and the grave Sir Torre
sobbed, for he loved his sister dearly.

One day Elaine sent for her father to come to her little turret
room.

'Promise me that when I die you will do as I wish. Fasten the
letter I shall write tightly in my hand, and clothe me in my
fairest dress. Carry me down to the river and lay me in the barge,
and, alone with our old dumb servant, let me be taken to the
palace.'

And her father promised. And when Elaine died there was great
sadness in Astolat.

Then her father took the letter and bound it in her hand, and by
her side he placed a lily. And they clothed her in her fairest
dress, and carried her down to the river, and laid her in the
barge, alone with the old dumb servant.

And the barge floated quietly down the stream, guided by the old
dumb man.

Then when it reached the palace steps, it stopped, and the King and
the Queen and all the knights and ladies came to see the strange
sight.

And the King took the letter from the fair maid's hand and read it
aloud.

'I am the Lily Maid of Astolat, and because Sir Lancelot left me, I
make unto all ladies my moan. Pray for my soul.'

When they heard it the lords and ladies wept with pity.

And Sir Lancelot buried Elaine sadly. And sometimes when those who
loved him were jealous and unkind, he thought tenderly of the pure
and simple love of the Lily Maid of Astolat.

[Illustration: THE LILY MAID OF ASTOLAT

Page 44]




PELLEAS AND ETTARDE


Far away in a dreary land there lived a lad called Pelleas. The men
were rough and the women grave in the dreary land where Pelleas
lived.

To this far-away country there had come tales of the gay lords and
ladies of Arthur's court.

Pelleas heard, in great astonishment, that the men in Arthur's
country were brave and gentle, and that the women smiled. He would
go away from his own land, he thought, and see these strange and
happy people.

Soon the rough men in his country laughed at Pelleas, for he began
to grow brave and gentle like the knights who were so often in his
thoughts.

And the grave women looked at each other in surprise, as they saw
the lad's bright face and caught the smile on his lips. Pelleas
had been dreaming about the gay ladies he had heard of, till some
of their gladness had passed into his face.

When he was older Pelleas left his country and all the land that
belonged to him there. He would take his horse and his sword and
ask the great King Arthur to make him one of his knights, for had
he not learned knightly ways from the wonderful tales he had heard
long ago?

After many days Pelleas reached the court. And when the King had
listened to the young man's story, and had seen his beauty and
strength, he gladly made him his knight.

Then Pelleas was ready to begin his adventures. He would go to
Carleon, where, for three days, the King's tournament was to be
held.

The King had promised a golden circlet and a good sword to the
knight who showed himself the strongest. The golden circlet was to
be given to the fairest lady in the field, and she was to be called
the 'Queen of Beauty.'

On his way to Carleon, Pelleas rode along a hot and dusty road.
There were no trees to shelter him from the scorching sun, but he
rode on steadfastly, for he knew that a great shady forest lay
before him.

When at last Pelleas reached the forest, he was so hot and tired
that he dismounted, and tying his horse to a tree, he lay down
gratefully under a large oak and fell asleep.

Sounds of laughter and merriment woke him, and opening his eyes he
saw a group of maidens close by.

Pelleas was bewildered. Could they be wild woodland nymphs, he
thought, as, only half-awake, he lay there, and watched them
flitting in and out among the tall trees.

They wore bright dresses, blue and yellow and purple, and to
Pelleas the forest seemed all aglow.

The maidens were talking together, and looking first in one
direction and then in another. They were lost in the forest, on
their way to the great tournament at Carleon.

Then the lost maidens caught sight of the knight, lying
half-asleep under the oak-tree. 'He will be able to show us the
way,' they said joyfully to one another, for they guessed that he
too was on his way to the tournament.

'I will speak to the knight,' said the Lady Ettarde, the tallest
and most beautiful of all the maidens, and she left the others and
went towards Pelleas. But when she told the knight that she and her
lords and ladies had lost their way, and asked him to tell her how
to reach Carleon, he only looked at her in silence. Was she one of
the woodland nymphs? Was he still dreaming, and was she the lady of
his dreams?

As the lady still stood there, he roused himself and tried to
speak. But because he was bewildered by her beauty, he stammered
and answered foolishly.

The Lady Ettarde turned to the merry lords and ladies who had
followed her. 'The knight cannot speak, though he is so strong and
good-looking,' she said scornfully.

But Sir Pelleas was wide-awake at last. He sprang to his feet, and
told the Lady Ettarde that he had been dreaming, and that she had
seemed to him a part of his dream. 'But I too am going to Carleon,'
he added, 'and I will show you the way.'

And as they rode through the forest Sir Pelleas was always at his
lady's side. When the branches were in her way he pushed them
aside, when the path was rough he guided her horse. In the evening
when the Lady Ettarde dismounted, Pelleas was there to help her,
and in the morning again it was Pelleas who brought her horse and
helped her to mount.

Now the Lady Ettarde was a great lady in her own land; knights who
had fought many battles and won great fame had served her, and she
cared nothing for the young untried knight's love and service.

'Still he looks so strong, that I will pretend to care for him,'
she thought, 'and then perhaps he will try to win the golden
circlet for me, and I shall be called the "Queen of Beauty."' For
the Lady Ettarde was a cruel and vain lady, and cared more for the
golden circlet and to be called the 'Queen of Beauty,' than for
the happiness of the young knight Pelleas. And so for many days the
Lady Ettarde was kind to Sir Pelleas, and at last she told him that
she would love him if he would win the golden circlet for her.

'The lady of my dreams will love me,' the knight murmured. And
aloud he said proudly that if there were any strength in his right
arm, he would win the prize for the Lady Ettarde.

Then the lords and ladies that were with Ettarde pitied the young
knight, for they knew their lady only mocked him.

At last they all reached Carleon, and the next morning the
tournament began.

And the Lady Ettarde watched her knight merrily, as each day he
overcame and threw from their horses twenty men.

'The circlet will be mine,' she whispered to her lords and ladies.
But they looked at her coldly, for they knew how unkindly she would
reward Sir Pelleas.

At the end of three days the tournament was over, and King Arthur
proclaimed that the young knight Pelleas had won the golden circlet
and the sword.

[Illustration: SIR PELLEAS WAS ALWAYS AT HIS LADY'S SIDE

Page 49]

Then in the presence of all the people, Sir Pelleas took the golden
circlet and handed it to the Lady Ettarde, saying aloud that she
was the fairest lady on the field and the Queen of Beauty.

The Lady Ettarde was so pleased with her prize, that for a day or
two she was kind to her knight, but soon she grew tired of him, and
wished that she might never see him again.

Still even when she was unkind, Sir Pelleas was happy, for he
trusted the beautiful lady, and said to himself, 'She proves me, to
see if I really love her.'

But the Lady Ettarde knew she would never love Sir Pelleas, even if
he died for her.

Then her ladies were angry, as they saw how she mocked the knight,
for they knew that greater and fairer ladies would have loved Sir
Pelleas for his strength and great knightliness.

'I will go back to my own country,' said the Lady Ettarde, 'and see
my faithful knight no more.'

When Pelleas heard that the Lady Ettarde was going home he was
glad. He remembered the happy days he had spent as they rode
together through the forest, and he looked forward to other happy
days in the open air, when he could again shield the lady from the
roughness of the road.

But when the Lady Ettarde saw that Sir Pelleas was following her
into her own country, she was angry.

'I will not have the knight near me,' she said proudly to her
ladies. 'I will have an older warrior for my love.' And they knew
their lady's cruel ways, and in pity kept the knight away.

As they rode along the days seemed long to Pelleas, for he neither
saw nor spoke to the Lady Ettarde.

When she got near her own castle, she rode on more swiftly, telling
her lords and ladies to follow her closely. The drawbridge was
down, and the Lady Ettarde rode across it, and waiting only till
her lords and ladies crossed it, ordered the bridge to be drawn up,
while Pelleas was still on the other side.

The knight was puzzled. Was this a test of his love too, or did the
lady for whom he had won the golden circlet indeed not care for
him? But that he would not believe. 'She will grow kinder if I am
faithful,' he thought, and he lived in a tent beneath the castle
walls for many days.

The Lady Ettarde heard that Pelleas still lingered near the castle,
and in her anger she said, 'I will send ten of my lords to fight
this knight, and then I shall never see his face again.'

But when Pelleas saw the ten lords coming towards him, he armed
himself, and fought so bravely that he overthrew each of them.

But after he had overthrown them, he allowed them to get up and to
bind him hand and foot, and carry him into the castle. 'For they
will carry me into the presence of the Lady Ettarde,' he thought.

But when she saw Pelleas, the Lady Ettarde mocked him, and told her
lords to tie him to the tail of a horse and turn him out of the
castle.

'She does it to find out if I love her truly,' thought Sir Pelleas
again, as he struggled back to his tent below the castle.

Another ten lords were sent to fight the faithful knight, and again
Pelleas overthrew them, and again he let himself be bound and
carried before the Lady Ettarde.

But when she spoke to him even more unkindly than before, and
mocked at his love for her, Sir Pelleas turned away. 'If she were
good as she is beautiful, she could not be so cruel,' he thought
sadly.

And he told her that though he would always love her, he would not
try to see her any more.

Now one of King Arthur's knights, called Sir Gawaine, had been
riding past the castle when the ten lords attacked Sir Pelleas.

And Sir Gawaine had looked on in dismay. He had seen the knight
overthrow the ten lords, and stand there quietly while the
conquered men got to their feet. He had seen them bind him hand and
foot, and carry him into the castle.

'To-morrow I will look for him, and offer him my help,' thought Sir
Gawaine, for he was sorry for the brave young knight.

The next morning he found Sir Pelleas in his tent, looking very
sad. And when Sir Gawaine asked the knight why he was so sad, Sir
Pelleas told him of his love for the Lady Ettarde and of her
unkindness. 'I would rather die a hundred times than be bound by
her lords,' he said, 'if it were not that they take me into her
presence.'

Then Sir Gawaine cheered Sir Pelleas and offered to help him, for
he too was one of Arthur's knights.

And Sir Pelleas trusted him, for had not all King Arthur's knights
taken the vows of brotherhood and truth?

'Give me your horse and armour,' said Sir Gawaine. 'I will go to
the castle with them, and tell the Lady Ettarde that I have slain
you. Then she will ask me to come in, and I will talk of your
great love and strength, till she learns to love you.'

And Sir Gawaine rode away, wearing the armour and helmet of Sir
Pelleas, and promising to come back in three days.

The Lady Ettarde was walking up and down outside the castle, when
she saw the knight approaching. 'Sir Pelleas again,' she thought
angrily, and turned to go into the castle.

But Sir Gawaine called to her to stay. 'I am not Sir Pelleas, but a
knight who has slain him.'

'Take off your helmet that I may see your face,' said the Lady
Ettarde, as she turned to look at him.

When she saw that it was really a strange knight, she took him into
her castle. 'Because you have slain Sir Pelleas, whom I hated, I
will love you,' said the cruel Lady Ettarde.

Sir Gawaine saw how beautiful the lady was, and he forgot her
unkindness to Sir Pelleas, and he loved her. And because he was not
a true knight, Sir Gawaine did not think of Pelleas, who waited so
anxiously for his return.

Three days passed, but he did not go back, and in the castle all
was joy and merriment.

Six days passed, and still Sir Gawaine stayed with the beautiful
Lady Ettarde.

At last Sir Pelleas could bear his loneliness no longer. That night
he went up to the castle, and swam across the river. When he
reached the front of the castle, he saw a great many tents. And all
the lords and ladies were asleep in their tents, and Sir Gawaine
was there too.

'He has forgotten me, and will stay here always with the Lady
Ettarde,' muttered Sir Pelleas in scorn, and he drew the sword he
had won at the tournament, to slay the false knight Sir Gawaine.

Then, all at once, he remembered the vows he had taken, when the
great King had knighted him, and slowly he sheathed his sword, and
went gloomily down to the river.

But Sir Pelleas could not make up his mind to go away, and again he
turned and went back to the tent, where Sir Gawaine lay, still
asleep.

Once more Sir Pelleas drew his sword, and laid it across the false
knight's bare neck.

When Sir Gawaine woke in the morning, he felt the cold steel, and
putting up his hand, he found the sword that Sir Pelleas had left.

Sir Gawaine did not know how the sword had come there, but when he
told the Lady Ettarde what had happened, and showed her the sword,
she knew it was the one that Sir Pelleas had won at the tournament,
when he had given her the golden circlet.

'You have not slain the knight who loved me,' cried the Lady
Ettarde, 'for he has been here, and left his sword across your
throat.' And then she hated Gawaine because he had told her a lie,
and she drove him from her castle.

And the Lady Ettarde thought of her true knight Sir Pelleas, and at
last she loved him with all her heart.

But when he had left his sword across Sir Gawaine's throat, Pelleas
had gone sadly back to his tent, and taking off his armour, had
lain down to die.

Then the knight's servant was in great distress, because his master
would neither eat nor sleep, but lay in his tent getting more pale
and more thin day by day. And the servant was wandering sadly along
the bank of the river, wondering how he could help his master, when
he met a beautiful maiden called the 'Lady of the Lake.'

The maiden asked why he looked so sad, and, won by her gentleness,
he told her how his master had been hated by the Lady Ettarde, and
betrayed by the false knight Sir Gawaine.

'Bring me to your master,' said the Lady of the Lake.

And when she had come to the tent and saw Sir Pelleas, she loved
him.

'I will send him to sleep,' she murmured, 'and when he wakes he
will be well.' And she threw an enchantment over him, and he slept.

When Sir Pelleas awoke, he felt strong once more, and at last he
knew that the cruel Lady Ettarde had never been the lady of his
dreams, and he loved her no longer.

But when the Lady Ettarde knew that Sir Pelleas loved her no more,
she wept sorrowfully, and died of her grief.

Then the gentle Lady of the Lake asked Pelleas to come with her to
her own beautiful Lake-land. And as they rode together, her simple
kindness made the knight happy again, and he learned to love the
Lady of the Lake, and they lived together and loved each other all
their lives long.




GARETH AND LYNETTE


Gareth was a little prince. His home was an old grey castle, and
there were great mountains all round the castle. Gareth loved these
mountains and his beautiful home at the foot of them. He had lived
there all his life.

Gareth had no little boys or girls to play with, for there were no
houses near his mountain home.

But Gareth was happy all day long. Sometimes in the bright summer
mornings the streams would call to him. Then he would follow them
up the mountains, till he found the place where the streams ended
in tiny silver threads.

Sometimes the birds and beasts, his woodland friends, would call to
him, and then Gareth would wander about in the forest with them
till evening came. Then he would tell his mother the wonderful
things he had seen, and the wonderful things he had heard in the
forests and on the mountain-sides.

Gareth's mother, the Queen of Orkney, loved the little prince so
much that she was never dull. She had no one to talk to except her
little son, for her husband was old, so old that he could not talk
to his Queen. And if she talked to him, he was almost too deaf to
hear what she said.

But though the Queen was never dull, she was sometimes unhappy. She
was afraid that some day, when Gareth was older, he would want to
leave her to go into the world, perhaps to go to the great King
Arthur's court, as his three brothers had done.

Now Gareth had already heard stories about the brave deeds of King
Arthur's knights. He knew that they were strong men, and that they
fought for the weak people, and that they often had great
adventures, when they were sent to punish the King's enemies. And
Gareth longed to be a man, for 'when I am a man, I will be one of
Arthur's knights, too,' he thought.

[Illustration: SOMETIMES THE BIRDS & BEASTS HIS WOODLAND FRIENDS
WOULD CALL TO HIM

Page 61]

At last, one day, his mother knew that what she had been afraid of
had come to pass. She knew that Gareth would not be content to stay
among the mountains much longer. But when he threw his arms round
her, and coaxed her to let him go, she thought, 'Surely I can keep
him a little longer.' And she said, 'Your father is old, and your
brothers have left me, you will not leave me alone, Gareth. You
will stay and be a great huntsman and follow the deer.' But all the
time her heart whispered, 'He will not stay.'

And Gareth said, 'Let me go, sweet mother. Now I am a man, I must
do a man's work. "Follow the deer!" No; now I must follow the
King.'

But still his mother would not let him go. 'The next time he asks
me, I will try another way,' she thought. And when Gareth came
again and pleaded to be allowed to go to the court, she said, 'Yes,
you may go, if for one whole year you will tell no one your name,
or that you are a prince, and if for that whole year you will go
into the King's kitchen and work there.' 'These things will be too
difficult for my princely boy,' she thought.

But Gareth wanted to go so much, that he promised not to tell any
one his name, nor that he was a prince. 'And I will go to the
court, only to work in the King's kitchen for a year,' promised
Gareth proudly. And then his mother knew that her plan had failed,
and she wept.

But Gareth was glad. He got up early one morning, and without
saying good-bye to his mother, for he could not bear to see her sad
face again, he left his mountain home, and went out into the wide
world.

When three men, dressed like ploughmen, left the castle, no one
would have known that one of them was a prince. For Gareth had left
all his beautiful clothes behind him, and was dressed just like the
two servants he took with him. But still he was glad, for though he
remembered he was going to work in a kitchen, he thought a year
would soon pass, and then, perhaps, King Arthur would make him one
of his knights.

On a certain day, every year, there was a great feast at Arthur's
court. Now the King would not sit down to the feast till he had
heard if any of his people were in trouble, and if they wished one
of his knights to go to help them. And on this day too, people
could come into the King's presence to ask for any boon or good
thing they wished. Gareth reached the court, with his two servants,
on one of these feast-days.

'The King will listen to my wish to-day. I will go to him at once,'
thought Gareth. And leaning on the shoulders of his servants, so as
to look less princely, he came into the large dining-hall.

'Grant me only this boon,' Gareth entreated the King, 'that I may
work in your kitchen and eat and drink there for a year. After that
I will fight.'

And King Arthur looked at Gareth, and saw that though he leaned on
his servants he was tall and strong, and that though he wore rough
clothes, he was as noble-looking as any of his knights.

'You ask but a small boon,' said the King. 'Would you not rather
serve me as my knight?'

And Gareth longed to say 'Yes.' But as he could not break the
promise he had given to his mother, he said again, that the only
boon he asked was to be allowed to work in the King's kitchen.

Then the King sent for Sir Kay, the steward of his kitchen, and
told him to make Gareth one of his kitchen-boys. But Sir Kay did
not wish this noble-looking lad in his kitchen, and he made fun of
him and mocked him, because he would not tell his name, nor where
his home was.

But Sir Lancelot, the noblest knight in all the land, was kind to
Gareth, and Gareth's brother, Sir Gavaine, who had gone to Arthur's
court long ago, was kind to him too. Yet Sir Gavaine did not know
that Gareth was his brother, for the little prince he had left at
home looked very different to the King's new kitchen-boy.

In the kitchen Gareth soon began to find out what a difficult task
he had undertaken, for the sake of one day being a knight. He ate
his meals with rough kitchen-boys, and as Gareth's mother had
taught her little prince daintily, he did not like their rough
ways; and at night he slept in a shed with dirty kitchen-boys.

And because Sir Kay did not like Gareth, he would bustle and hurry
him, and make him work harder than any of the other lads, and give
him all the roughest work to do. It was Gareth who had to draw the
water and cut the wood, while the other servants played.

But when at last his work was done, Gareth would listen gladly as
the servants talked of Lancelot and the King. He loved to hear how
Lancelot had twice saved the King's life, and how since then there
had grown up a great friendship between the King and his brave
knight.

And Gareth was glad when he heard that though Lancelot was first in
all the tournaments or mock battles, yet on the battle-field his
hero King was mightiest of all.

But when the servants' talk was rough and rude, Gareth would not
listen, but sang some of his old mountain-songs, carolling like
any lark, and the servants stopped their talk to listen.

It seemed a long year to Gareth, the longest year in all his life,
but at last it came to an end. A whole year had passed, and another
of the King's great feast-days had begun.

Gareth woke up on that morning, thinking, 'Now at last I can be one
of King Arthur's knights; now at last I am free.'

In the dining-room he sprang eagerly to the King's side. 'A boon,
King Arthur, grant me this boon,' he cried, 'that I serve you no
longer as a kitchen-page, but as a knight.'

Arthur loved the noble-looking lad, and was pleased with his
eagerness. 'I make you my knight, to win glory and honour for our
land,' said the King. But the secret of Gareth's knighthood was to
be kept from all but Sir Lancelot, till the new knight, Sir Gareth,
had won for himself great fame.

'You shall begin at once,' said the King. And he promised Gareth
that he should be the first of all his knights to leave his court
that day.

As he spoke, a beautiful lady called Lynette came into the hall, in
great haste. 'A knight to rescue my sister, King Arthur,' she
cried.

'Who is your sister, and why does she need a knight?' asked the
King.

And Lynette told Arthur that her sister was called the Lady
Lyonors, and that Lyonors was rich and had many castles of her own,
but a cruel knight, called the Red Knight, had shut her up in one
of her own castles. The name of the castle in which she was a
prisoner was Castle Dangerous. And the Red Knight said he would
keep Lady Lyonors there, till he had fought King Arthur's bravest
knight. Then he would make Lyonors his wife. 'But,' said Lynette,
'my sister will never be the bride of the Red Knight, for she does
not love him.'

Then Arthur, looking round his knights, saw Gareth's eyes growing
bright, and heard Gareth's voice ringing out, 'Your promise, King.'

And the King said to Gareth, 'Go and rescue the Lady Lyonors from
the Red Knight.'

'A kitchen-page go to rescue the Lady Lyonors!' shouted Sir Kay in
scorn.

When Lynette heard that, she was angry, and said, 'I came for Sir
Lancelot, the greatest of all your knights, and you give me a
kitchen-boy.' In her anger, she walked out of the palace gates, and
rode quickly down the streets. She neither looked nor waited to see
if Gareth followed.

'I will wait for nothing,' thought the new knight, and he hurried
after Lynette to the palace gates, but there he was stopped.

Gareth's mother had not forgotten that a year had passed since her
boy had left her. In her quiet castle she had been busy planning a
surprise for her prince.

'Gareth will be a knight to-day,' she thought. 'I will send our
dwarf to him with a noble war-horse and armour fit for a knight.
Surely he will begin his adventures the more gladly, that I help to
send him forth,' she murmured, thinking half-regretfully of the
long year she had made him spend in the kitchen.

And Gareth was glad when he saw his mother's gift; and when he had
put on the armour, there was no more handsome knight in all King
Arthur's court than Sir Gareth. He mounted his horse, and, telling
the dwarf to follow, rode quickly after Lynette.

But Gareth had not gone far, when he heard shouts behind him, and,
turning, he saw that Sir Kay was riding after him.

'If it is possible, I will bring my kitchen-boy boy back again,'
thought Sir Kay, 'for he works well.' 'Have you forgotten that I am
your master?' he shouted, as he reached Gareth.

'You are no longer my master,' said Gareth, 'and I know that you
are the most unkind of all Arthur's knights.'

Then Sir Kay was so angry that he drew his sword, and Gareth drew
his and struck Sir Kay so hard a blow, that he tumbled off his
horse, and lay on the ground as if he were dead. Then Gareth took
away his old master's sword and shield, and telling the dwarf to
take Sir Kay's horse, he once more hurried on to reach Lynette.

Both Lancelot and Lynette had seen Sir Gareth fight with Sir Kay,
for the King had asked Sir Lancelot to ride on before Gareth, that
he might know if his new knight could use his sword.

When Lancelot had seen Sir Kay fall to the ground, he rode back to
the court to tell King Arthur that his knight, Sir Gareth, was
strong and true. And he sent men to bring home the wounded Sir Kay.

Now Lynette was more cross than ever because Lancelot had left her,
and when Gareth at last rode up to her, she cried rudely, 'You are
only a kitchen-knave. Your clothes smell of cooking, and your dress
is soiled with grease and tallow. Ride further off from me.'

But what she said was not true, for Gareth had put on the beautiful
armour his mother had sent him.

As Lynette mocked, Gareth rode quietly behind. In spite of her
unkindness, he was happy. After the long days spent in the hot
kitchen, the forest breeze seemed to touch him more gently than in
the old days, and the trees seemed to him more beautiful. But
though the streams seemed more clear, they still called to him,
just as the streams in his own mountains used to do.

But Gareth had not much time to think of the trees and streams, for
suddenly he heard the steps of some one hurrying through the
forest, crushing the fallen twigs and crisp leaves underfoot in his
great haste. Was it an adventure?

'Where are you running to?' said Gareth, as a man came in sight.

'O sir, six thieves have fallen upon my lord, and bound him to a
tree, and I am afraid they will kill him.'

'Show me where your lord is,' said Gareth. And they rode together
to the place where the knight was tied to a tree.

Then Gareth struck the first robber down with his sword, and killed
another, and slew the third as he turned to run away.

'There were six thieves,' thought Gareth; but when he turned to
look for the other three, they were nowhere to be seen. They had
all run away in great fright.

Then Gareth unbound the knight. And the knight was very grateful,
and said, 'Come and stay at my castle to-night, and to-morrow I
will reward you.'

'I want no reward,' said Gareth. 'And besides, I must follow this
lady.' But when he rode up to Lynette, she said, 'Ride further off,
for still you smell of the kitchen.' 'You are no knight, though you
killed the robbers.'

Then the knight who had been set free rode up, and asked Lynette to
come to his castle, and as it was getting dark in the forest, she
was glad to stay with him that night.

At supper-time, the knight put a chair for Gareth beside Lynette.

'Sir Knight, you are wrong to put a kitchen-knave beside me,' said
the lady, 'for I am of noble birth.'

'The noble-looking knight a kitchen-knave! What does the lady
mean!' But he took Gareth to another table, and sat there himself
with him.

The next morning Gareth and Lynette thanked the knight, and rode
on, till they came to another great forest, and at the end of the
forest they reached a broad river. There was only one place where
the river was narrow and could be crossed, and this passage was
guarded by two knights.

'Will you fight two knights,' mocked Lynette, 'or will you turn
back again?'

'Six knights would not make me turn back,' said Gareth, as he
rushed into the river. One knight rushed in from the further side,
and Gareth and he fought with their swords in the middle of the
stream. At last Gareth smote him on the helmet so violently that he
fell down into the water and was drowned.

Then Gareth spurred his horse up the bank where the other knight
stood waiting for him, and this knight fought so fiercely that he
broke Gareth's spear. Then they both drew their swords, and fought
for a long time, till in the end Gareth won the victory.

Gareth then crossed over the river again to Lynette, and told her
to ride on, for the passage across the river was clear.

'Alas, that a kitchen-page should kill two brave knights!' cried
Lynette. 'But do not think your skill killed these men.' And she
told Gareth she had seen the horse of the first knight stumble, and
that that was why he was drowned. 'And, as for the second knight,
you came behind and slew him like a coward,' she said.

'Lady,' said Gareth, 'say what you like; but lead on, and I follow
to deliver your sister.' So Gareth and the lady rode on till
evening.

In the evening they came to a strange and dreary country, where
everything looked black. On one side of a black hawthorn hung a
black banner, on the other side hung a black shield. Beside the
shield there was a long black spear, and close to the spear there
was a great black horse, covered with silk, and the silk was black.
And looking blacker than all the rest was a huge black rock.

Through the darkness they could see some one sitting near the rock.
It was a knight, and he was armed in black armour, and his name was
'the Knight of the Black Land.'

Lynette saw the knight. 'Flee down the valley, before the Black
Knight saddles his horse,' she called to Gareth. But she knew that
even the Black Knight would not frighten her kitchen-knave.

The Black Knight saddled his horse and rode up to them. 'Is this
your knight, and has he come to fight me?' he asked Lynette.

'He is only a kitchen-boy, he is no knight of mine,' Lynette
answered. And in a cruel voice she added, 'I wish you could slay
him and take him out of my way; but he does wonderful deeds with
his sword, and has just slain two knights.'

'If he is no knight, I will take his horse and armour, and let him
go. It would be a shame to take his life,' said the Black Knight.

Gareth was very angry when he heard this. 'I am on my way to Castle
Dangerous, and I mean to reach it,' he said to the Black Knight.
'And as for my horse and armour, you cannot have them unless you
take them from me in fair fight.'

Then they began to fight on foot, and the Black Knight wounded
Gareth, but Gareth smote him with such strength, that his sword cut
through the knight's armour, and then the Black Knight fell to the
ground and died. This was the fiercest fight Gareth had ever
fought, and it lasted for an hour and a half.

Once more Gareth went back to Lynette a conqueror, but still she
cried, 'Do not come near me, kitchen-knave. You have slain a noble
knight. Let me ride on alone.'

'Whatever happens I will follow you till we reach the Lady
Lyonors,' said Gareth.

They were coming near to Castle Dangerous now, but before they
reached it, a knight dressed all in green stopped them.

And Gareth fought the Green Knight too. But when he had struck him
to the ground, the Green Knight begged Gareth to spare his life.

'It is useless to ask me to spare your life, for you shall die,
unless the Lady Lynette asks me to set you free,' said Gareth. And
he began to undo the helmet of the Green Knight, as if he meant to
slay him.

'I will never ask a favour of a kitchen-page,' said Lynette
haughtily. 'I will never ask you to spare the Green Knight's life.'

'Spare my life,' entreated the Green Knight, 'and I and my thirty
followers will serve you for ever.'

'It is useless for you to ask me,' repeated Gareth. 'Only the Lady
Lynette can save your life.' And again he lifted his sword, as if
to slay the Green Knight.

'You will not slay him, for if you do, you will be sorry,'
stammered Lynette, as she saw Gareth's sword coming down to kill
the knight.

Gareth heard Lynette's voice, and at once put away his sword, and
gave the Green Knight his freedom.

In his gratitude the knight persuaded Gareth and Lynette to stay
with him that night, 'and in the morning I will help you to reach
Castle Dangerous,' he said.

That evening at supper-time, Lynette again mocked Gareth. He had
never asked her to be more gentle to him, but now he said, 'Mock me
no more, for in spite of all your taunts I have killed many
knights, and cleared the forests of the King's enemies.'

Now Lynette had begun to feel ashamed of her unkindness, and as she
listened to Gareth, and thought how loyally he had served her, she
felt sorry that she had been so unkind. And she asked Gareth to
forgive her for being so rude.

'I forgive you with all my heart,' said Gareth, and at last they
rode on happily side by side.

Then Gareth sent his dwarf on in front to tell Lynette's sister
that they were near her castle. And the Lady Lyonors asked the
dwarf a great many questions about his master.

'He is a noble knight and a kind master,' said the dwarf; and he
told the lady of all the adventures they had met on their way to
her castle. And Lyonors longed to see the knight who had fought so
often and so bravely to reach her.

And now there was only the Red Knight between Gareth and the Lady
Lyonors.

On the great tree, outside the castle, Gareth saw hanging the
bodies of forty knights, with their shields round their necks and
their spurs on their heels. As he looked at this terrible sight,
Gareth was afraid.

Then Lynette reminded him of all his victories, and of how even the
Black Knight had yielded to him. But what encouraged Gareth more
than all Lynette said was that, when he looked up to the castle, he
saw a beautiful lady at one of the windows. She smiled and waved
her hands to him, and he knew that this was the Lady Lyonors. Then
all his courage came back.

'This is the fairest lady I have ever seen,' thought Gareth. 'I ask
nothing better than to be allowed to do battle for her, and win her
from the Red Knight.'

Outside the castle, hanging on a sycamore tree, was a great horn,
made of an elephant's bone, and whoever wished to fight the Red
Knight must blow this horn.

Gareth looked again at the window where Lyonors still watched, and
hesitating no longer, blew the horn so piercingly and so long, that
he woke all the echoes of the wood.

Then the Knight of the Red Lands armed himself in great haste, and
his barons brought him a red spear, and a steed covered with red
silk. And the Red Knight rode proudly down into the valley, to slay
Gareth, as he had slain the other forty knights.

'Do not look any longer at the castle window,' said the Red Knight
roughly to Gareth. 'The Lady Lyonors is mine. I have fought many
battles for her.'

'I know that the Lady Lyonors does not love you nor your ways, for
they are cruel,' said Gareth, 'and I will rescue her from you, or
die.'

'Look at the dead knights on those trees, and beware,' said the Red
Knight, 'or soon I will hang your body beside theirs.'

'That is a sight that makes me only more anxious to fight,' said
Gareth, 'for you break the rules of all true knights by your
cruelty.'

'Talk no more,' said the Red Knight, 'but get ready for the
combat.'

Then Gareth told Lynette to go further off, to a place of safety.

And the two knights smote each other so fiercely in the front of
their shields that they both fell off their horses, still holding
the reins in their hands. And they lay stunned on the ground so
long, that those who were watching from the castle thought their
necks were broken.

But after a time, leaving their horses, they fought on foot. And
the battle was so rough that great pieces of their shields and
armour were knocked off, and left lying on the field.

And they fought till twelve o'clock. But by that time they were so
worn out that they staggered about, scarcely knowing where they
went, and their wounds bled so much that they were faint.

They fought till evening, and then they both agreed to rest for a
little while.

Then Gareth took off his helmet, and looked up to the castle
window. And when he saw the Lady Lyonors looking down at him, with
great kindness in her eyes, his heart felt all at once light and
glad.

And her kindness made him strong, and he started up quickly and
called to the Red Knight to fight, 'and this time to the death,'
said Gareth.

In his fury the Red Knight knocked the sword out of Gareth's hand,
and before he could get it again, he gave him such a blow on his
helmet that Gareth stumbled and fell to the ground.

Then Lynette called out, 'O Gareth, have you lost your courage? My
sister weeps and breaks her heart, because her true knight has
fallen.'

When Gareth heard that, he got up, and with a great effort leaped
to where his sword lay, and caught it in his hand, and began to
fight as if he fought a new battle.

[Illustration: THE LADY LYONORS

Page 84]

And his strokes fell so quickly on his foe, that the Red Knight
lost his sword and fell to the ground, and Gareth threw himself on
him to slay him. But the knight begged piteously for his life.

'Go to the castle and yield your homage to the Lady Lyonors,' said
Gareth. 'And if she is willing to pardon you, you are free, after
you restore the lands and castles you have taken from her.'

Then the Red Knight gladly restored all he had stolen. And after he
had been forgiven by the Lady Lyonors, he journeyed to the court,
and told Arthur all that Sir Gareth had done.

And Lynette came and took off Gareth's armour and bathed his
wounds, and he rested in his tent for ten days.

'I will go to the castle and ask Lyonors to come home with me and
be my wife,' thought Gareth, as soon as his wounds were healed. But
when he came to the castle, he found the drawbridge pulled up, and
many armed men were there, who would not let him enter.

'But Lyonors, I must see Lyonors,' thought Gareth. 'Surely she will
wish to see me,' and he looked wistfully up to the window, and
there beautiful as ever, was his Lady Lyonors.

'I cannot love you altogether,' said Lyonors, 'till you have been
King Arthur's knight for another year, and helped to clear the land
from his enemies.'

Though he was a good knight, Gareth's heart was heavy as he
listened. 'If I do not see Lyonors for a year,' he thought, 'the
months will pass more slowly and seem more empty than those long
months I spent in the King's kitchen.' But as Gareth was a right
loyal knight, he bowed to his lady's will. He had freed the castle
from the Red Knight, and now it was open to every one, only he
himself was banished. And he went away sadly but faithfully to find
new adventures.

And when Gareth slept in the forests or on the wild mountain-sides,
he often dreamed of the day that would come when his year's
wanderings were over, when Lyonors would be his wife, and together
they would go back to King Arthur's court, and he would at last be
known to every one as Sir Gareth and a prince.

He dreamed, too, of the happier day, when he would take the
beautiful Lyonors to his mother, and show her the mountain home he
loved so well.




SIR GALAHAD AND THE SACRED CUP


    'My strength is as the strength of ten,
     Because my heart is pure,'

sang Galahad gladly. He was only a boy, but he had just been made a
knight by Sir Lancelot, and the old abbey, where he had lived all
his life, rang with the echo of his song.

Sir Lancelot heard the boy's clear voice singing in triumph. As he
stopped to listen, he caught the words,

    'My strength is as the strength of ten,
     Because my heart is pure,'

and the great knight wished he were a boy again, and could sing
that song too.

Twelve nuns lived in the quiet abbey, and they had taught Galahad
lovingly and carefully, ever since he had come to them as a
beautiful little child. And the boy had dwelt happily with them
there in the still old abbey, and he would be sorry to leave them,
but he was a knight now. He would fight for the King he reverenced
so greatly, and for the country he loved so well.

Yet when Sir Lancelot left the abbey the next day, Galahad did not
go with him. He would stay in his old home a little longer, he
thought. He would not grieve the nuns by a hurried farewell.

Sir Lancelot left the abbey alone, but as he rode along he met two
knights, and together they reached Camelot, where the King was
holding a great festival.

King Arthur welcomed Sir Lancelot and the two knights. 'Now all the
seats at our table will be filled,' he said gladly. For it pleased
the King when the circle of his knights was unbroken.

Then all the King's household went to service at the minster, and
when they came back to the palace they saw a strange sight.

In the dining-hall the Round Table at which the King and his
knights always sat seemed strangely bright.

The King looked more closely, and saw that at one place on this
Round Table were large gold letters. And he read, 'This is the seat
of Sir Galahad, the Pure-hearted.' But only Sir Lancelot knew that
Sir Galahad was the boy-knight he had left behind him in the quiet
old abbey.

'We will cover the letters till the Knight of the Pure Heart
comes,' said Sir Lancelot; and he took silk and laid it over the
glittering letters.

Then as they sat down to table they were disturbed by Sir Kay, the
steward of the King's kitchen.

'You do not sit down to eat at this festival,' Sir Kay reminded the
King, 'till you have seen or heard some great adventure.' And the
King told his steward that the writing in gold had made him forget
his usual custom.

As they waited a squire came hastily into the hall. 'I have a
strange tale to tell,' he said. 'As I walked along the bank of the
river I saw a great stone, and it floated on the top of the water,
and into the stone there has been thrust a sword.'

Then the King and all his knights went down to the river, and they
saw the stone, and it was like red marble. And the sword that had
been thrust into the stone was strong and fair. The handle of it
was studded with precious stones, and among the stones there were
letters of gold.

The King stepped forward, and bending over the sword read these
words: 'No one shall take me away but he to whom I belong. I will
hang only by the side of the best knight in the world.'

The King turned to Sir Lancelot. 'The sword is yours, for surely
there lives no truer knight.'

But Sir Lancelot answered gravely, 'The sword is not mine. It will
never hang by my side, for I dare not try to take it.'

The King was sorry that his great knight's courage failed, but he
turned to Sir Gawaine and asked him to try to take the sword.

And at first Sir Gawaine hesitated. But when he looked again at the
precious stones that sparkled on the handle, he hesitated no
longer. But he no sooner touched the sword than it wounded him, so
that he could not use his arm for many days.

Then the King turned to Sir Percivale. And because Arthur wished
it, Sir Percivale tried to take the sword; but he could not move
it. And after that no other knight dared to touch the fair sword;
so they turned and went back to the palace.

In the dining-hall the King and his knights sat down once more at
the Round Table, and each knight knew his own chair. And all the
seats were filled except the chair opposite the writing in gold.

It had been a day full of surprise, but now the most wonderful
thing of all happened. For as they sat down, suddenly all the doors
of the palace shut with a loud noise, but no one had touched the
doors. And all the windows were softly closed, but no one saw the
hands that closed them.

Then one of the doors opened, and there came in a very old man
dressed all in white, and no one knew whence he came.

By his side was a young man in red armour. He had neither sword nor
shield, but hanging by his side was an empty sheath.

There was a great silence in the hall as the old man said slowly
and solemnly, 'I bring you the young knight Sir Galahad, who is
descended from a king. He shall do many great deeds, and he shall
see the Holy Grail.'

'He shall see the Holy Grail,' the knights repeated, with awe on
their faces.

For far back, in the days of their boyhood, they had heard the
story of the Holy Grail. It was the Sacred Cup out of which their
Lord had drunk before He died.

And they had been told how sometimes it was seen carried by angels,
and how at other times in a gleam of light. But in whatever way it
appeared, it was seen only by those who were pure in heart.

And as the old man's words, 'He shall see the Holy Grail,' fell on
their ears, the knights thought of the story they had heard so long
ago, and they were sorry, for they had never seen the Sacred Cup,
and they knew that it was unseen only by those who had done wrong.

But the old man was telling the boy-knight to follow him. He led
him to the empty chair, and lifted the silk that covered the golden
letters. 'This is the seat of Sir Galahad, the Pure-hearted,' he
read aloud. And the young knight sat in the empty seat that
belonged to him.

Then the old man left the palace, and twenty noble squires met him,
and took him back to his own country.

When dinner was ended, the King went over to the chair where his
boy-knight sat, and welcomed him to the circle of the Round Table.
Afterwards he took Sir Galahad's hand, and led him out of the
palace to show him the strange red stone that floated on the river.
When Sir Galahad heard how the knights could not draw the sword out
of the stone, he knew that this adventure was his.

'I will try to take the sword,' said the boy-knight, 'and place it
in my sheath, for it is empty,' and he pointed to his side. Then
he laid his hand on the wonderful sword, and easily drew it out of
the stone, and placed it in his sheath.

'God has sent you the sword, now He will send you a shield as
well,' said King Arthur.

Then the King proclaimed that the next day there would be a
tournament in the meadows of Camelot. For before his knights went
out to new adventures, he would see Sir Galahad proved.

And in the morning the meadows lay bright in the sunshine. And the
boy-knight rode bravely to his first combat, and overthrew many
men; but Sir Lancelot and Sir Percivale he could not overthrow.

When the tournament was over the King and his knights went home to
supper, and each sat in his own seat at the Round Table.

All at once there was a loud crashing noise, a noise that was
louder than any peal of thunder. Was the King's wonderful palace
falling to pieces?

But while the noise still sounded a marvellous light stole into
the room, a light brighter than any sunbeam.

As the knights looked at one another, each seemed to the other to
have a new glory and a new beauty in his face.

And down the sunbeam glided the Holy Grail. It was the Sacred Cup
they had all longed to see. But no one saw it, for it was invisible
to all but the pure-hearted Sir Galahad.

As the strange light faded away, King Arthur heard his knights
vowing that they would go in search of the Holy Grail, and never
give up the quest till they had found it.

And the boy-knight knew that he too would go over land and sea,
till he saw again the wonderful vision.

That night the King could not sleep, for his sorrow was great. His
knights would wander into far-off countries, and many of them would
forget that they were in search of the Holy Grail. Would they not
have found the Sacred Cup one day if they had stayed with their
King and helped to clear the country of its enemies?

In the morning the streets of Camelot were crowded with rich and
poor. And the people wept as they watched the knights ride away on
their strange quest. And the King wept too, for he knew that now
there would be many empty chairs at the Round Table.

The knights rode together to a strange city and stayed there all
night. The next day they separated, each going a different way.

Sir Galahad rode on for four days without adventure. At last he
came to a white abbey, where he was received very kindly. And he
found two knights there, and one was a King.

'What adventure has brought you here?' asked the boy-knight.

Then they told him that in this abbey there was a shield. And if
any man tried to carry it, he was either wounded or dead within
three days.

'But to-morrow I shall try to bear it,' said the King.

'In the name of God, let me take the shield,' said Sir Galahad
gravely.

'If I fail, you shall try to bear it,' said the King. And Galahad
was glad, for he had still no shield of his own.

Then a monk took the King and the young knight behind the altar,
and showed them where the shield hung. It was as white as snow, but
in the middle there was a red cross.

'The shield can be borne only by the worthiest knight in the
world,' the monk warned the King.

'I will try to bear it, though I am no worthy knight,' insisted the
King; and he took the shield and rode down into the valley.

And Galahad waited at the abbey, for the King had said he would
send his squire to tell the young knight how the shield had
protected him.

For two miles the King rode through the valley, till he reached a
hermitage. And he saw a warrior there, dressed in white armour, and
sitting on a white horse.

The warrior rode quickly towards the King, and struck him so hard
that he broke his armour. Then he thrust his spear through the
King's right shoulder, as though he held no shield.

'The shield can be borne only by a peerless knight. It does not
belong to you,' said the warrior, as he gave it to the squire,
telling him to carry it back to the abbey and to give it to Sir
Galahad with his greeting.

'Then tell me your name,' said the squire.

'I will tell neither you nor any one on earth,' said the warrior.
And he disappeared, and the squire saw him no more.

'I will take the wounded King to an abbey, that his wounds may be
dressed,' thought the squire.

And with great difficulty the King and his squire reached an abbey.
And the monks thought his life could not be saved, but after many
days he was cured.

Then the squire rode back to the abbey where Galahad waited. 'The
warrior who wounded the King bids you bear this shield,' he said.

Galahad hung the shield round his neck joyfully, and rode into the
valley to seek the warrior dressed in white.

And when they met they saluted each other courteously. And the
warrior told Sir Galahad strange tales of the white shield, till
the knight thanked God that now it was his. And all his life long
the white shield with the red cross was one of his great treasures.

Now Galahad rode back to the abbey, and the monks were glad to see
him again. 'We have need of a pure knight,' they said, as they took
Sir Galahad to a tomb in the churchyard.

A pitiful noise was heard, and a voice from the tomb cried,
'Galahad, servant of God, do not come near me.' But the young
knight went towards the tomb and raised the stone.

Then a thick smoke was seen, and through the smoke a figure uglier
than any man leaped from the tomb, shouting, 'Angels are round
thee, Galahad, servant of God. I can do you no harm.'

The knight stooped down and saw a body all dressed in armour lying
there, and a sword lay by its side.

'This was a false knight,' said Sir Galahad. 'Let us carry his body
away from this place.'

'You will stay in the abbey and live with us,' entreated the monks.
But the boy-knight could not rest. Would he see the light that was
brighter than any sunbeam again? Would his adventures bring him at
last to the Holy Grail?

Sir Galahad rode on many days, till at last he reached a mountain.
On the mountain he found an old chapel. It was empty and very
desolate. Galahad knelt alone before the altar, and asked God to
tell him what to do next.

And as he prayed a voice said, 'Thou brave knight, go to the Castle
of Maidens and rescue them.'

Galahad rose, and gladly journeyed on to the Castle of Maidens.

There he found seven knights, who long ago had seized the castle
from a maiden to whom it belonged. And these knights had imprisoned
her and many other maidens.

When the seven knights saw Sir Galahad they came out of the castle.
'We will take this young knight captive, and keep him in prison,'
they said to each other, as they fell upon him.

But Sir Galahad smote the first knight to the ground, so that he
almost broke his neck. And as his wonderful sword flashed in the
light, sudden fear fell on the six knights that were left, and they
turned and fled.

Then an old man took the keys of the castle to Galahad. And the
knight opened the gates of the castle, and set free many prisoners.
He gave the castle back to the maiden to whom it belonged, and sent
for all the knights in the country round about to do her homage.

Then once again Sir Galahad rode on in search of the Holy Grail.
And the way seemed long, yet on and on he rode, till at last he
reached the sea.

There, on the shore, stood a maiden, and when she saw Sir Galahad,
she led him to a ship and told him to enter.

[Illustration: "MY STRENGTH IS AS THE STRENGTH OF TEN BECAUSE MY
HEART IS PURE"

Page 88]

The wind rose and drove the ship, with Sir Galahad on board,
between two rocks. But when the ship could not pass that way, the
knight left it, and entered a smaller one that awaited him.

In this ship was a table, and on the table, covered with a red
cloth, was the Holy Grail. Reverently Sir Galahad sank on his
knees. But still the Sacred Cup was covered.

At last the ship reached a strange city, and on the shore sat a
crippled man. Sir Galahad asked his help to lift the table from the
ship.

'For ten years I have not walked without crutches,' said the man.

'Show that you are willing, and come to me,' urged the knight.

And the cripple got up, and when he found that he was cured, he ran
to Sir Galahad, and together they carried the wonderful table to
the shore.

Then all the city was astonished, and the people talked only of the
great marvel. 'The man that was a cripple for ten years can walk,'
each said to the other.

The King of the city heard the wonderful tale, but he was a cruel
King and a tyrant. 'The knight is not a good man,' he said to his
people, and he commanded that Galahad should be put in prison. And
the prison was underneath the palace, and it was dark and cold
there.

But down into the darkness streamed the light that had made Galahad
so glad long ago at Camelot. And in the light Galahad saw the Holy
Grail.

A year passed and the cruel King was very ill, and he thought he
would die. Then he remembered the knight he had treated so
unkindly, and who was still in the dark, cold prison. 'I will send
for him, and ask him to forgive me,' murmured the King.

And when Galahad was brought to the palace, he willingly forgave
the tyrant who had put him in prison.

Then the King died, and there was great dismay in the city, for
where would they find a good ruler to sit on the throne?

As they wondered, they heard a voice that told them to make Sir
Galahad their King, and in great joy the knight was crowned.

Then the new King ordered a box of gold and precious stones to be
made, and in this box he placed the wonderful table he had carried
away from the ship. 'And every morning I and my people will come
here to pray,' he said.

For a year Sir Galahad ruled the country well and wisely.

'A year ago they crowned me King,' thought Galahad gravely, as he
woke one morning. He would get up early, and go to pray at the
precious table.

But before the King reached the table he paused. It was early.
Surely all the city was asleep. Yet some one was already there,
kneeling before the table on which, uncovered, stood the Sacred
Cup.

The man kneeling there looked holy as the saints look. Surrounding
him was a circle of angels. Was it a saint who kneeled, or was it
the Lord Himself?

When the man saw Sir Galahad, he said, 'Come near, thou servant of
Jesus Christ, and thou shalt see what thou hast so much longed to
see.'

And with joy Sir Galahad saw again the Holy Grail. Then as he
kneeled before it in prayer, his soul left his body and was carried
by angels into heaven.




THE DEATH OF KING ARTHUR


It was not to win renown that King Arthur had gone far across the
sea, for he loved his own country so well, that to gain glory at
home made him happiest of all.

But a false knight with his followers was laying waste the country
across the sea, and Arthur had gone to wage war against him.

'And you, Sir Modred, will rule the country while I am gone,' the
King had said. And the knight smiled as he thought of the power
that would be his.

At first the people missed their great King Arthur, but as the
months passed they began to forget him, and to talk only of Sir
Modred and his ways.

And he, that he might gain the people's praise, made easier laws
than ever Arthur had done, till by and by there were many in the
country who wished that the King would never come back.

When Modred knew what the people wished, he was glad, and he made
up his mind to do a cruel deed.

He would cause letters to be written from beyond the sea, and the
letters would tell that the great King Arthur had been slain in
battle.

And when the letters came the people read, 'King Arthur is dead,'
and they believed the news was true.

And there were some who wept because the noble King was slain, but
some had no time to weep. 'We must find a new King,' they said. And
because his laws were easy, these chose Sir Modred to rule over
them.

The wicked knight was pleased that the people wished him to be
their King. 'They shall take me to Canterbury to crown me,' he said
proudly. And the nobles took him there, and amid shouts and
rejoicings he was crowned.

But it was not very long till other letters came from across the
sea, saying that King Arthur had not been slain, and that he was
coming back to rule over his own country once more.

When Sir Modred heard that King Arthur was on his way home, he
collected a great army and went to Dover to try to keep the King
from landing.

But no army would have been strong enough to keep Arthur and his
knights away from the country they loved so well. They fought
fiercely till they got on shore and scattered all Sir Modred's men.

Then the knight gathered together another army, and chose a new
battle-field.

But King Arthur fought so bravely that he and his men were again
victorious, and Sir Modred fled to Canterbury.

Many of the people began to forsake the false knight now, and
saying that he was a traitor, they went back to King Arthur.

But still Sir Modred wished to conquer the King. He would go
through the counties of Kent and Surrey and raise a new army.

Now King Arthur had dreamed that if he fought with Sir Modred again
he would be slain. So when he heard that the knight had raised
another army, he thought, 'I will meet this traitor who has
betrayed me. When he looks in my face, he will be ashamed and
remember his vow of obedience.'

And he sent two bishops to Sir Modred. 'Say to the knight that the
King would speak with him alone,' said Arthur.

And the traitor thought, 'The King wishes to give me gold or great
power, if I send my army away without fighting.' 'I will meet King
Arthur,' he said to the bishops.

But because he did not altogether trust the King he said he would
take fourteen men with him to the meeting-place, 'and the King must
have fourteen men with him too,' said Sir Modred. 'And our armies
shall keep watch when we meet, and if a sword is lifted it shall be
the signal for battle.'

Then King Arthur arranged a feast for Sir Modred and his men. And
as they feasted all went merrily till an adder glided out of a
little bush and stung one of the knight's men. And the pain was so
great, that the man quickly drew his sword to kill the adder.

And when the armies saw the sword flash in the light, they sprang
to their feet and began to fight, 'for this is the signal for
battle,' they thought.

And when evening came there were many thousand slain and wounded,
and Sir Modred was left alone. But Arthur had still two knights
with him, Sir Lucan and Sir Bedivere.

When King Arthur saw that his army was lost and all his knights
slain but two, he said, 'Would to God I could find Sir Modred, who
has caused all this trouble.'

'He is yonder,' said Sir Lucan, 'but remember your dream, and go
not near him.'

'Whether I die or live,' said the King, 'he shall not escape.' And
seizing his spear he ran to Sir Modred, crying, 'Now you shall
die.'

And Arthur smote him under the shield, and the spear passed through
his body, and he died.

Then, wounded and exhausted, the King fainted, and his knights
lifted him and took him to a little chapel not far from a lake.

As the King lay there, he heard cries of fear and pain from the
distant battle-field.

'What causes these cries?' said the King wearily. And to soothe the
sick King, Sir Lucan said he would go to see.

And when he reached the battle-field, he saw in the moonlight that
robbers were on the field stooping over the slain, and taking from
them their rings and their gold. And those that were only wounded,
the robbers slew, that they might take their jewels too.

Sir Lucan hastened back, and told the King what he had seen.

'We will carry you farther off, lest the robbers find us here,'
said the knights. And Sir Lucan lifted the King on one side and Sir
Bedivere lifted him on the other.

But Sir Lucan had been wounded in the battle, and as he lifted the
King he fell back and died.

Then Arthur and Sir Bedivere wept for the fallen knight.

Now the King felt so ill that he thought he would not live much
longer, and he turned to Sir Bedivere: 'Take Excalibur, my good
sword,' he said, 'and go with it to the lake, and throw it into its
waters. Then come quickly and tell me what you see.'

Sir Bedivere took the sword and went down to the lake. But as he
looked at the handle with its sparkling gems and the richness of
the sword, he thought he could not throw it away. 'I will hide it
carefully here among the rushes,' thought the knight. And when he
had hidden it, he went slowly to the King and told him he had
thrown the sword into the lake.

'What did you see?' asked the King eagerly.

'Nothing but the ripple of the waves as they broke on the beach,'
said Sir Bedivere.

'You have not told me the truth,' said the King. 'If you love me,
go again to the lake, and throw my sword into the water.'

Again the knight went to the water's edge. He drew the sword from
its hiding-place. He would do the King's will, for he loved him.
But again the beauty of the sword made him pause. 'It is a noble
sword; I will not throw it away,' he murmured, as once more he hid
it among the rushes. Then he went back more slowly, and told the
King that he had done his will.

'What did you see?' asked the King.

'Nothing but the ripples of the waves as they broke on the beach,'
repeated the knight.

'You have betrayed me twice,' said the King sadly, 'and yet you are
a noble knight! Go again to the lake, and do not betray me for a
rich sword.'

Then for the third time Sir Bedivere went to the water's edge, and
drawing the sword from among the rushes, he flung it as far as he
could into the lake.

And as the knight watched, an arm and a hand appeared above the
surface of the lake. He saw the hand seize the sword, and shaking
it three times, disappear again under the water. Then Sir Bedivere
went back quickly to the King, and told him what he had seen.

'Carry me to the lake,' entreated Arthur, 'for I have been here too
long.'

[Illustration: Page 115]

And the knight carried the King on his shoulders down to the
water's side. There they found a barge lying, and seated in it were
three Queens, and each Queen wore a black hood. And when they saw
King Arthur they wept.

'Lay me in the barge,' said the King. And when Sir Bedivere had
laid him there, King Arthur rested his head on the lap of the
fairest Queen. And they rowed from land.

Sir Bedivere, left alone, watched the barge as it drifted out of
sight, and then he went sorrowfully on his way, till he reached a
hermitage. And he lived there as a hermit for the rest of his life.

And the barge was rowed to a vale where the King was healed of his
wound.

And some say that now he is dead, but others say that King Arthur
will come again, and clear the country of its foes.


Edinburgh: Printed by T. and A. CONSTABLE




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE


Minor punctuation corrections have been made; however, all
spellings appear as in the original.

Removed a duplicate title page for GERAINT AND ENID.





End of Project Gutenberg's Stories of King Arthur's Knights, by Mary MacGregor

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK STORIES OF KING ARTHUR'S KNIGHTS ***

***** This file should be named 25654.txt or 25654.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/6/5/25654/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Lindy Walsh, Suzan Flanagan and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
