The Project Gutenberg EBook of Teams, by Ann Wilson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: Teams
       A Terran Empire story

Author: Ann Wilson

Release Date: June 9, 2008 [EBook #25744]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEAMS ***




Produced by Al Haines








  +------------------------------------------------------+
  |  This work is licenced under a Creative Commons      |
  |  Attribution-Non-Commercial-No Derivative Works 3.0  |
  |  Licence.                                            |
  |                                                      |
  |  http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/   |
  +------------------------------------------------------+



TEAMS

A Terran Empire story

by Ann Wilson



Copyright (C) 1992 by Ann Wilson




Narvon III, 2277 CE

Marine Captain Jase Thompson enjoyed Evaluation Team duty, and this
particular assignment appealed to what his team members called his
warped sense of humor.  This had started out as an odd one; it was the
Archbishop of Narvon III, rather than its Baron or the System Count,
who  had pushed the panic button.  He'd appealed to the Emperor for a
battle fleet, with a full complement of Security and Combat Division
Marines, claiming civil war was breaking out because of something that
was turning Narvon System's "best people" into "bloodsucking servants
of the Devil."

Captain Thompson had no idea what His Majesty thought about the
situation, but he was skeptical, himself.  Still, no one asked for that
sort of intervention without some reason; it was up to the E-Team to
find out whether the reason was valid, and if so what degree of
intervention was really justified.  He certainly didn't want to call in
a fleet--no E-Team leader did--but he would if he had to.  Then he'd
hope that the Ranger or Fleet Admiral in charge overruled him; he
didn't like thinking what military occupation could do to the occupied
system.  Not that the situation was likely to be that bad.

Thompson sighed, checking the clock and deciding he'd better get back
to the bridge; the Koslov's Captain--Navy Lieutenant Inga Sanchez--
should have the pre-landing surveillance reports for him by now.

She gave him a rueful shake of the head as he entered her small bridge.
"It's peaceful as Terra down there, Jase.  No trace of active weaponry,
no civil disturbances our sensors can detect, no fires involving
artificial substances--no nothing."

Thompson grinned.  "Sounds good to me, Inga.  What about news reports,
entertainment broadcasts, that sort of thing?"

Sanchez grinned back.  "Just as normal, except for a couple of
oddities. The holos aren't carrying any 'casts of contact sports, and
on a talk show, one of the guests had fangs; the others were acting a
little nervous, but she was telling them how harmless she and the other
`Kins of the Dragon' really were." Sanchez touched a control on the arm
of her command chair.  "Watch."

The Captain's monitor screen lit up to show several people seated in a
group of comfortable-looking chairs around a low table, and Thompson
repressed a chuckle.  Talk shows seemed to be the same everywhere, he
thought--then one of the guests caught his attention.  She was
attractive, wearing the uniform of a System Security officer--Chief of
Detectives, from her badge--except that she was more than slim, she
looked damned near starved.

"How do you feel about the Kins who were killed, Chief Kaufman, and
what do you plan to do with the ones who killed them?" a man--Thompson
guessed him to be the show's host--asked.

The woman shrugged slightly.  "My personal feelings have no bearing; I
plan to deal with them as I would with any other murderers, how else?
I am an officer of the law."

"You don't have any desire for revenge?  After all, the killings were
rather . . . unpleasant."

The detective chief grimaced.  "Yes, they were.  But I can't take
revenge, any more than I can feed on someone who doesn't want me to--it
should be common knowledge by now that Kins feel any pain we
deliberately inflict."

"But you can feed on someone who's not willing, or kill; Kins have done
it."

"We can, yes; I've killed in the line of duty since I became a Kin,
which was bearable because I knew that not killing would cause more
harm later.  And I did try to feed on someone who didn't want me,
once--I suppose most Kins have--but I'd rather starve into coma than try
that again.  Thank the Prince I didn't really hurt him, but I did feel
every bit of his terror."

"Looks like she's doing just that, too," Thompson commented.  It didn't
look like much intervention, if any at all, would be needed--not with
the `servants of the Devil' appearing on talk shows trying to reassure
people and looking like death warmed over.  "What the hell do they do
for food, then?"

Sanchez advanced the recording, then started playing it again.
"--willing Donors," the detective chief was saying.  "We feel pain we
inflict deliberately, yes--but we can also project feelings.  If
somebody's willing to feed me, I can let . . . feel the
satisfaction--even, if @'s willing enough, the ecstasy--I do when I
feed.  And I certainly wouldn't take enough to hurt, or even to
weaken, . . .!"

Sanchez shut off the recording.  "You know, I believe her."

"So do I," Thompson said thoughtfully.  "I do still have to
investigate, of course, but I'd say from this that there's no crisis
big enough to call in even a squadron for."

      *      *      *      *      *

The E-Team's landing wasn't the covert operation Thompson had
originally planned; instead, the Koslov called for clearance, and they
landed at the main spaceport, where Thompson and his team disembarked
in full uniform, complete with sidearms.  He didn't particularly like
weapons, but procedure called for E-Teams to carry them unless doing so
would be more dangerous than not, which didn't seem to be the case
here.

Landing openly, even an E-Team had to go through Customs and Health,
which was routine enough until a tech told Thompson that he needed
blood samples to test for susceptibility to the nosferatu pseudo-virus.

"What's that?" Thompson asked.

"What makes humans into Kins," the tech said, sounding as if he were
telling them something they should already know.  "If you're
susceptible, and if the virus gets into your bloodstream, and if
something seriously weakens your system more than twenty-four standard
hours later, you turn into a Kin. The Count's orders are that anyone
from out-system be tested and warned, so if they are susceptible, they
can leave before exposure is possible."  The tech shrugged.  "Odds are
none of you will be, though; no one I've tested has been, and so far it
looks like only one percent--maybe less--are."

"We all have full-spectrum immunizations," Thompson pointed out.

"I know.  But the pseudo-virus isn't one of the things full-spectrum
works against."

"Okay."  Thompson extended his arm and let the tech take his sample.
When the rest of his team had followed suit, the tech sent them to a
waiting room until the results were back, probably in less than an
hour.  Thompson posted the newest team member with their luggage, sent
his second-in-command to a phone to make arrangements for them to be
quartered in the System Palace, then told the rest to spread out and
start up conversations with the others in the room, all of whom looked
like locals.

Not that he really had to give them orders any more, he thought.  All
except Corporal Nkomo--who'd replaced Corporal van Breda, killed on an
earlier mission--had been with him for at least four years; they were
more of a family than a military unit, although they were careful to
maintain protocol with anyone else around.  Thompson knew he had a
reputation for being overly concerned with his people's welfare,
especially since he'd turned down promotion to stay with his team, but
he preferred being called a mother hen to taking command of a larger
unit that would give him less personal satisfaction.

While his people circulated, Thompson leafed through several of the
newsjournals that seemed to be an inevitable part of every waiting
room.  He started with the oldest, published about six weeks ago,
discovering that the Archbishop's basic facts were accurate.  There had
been riots, all right, when some kind of laboratory accident and
explosion had released the pseudo-virus and created the first Kins of
the Dragon.  They'd called themselves that from the very beginning, it
seemed, which Thompson found intriguing--and it was discovered almost
immediately that they had to drink blood to survive. Preferably human
blood, taken directly from a donor's carotid, though they could manage
for short times on packaged or even animal blood.  Normal food made
them violently ill, and strong spices caused anaphylactic shock,
usually fatal.  To balance those limitations, they developed great
physical strength and endurance, as well as the responsive and
projective forms of empathy the detective chief had mentioned.

Unfortunately, the first reaction to the Kins had been horror.
Thompson could understand that, though he didn't share it; psych tests
kept people who couldn't overcome such feelings out of Imperial
service.  He was more intrigued than frightened by the idea of a Kin
drinking some of his blood, and according to the journals, most
Narvonese had felt the same way after the initial shock had worn
off--especially those who'd had friends or relatives affected.

But there had been enough whose horror had persisted to cause the
trouble that had inspired the Archbishop's appeal.  Riots had broken
out in all but the smallest towns, Kins had been brutally murdered by
impalement, decapitation, poisoning, incineration--but that trouble had
tapered off dramatically, starting about a week after the Archbishop's
call, when all three Planetary Barons and the System Count announced
that they had been infected and become Kins themselves.  Thompson found
that amusing, if almost inevitable; once Imperial nobility embraced
something new, most of the people in their fiefs followed suit.  By
now, attacks on Kins were down to scattered incidents, and it looked
like they'd taper off to almost nothing soon.

In fact, public opinion had made almost a complete reversal from the
initial near-universal horror.  In spite of some lingering
apprehension, Kins were rapidly becoming respected and even envied--a
process speeded by the fact that many of them had been that way to
begin with.  The Archbishop had been right in his report that it was
the "best people" who were becoming Kins. Not "best" in the sense of
richest or most powerful, although some were, but in the sense of
contributing most to society.  Kins overwhelmingly came from groups
like doctors, police officers, religious, and others who were devoted
to some form of service; none came from criminal or other anti-social
elements, and only a few from generally-neutral groups.  The
approximately one-percent figure the tech had mentioned seemed
accurate, so not all members of even the highest-incidence groups were
Kins--but it was enough to convince Thompson that such an oddly
selective disease called for scientific investigation, rather than
military intervention.  It wouldn't surprise him to see the Kins become
Narvon System's local nobility, either.

"Captain Thompson?"

He looked up from the journal to see the tech approaching, and his
people breaking off their conversations to join them.  Waiting until
his team had gathered around, he asked the tech, "What results?"

"One susceptible, Captain," the tech said, his expression unreadable.
"You."

Thompson was silent for a moment, then said, "Oh, Chaos."  He wouldn't
mind letting a Kin drink from him, but he had no desire to become one,
even with the social status they seemed to be gaining.  He didn't know
just how much blood a Kin needed, but he was positive it was more than
his team could supply, and probably more than anything short of a base
or mid-sized ship could handle; if he became one, he'd lose his team,
maybe even have to be discharged.  "You said the virus has to get into
my bloodstream to infect me?"

"Yes, sir--well, or into your digestive tract.  But it's hard to get
infected accidentally, except in a lab explosion like the original
ones; most Kins got that way feeding a friend or family member.  And
then you have to be seriously weakened for it to change you.  So if you
don't feed any Kins, or if you do and then don't get badly hurt or
sick, you'll stay just the way you are."

"Thank you."  That was better; he could still lead this mission safely.
He turned to his second-in-command.  "Report."

"We have quarters at the System Palace," Gunnery Sergeant Audra King
said.  "Count Nilssun was expecting us, and wants to see you at your
earliest convenience.  She's sent transportation and an escort."

"She expected an E-Team?"  No one was supposed to know about an E-Team,
not even the person who'd called for help; teams that came in openly,
like his, had covers that would allow them to go around asking
questions about anything and everything.

"Yes, sir."  King gave her team leader a wry grin.  "I'm afraid she was
in IntelDiv herself, on an E-Team, before her brother died and she was
named to succeed.  I'd guess one of her former teammates let her know
we were assigned here."

That sounded likely; it was just a good thing the problem had solved
itself before his team had to file its evaluation.  "Was she upset?"

"No, sir.  Pleased."

"That's good, I suppose."  Thompson kept from scowling by an effort of
will.  "When's the transport supposed to get here?"

"Should be already, sir."

"It figures."  If the Count had expected them, she'd probably given
orders that she be notified when ten Marines arrived; being former
E-Team herself, she'd be able to guess that with the primary danger past,
they'd be likely to come in openly.  "Main entrance?"

"Yes, sir."

"Okay, let's go."

      *      *      *      *      *

They were taken to the System Palace in a luxury limousine, with a
dozen System Security troops riding escort on gravcycles, then settled
into a decade apartments in the Palace's guest wing.  Thompson changed
into dress blues, and wasn't surprised, moments after he was finished,
to hear a knock on his door.  "Enter," he called.

The door opened, and a man in black and silver livery bowed to him.
"My Lady Count's compliments, Captain Thompson.  She invites you to her
office to discuss your mission; if you will come with me?"

Thompson nodded shortly, and followed the man to an office whose open
door was flanked by a pair of System Security officers.  He entered,
and the door closed behind him as he came to attention facing the woman
standing behind the desk.  "Captain Jase Thompson, my Lady Count."

"You may be seated, Captain."  The Count gestured to a comfortable-looking
leather armchair, and took her own seat as Thompson sat.  "Now--you came
here to investigate a report of rioting, did you not?"

"You know I did, my Lady."

"And what will your report to His Majesty say?"

"That no intervention is required, of course."

"No, Captain, it will not."  Count Nilssun smiled, and Thompson found
himself admiring her fangs, with an uncomfortable certainty that she
knew what he was thinking.  "Since you are head of an E-Team, I'm sure
you saw at least part of yesterday's `Narvon Tonight,' and read the
spaceport newsjournals while you were waiting for your test results.  I
hope you weren't too distressed at finding yourself susceptible."

"Not overly, my Lady."  She'd been IntelDiv, all right, Thompson
thought.  E-Team, yes, but he'd be willing to bet she'd been a field
agent before that--and that she'd set up the interview with her Chief
of Detectives and had a complete set of journals waiting for him.
She'd know better than to try misleading him, with her background, but
Thompson could understand her setting things up to let him get
information without too much effort.  And something in the information
she'd arranged for him would tell him why she said his report would ask
for some kind of intervention.

He was starting to enjoy himself.  This was the sort of puzzle IntelDiv
people liked to set up for each other, and it let him be sure there was
nothing seriously wrong.  "Let me see.  You couldn't have known I'm
susceptible to the pseudo-virus, since this is the only system that
tests for that, which means it has no bearing."

"Correct."

"Okay."  Thompson thought back.  "The journals were a pretty
straight-forward account, so you probably set them up just to give me
background.  The key has to be the interview, then."  He saw her nod
slightly, and concentrated.  "The Empire can't do much about your
feeding problem, if you need mostly fresh blood, so that's not it
either.  Oh!"  He nodded, realizing.  "You can't deliberately hurt
anyone, which means you'd have a hard time defending yourselves from
anything, criminals to a full-scale invasion. You need an Imperial
military presence, probably a Sub-Sector or Sector-level base.  Maybe
police, too, though Narvonese who aren't Kins may be able to handle
that."

The Count looked pleased.  "Exactly, Captain.  I do need a full-scale
base, and the Empire has none in this Sector as yet.  Debate on where
to place one is evenly balanced between this system and Argyros; your
report on our limitation will swing that debate in our favor."

It sure would, Thompson thought.  Given equal merit, the Empire
preferred to site bases and jobs where the need was greatest, and a
completely vulnerable system needed a base far more than one like
Argyros, which could defend itself at least until reinforcements could
arrive.

"As for police," the Count went on, "yes, non-Kins can handle most of
what Kins cannot--but I have already begun trying to recruit Security
Division veterans.  Non-susceptible ones, of course."

Thompson grinned appreciation.  Former SecuDiv Marines made the best
police available, if you were willing to let them do the job you paid
them for; if you didn't, they'd probably consider it a breach of
contract and leave.  Not too many people were willing to deal with
someone who'd alienated such police, so that was a definite point in
the Count's favor.  "I'll be glad to recommend construction of a base,
then, my Lady."

"Excellent."  The Count leaned forward, her expression serious.  "As
you have deduced, Captain, I was once a field agent, and I had this set
up to give you the maximum amount of information in the minimum amount
of time.  I can see from your reactions that you also know I want more
from you than a base, now that I have learned of your susceptibility."
She smiled, showing those tempting fangs again.  "And that you are
trying to avoid thinking about it, because you want it as well."

Thompson tried to keep his face impassive, even though he knew
perfectly well that it was useless, with a field agent reading him.
Dammit, a man was entitled to his privacy!  "By my Lady Count's leave,
I must remind her that my responsibilities to my team outweigh my
personal desires."

Count Nilssun leaned back with a sigh.  "Formality doesn't change
things, Captain.  You want to feed a Kin, and I have to send a Liaison
Officer to the Imperial Palace to represent Narvon System; a Kin who
was head of the team sent here to investigate us would be ideal, from a
public relations viewpoint.  I can't force you, as you are well
aware--but I needn't be the one who introduces the virus, or who weakens
you so you will Change.  I am perfectly capable of requesting that you
and your team be stationed here indefinitely, then surrounding you with
Kins until you can no longer resist your own desires."

Thompson's jaw tightened.  "My Lady Count may of course do as she
thinks best--but I will, equally of course, protest any such orders."

The Count stood, and Thompson had to follow suit.  "So be it, then,
Captain, although I had hoped you would be more reasonable.  You have
leave to use the Palace ultrawave for your protest--after I have made
the initial request."  She smiled, this time almost sadly and without
revealing her fangs.  "I can sense hidden depths within you, Captain,
and I would like to be the one to bring them to the surface.  Should
you ever decide you want to see me, I will grant you an audience as
soon as I can."

Thompson was unwillingly impressed; an Imperial Count's time was worth
considerably more than a Marine Captain's.  That didn't make enough
difference to change his mind, though.  "By the Count's leave, I would
like to return to my people."

"Permission granted, Captain.  But please remember, I am not doing this
out of hostility; I do what I do only because I think it best for my
own people."

      *      *      *      *      *

Returning to his assigned apartment, Thompson changed back into service
black.  He wasn't sure whether to be angry or flattered at the Count's
intentions for him; at the moment, he felt a bit of both.  She was
trying to take him away from his team, but on the other hand, she
wanted him to become Liaison Officer for an entire system--which, being
primarily ceremonial in nature, was a less responsible, but far more
prestigious, position.  And, though he was reluctant to admit it even
to himself, he was more than a little tempted by the prospect of--

Resolutely, he blanked out the inviting image of Kin fangs, and went to
knock on King's door.  She had evidently been going through the
library; when she let him in he saw tapes on the coffee table, and more
in the delivery tray.  "Research again, Audra?"

"Uh-huh.  What's up, Cap?"

He described his conversation with the Count, then scowled, knowing
Audra wouldn't take it as aimed at her.  "I'd try to get back to the
ship, but she'd anticipate that.  I'm afraid we're stuck here until
either she decides on someone else as liaison, or I let myself be
turned into a Kin."

King looked thoughtful, hesitating before she spoke.  "Cap . . . we
could all use a leave, and this isn't half bad."

Thompson chuckled, startled into real humor.  "True, Audra.  And we
won't get too many chances at living in a System Palace; pass the word
to take full advantage of it."

"Will do, Cap.  Anything we should do when her Ladyship starts setting
Kins on you?"

"I don't think so," Thompson said, "unless you can arrange for someone
to be on hand to interrupt if things get touchy.  They won't hurt me,
or even try to; from what I've read and been told, they can't.  But . . .
Audra, I may need--well, protection from myself.  I . . . it's hard
for me not to--"

King nodded understandingly.  "They are tempting, aren't they?  Cap, in
your position I wouldn't hesitate; I'd donate, and enjoy the hell out
of myself, even if it meant I'd have to stay here."  She gestured to
the tapes she'd been studying.  "This system is in the beginning of a
major social change, one that ought to be absolutely fascinating."

"I'm sure it would, if I shared your interest in sociology," Thompson
said drily.  Audra was the team's socio spec, and kept trying to get
the rest as interested as she was.  "But I'll be damned if I'll
voluntarily do anything to take myself off this team, or out of the
service."

"If you're given the choice, no.  But--" King raised a cautionary
hand--"if the Count's as determined as you say, it may not be your choice.
They have something called projective empathy, according to these
tapes, and they can use it to make you feel anything they want you to
feel.  Especially if it reinforces something you already feel a little."

"And I already want to donate.  Yeah, I see what you mean.  Her
Ladyship could have taken me already--and made me like it.  I wonder
why she didn't." Another thought struck him, and he looked sharply at
his second-in-command.  "Our hostess was a field agent, Audra.  Were any
of these tapes waiting for you?"

King looked startled, then nodded.  "Two of them, yes.  And one answers
your question--they don't know how long the effects of the projective
empathy last.  Which may mean they won't use it to infect or change you
for fear it'll backfire on them."

That made sense, Thompson thought.  Her Ladyship had to know that a
Marine who realized @'d been coerced into a decision, even gently,
would rebel against both the decision and the coercer.  "Then I'd say
they won't go beyond persuasion and the temptation her Ladyship
promised--or threatened me with."

King nodded, her expression troubled.  "There's another aspect, Cap,
one you may not be thinking about.  At least it's something I've never
known you to be concerned with--but these tapes make it pretty clear
that feeding is . . . well--"

"That's enough," Thompson interrupted shortly.  He'd been trying to
avoid thinking about that aspect; what had made Audra bring it up?  It
was a personal problem, a reason as important as what he'd spoken
openly about for his reluctance to donate--the reason he had opted out
of his original assignment selection when he'd found out what it
involved.  The idea of casual liaisons left him cold; the only people
he felt close enough to want intimacy with were the members of his
team--and regulations forbade that.  So although he certainly didn't
lack it, he'd never shown any outward interest in sex.

"No offense intended, Cap.  Sorry."

"None taken, Audra; you just pushed the wrong button."  Thompson took a
deep breath.  "And you haven't mentioned one factor that's damned hard
for me to resist."  He couldn't help thinking about the detective chief
he'd seen on holo.  "Some of these Kins, at least, aren't much more
than skin and bones.  I could provide a meal for one of them, yes--and
I would, gladly, if it wouldn't change me into one of them.  Hell, if I
could, I'd feed 'em as often as my body would tolerate the blood loss!"

      *      *      *      *      *

The Count didn't waste any time acting on her intention; she had
Thompson summoned to the Palace communications section, where she
called HQMC and requested the E-Team's indefinite assignment to Narvon
System.  Thompson filed his protest immediately, but it had no more
effect than he'd expected; he and his team were assigned to the Count's
command.

She turned to him when the tech broke contact.  "I don't think you will
find my first commands too unpleasant, Captain.  I would like you and
your people to consider yourselves my guests; you are welcome to full
use of all Palace facilities.  I would also like you to attend a
get-acquainted party tomorrow night."

Thompson had resigned himself to spending at least several weeks in
this system; he found himself grateful that the Count was making it as
pleasant as possible for them.  "Thank you, my Lady.  We'll be there;
should we wear blues or civvies?"

"Whichever you choose, Captain.  It will be semi-formal."

      *      *      *      *      *

Thompson wore blues, more for the illusory protection of the dress
uniform's high collar than for any other reason; the rest of his team
opted for civilian wear.  He thought King looked particularly sharp in
the shimmer-cloth culotte outfit she'd had the fabricator make, and
almost as soon as their group entered the Grand Ballroom he saw that he
wasn't the only one. Several Kins, ranging from almost normal physique
to near-starvation gauntness, surrounded her and began an animated
conversation.  Others started discussions with the rest of his team,
leaving Thompson himself momentarily alone.

That didn't last long, however.  The Count joined him, accompanied by
half a dozen other Kins who she introduced as her Planetary Barons, her
Chief of System Security, and the Head Nurse of the Palace medcenter.
"And you've already seen Detective Chief Enna Kaufman," the Count
finished.

Thompson acknowledged the introductions with a certain amount of
discomfort.  He wasn't used to associating with the nobility, and it
was unsettling for him to feel the restrained hunger they all radiated.
The two Security people were in the worst shape, and a moment's thought
told Thompson it made sense; their jobs were unlikely to bring them
into much contact with people willing to let them feed.

As they chatted about inconsequentials, Thompson had to keep himself
from staring at the Kins' mouths, or getting within touching range.
The Count had read him all too accurately; while one Kin was relatively
easy to resist, seven--two of whom were near starvation--made it an
entirely different case, even though they weren't doing anything but
stand there and converse. He was far too aware not only of their
hunger, but of his urge to satisfy it. How the hell was he going to
resist this kind of pressure even for however long the party lasted,
much less for weeks or maybe months?  He sipped at a drink he'd taken
from a passing waiter's tray, wishing for some excuse to leave, but he
couldn't think of any.  He couldn't even fall back on the Corps'
informal motto, because there was no dishonor involved.

"At least your teammates aren't refusing to enjoy what we can do for
them," Kaufman said, gesturing as she chuckled.

Thompson turned, to see Sergeant Gottfried--his communications
expert--in the arms of a tall, equally Nordic-looking man, her expression
almost ecstatic as the Kin's mouth worked at her throat.  Nearby he saw
Audra, pale but looking pleased, with a petite Polynesian-looking Kin
being obviously solicitous of her.  Thompson shook his head ruefully,
then turned back to his group.  "It looks like you have a few more
donors, at least as long as we're assigned here."  He hesitated, trying
to decide whether he should go on, but the Count made that decision for
him.

"Go on, Captain.  I can see you have more to say."

"Yes, sir."  Thompson took a breath, then did so.  "As I told Sergeant
King, I'd donate myself, as often as I could, except that I'm told that
if I do it even once, I'll become a Kin.  And that would cost me my
career, something I'm not willing to give up."

"More to the point," the Count said, "you think it would cost you your
team."

Dammit, Thompson thought, couldn't she give him any slack?  "The only
way it wouldn't, my Lady, is if you got the Emperor to assign them here
permanently--which would ruin their careers.  I say again, my
responsibilities to my team outweigh my personal desires."

He hadn't kept his distance carefully enough; Kaufman touched his
shoulder, then his throat, and he shivered with the promise of it.
"Captain," she said softly, "would it really be that bad, staying in
this system?  The human race, after all, was restricted to one planet
for millions of years, and most people still remain planetbound for
their entire lives.  Believe me, Narvon System can provide enough
challenge for you and your team.  Have you asked them whether they
would consider staying here with you?"

"No, I haven't," Thompson admitted.  But he had to add, "I wouldn't,
either, because I'm afraid they'd think I was pressuring them."

Kaufman eased her hand to the other side of his neck, and Thompson
moved closer without quite realizing it.  "Look at them, my friend.
They're feeling good, and I can assure you that anyone who's donated to
one of us once wants to do it again." She chuckled.  "The kind of
pleasure we can give is unique, and you want the best possible for your
people; wouldn't you like to give them feeding-pleasure yourself, as
often as you could do it without endangering their health?"

That gave Thompson an entirely different point of view, and he moved
still closer to the Kin, again without realizing it.  "Yes . . . yes, I
would."  He did want the best for his people, and if he could get that
in a way that also let him be even closer to them--

He felt lips at his throat, hard sharpness under their warmth, and knew
he'd surrendered.

Then a large hand closed on his shoulder and he was pulled away, to
stumble back against Corporal Nkomo's chest.  "What--"

"No marks, sir; you're safe."

Thompson took a deep breath, coming back to reality as his team
surrounded him.  It seemed he'd been right when he told Audra he might
need protection from himself.  "Thanks, Corporal.  And the rest of
you."

"No problem, sir.  Sergeant King said this might happen."

The Count smiled ruefully.  "You have a very well trained team, Captain
Thompson--but they cannot be around you all the time.  Sooner or later,
you will give in to your own desire."

He'd already come too close for comfort, Thompson thought bitterly.
The worst part of it was that it was himself he was fighting, not the
Count--and whichever way the fight went, he lost.  "That may be, my
Lady, but they're here now.  And they'll keep me from doing anything
I'd regret later."

"Indeed," the Count said politely.  "Then you will stay and enjoy the
rest of the party."

That was an order, Thompson knew, not a request.  "As my Lady Count
wishes," he said, trying to conceal resentment from the others, if not
from the Count herself.

"Good."  The Count signalled a waiter, who approached carrying a tray
loaded with foam-topped mugs.  "Your records say you have a fondness
for New Bavarian beer, something I doubt you can find very often.  I
can recommend this; it is their Oktoberfest Doppelbock, a brew I
enjoyed myself before becoming a Kin."

Thompson didn't doubt that; it was a brew he'd heard quite a lot about,
though he'd never been able to afford any.  He reached for a mug,
shaking his head when Nkomo tried to restrain him.  "It's okay,
Corporal.  I'm in danger of becoming a Kin, not being poisoned.  But if
it'd make you feel better, you can taste it before I have any."

"I'll do that, sir."  Nkomo took a deep drink, then handed the mug to
Thompson, shaking his head.  "Whoo! That's beer?"

"It certainly is," the Count said with obvious amusement.  "Rather
potent beer, I might add, though it is also quite smooth.  Feel free to
drink all you wish; my medcenter has considerable experience treating
hangovers."

With that, the group of Kins broke up and began circulating.  Thompson
took a hearty drink from the mug he held, while the rest of the team
took advantage of the Count's offer, accepting mugs of their own from
the waiter. Not at all to his surprise, he saw that all of them had
fang marks on their throats; when Nkomo lowered his mug, Thompson
indicated the marks.  "How was it?"

Nkomo rubbed the marks, grinning.  "It was great, sir--like nothing
I've ever felt before.  I'm going to do it again, as often as they'll
let me." He gestured resignation.  "Not as often as I'd like, but the
one who fed on me says they don't take chances on their donors' health;
even if I dose with rapid-heal, which I intend to, I'm not allowed to
donate more than once every four tendays.  What they call a Class Four
Donor."

That seemed to be about average, Thompson found.  Gottfried was a Class
Three, King a Class One, and all the rest were Fours like Nkomo.  Also
like Nkomo, all of them intended to repeat the experience as often as
they were allowed to.  "And if you do become a Kin," King told him, "we
want you to be the one who feeds from us.  Mine said that it's good
with any Kin, but best with someone you know and like or respect.  And
that a custom is developing for a Kin who leads a regular group of
Donors to be responsible for taking care of them that way."

Thompson raised an eyebrow.  "The Kin is responsible for feeding on
@'s people?"

"Yes, sir.  If you'd Donated, you wouldn't be questioning it, either."

"Maybe not," Thompson conceded.  It did seem to make an odd sort of
sense . . . but he didn't care to find out.  "That's academic for the
moment, though, so let's do what her Ladyship said, and enjoy the
party."

      *      *      *      *      *

The next morning, Thompson woke feeling hungry.  That was something
that almost never happened, especially when he'd been drinking the
night before; breakfast, for him, was seldom more than a cup of coffee
and maybe an English muffin.  Well, he knew where the guest dining room
was, he told himself, and it was likely that Audra would be eating
there; the rest were more likely to eat with the System Security troops
in their chow hall.

She wasn't there, so Thompson took a small table and began scanning the
menu as soon as he'd punched for coffee.  That was delivered by a human
waiter, not too surprising in a System Palace dining room, and Thompson
was giving his order when King walked in.  She looked surprised, but
joined him at his gesture and ordered her usual Spanish omelet, toast,
and coffee.  It wouldn't be quite like the same items on any other
world, but it was always how she started the day.

When their food came and Thompson cleaned his plate, then signalled for
a second helping while she was barely halfway through, King gave her
commanding officer a quizzical look.  "Is everything all right, Cap?"

"Fine, as far as I know," Thompson said.  "I'm just hungry."

"Hungry enough to eat two breakfasts when you normally don't eat any."
King frowned.  "Cap--did Carlo pull you away before that detective
chief got her fangs into you?"

"Yes, why?"

"Because some of the tapes I dug out--not the ones her Ladyship left
for me--say that some susceptibles get hungrier than usual after
they've become infected.  But if she didn't bite you, you can't be
infected."

Thompson set down the coffee cup he'd just picked up, an unpleasant
thought forming.  "I . . . don't know about that," he said slowly.  "I
may have a nasty mind, but I can't forget that our gracious hostess
used to be a field agent."

"And field agents don't exactly have the same standards as the rest of
the Imperial services."  King hesitated.  "Cap, you don't think she'd--"

"That's exactly what I do think."  The Count couldn't force him, no,
but a field agent would feel perfectly justified in tricking him, if
the stakes were high enough.  "I'm not sure whether it was her primary
plan or a backup, but thinking back, she could very well have laced
that beer with virus.  With you not susceptible and the rest of her
guests being Kins already, I'm the only one it would have any effect
on."

King chuckled.  "That makes sense, Cap--but if so, it backfired on her.
According to the tapes, the ones who get the hungries may become
high-class Donors when they're weakened for the Change, but they don't
become Kins."

"Oh, yeah?"  Thompson grinned in relief.  "I can handle that easily
enough, especially since it means the team doesn't have to break up.  I
think I'll ask to see her as soon as we finish eating."

      *      *      *      *      *

The Count sent word that she'd see him as soon as her morning formal
audience was over, so Thompson was waiting in her working office when
she came in just before noon.  He rose and, since he was in civilian
clothes this time, bowed slightly.  "Good morning, my Lady."

"Good morning, Captain.  You look pleased with yourself."  The Count
motioned him back to his seat, while she leaned against her desk.
"What is it?"

Thompson outlined what he and King had discussed, feeling more relaxed
in her presence than he'd have thought possible the previous night.
"So if what Sergeant King read is accurate," he finished, "I can let
one of you feed, enjoy it, and still stay with my team."

"It is accurate enough," the Count said, her expression unreadable to
anyone without a field agent's training.  "Perhaps a tenth of those who
are susceptible do not Change into Kins.  They do become the best
Donors available, though no Kin will risk feeding even from them more
than once per tenday."  She sighed.  "I cannot share your relief,
Captain, though I can understand it.  I am fully aware of the way most
people out-system will react to us, and being from out-system yourself,
you would have gotten a far more sympathetic reaction than a
Narvonese-born Kin.  Your being a Donor will help, even so.  Do you have
any preference as to the Kin?"

"One of the really hungry ones," Thompson said.  "Otherwise, not
particularly."

"Very well.  You seemed quite taken with Chief Kaufman yesterday; she
is Night Duty Officer now, so she is sleeping, but will be in her
office about twenty-two-thirty tonight.  Shall I leave word that you
are coming?"

"I felt sorry for her, was all," Thompson said.  "The poor kid--Yes,
please let her know."

"All you felt consciously, perhaps," the Count said drily.  "I read it
as potentially far more--but that no longer matters.  I will rescind my
request for your indefinite assignment here."

"Thank you, my Lady."  Thompson rose, and this time his bow was
everything her rank entitled her to.

      *      *      *      *      *

Thompson entered the System Security office complex and approached the
desk sergeant, ready to introduce himself, but she stood.  "Captain
Thompson?"

"Yes."

"Chief Kaufman is waiting for you, sir.  To your right, third door on
the left."  She smiled.  "You made a good choice, Captain.  She's the
best I've ever Donated to."

"How did you know I chose her, rather than the other way around?"

"It's always the Donor's choice, sir.  The Kin can ask someone, or pass
on a volunteer, but one will never feed on an unwilling Donor."  The
desk sergeant grinned.  "Besides, her Ladyship said you had."

Thompson chuckled.  "Thanks, Sergeant.  Third on my left, you said."
He went to the door she'd described, still amused.  Now that the danger
of becoming one himself was past, he discovered he was beginning to
like these blood-drinkers, and to hope the Count would find a good,
sympathetic Liaison Officer.

He didn't have to knock; the door opened as he neared it, and Kaufman
invited him in with a flourish.  "Nice to see you again, Captain," she
said, smiling--and this time Thompson let himself respond to her hunger
and her gleaming fangs.  He went into her open arms, leaning his head
to one side.

She brushed his throat with her lips, and he felt amusement mixed with
her hunger.  "May I assume that your Corporal Nkomo won't pull you away
from me this time, my dear Captain?" she murmured.

"You may, my dear Chief."  Thompson relaxed completely, feeling the
assurance she projected.  "This may be my only chance, so drink as much
as you want."

"As much as I'd take for a Change, yes.  You'll go into a deep sleep,
and wake up hungry enough to eat a hellbeast."

"That's what my socio spec told me."  Thompson's earlier desire was
back in full force, stronger than ever; he licked his lips, wishing
she'd get on with it.

Warmth on his throat, the sensation of hunger, hard sharpness--  He
cried out at the sudden intense pleasure of fangs in his throat, his
blood filling the Kin's eager mouth, satisfying her driving hunger . . .

      *      *      *      *      *

He woke with that memory, his hand going to his throat and caressing
the wounds there.  It was comfortable lying in bed--he knew, somehow,
that he was back in the apartment he'd been assigned--and he'd like to
stay there, holding on to the memory of Kaufman's feeding, but he was
much too hungry.  He got up and used the 'fresher, then dressed,
intending to go to the dining room.

It wasn't necessary; a covered serving tray sat on the coffee table in
his apartment's living room, with a note beside it.  He uncovered the
tray and began eating, curious about the note but not willing to
interrupt until he'd taken the edge off his appetite.  Whoever had
prepared the tray, he thought gratefully, had a pretty good idea what
one of the "near-misses" like himself needed; by the time he emptied
it, he was satisfied.

He picked up the note and leaned back, chuckling as he read it.


"Dear Jase,

"By the time you get to this, you'll have eaten and I'll be asleep.  I
want you to know: you were delicious, and I have never had a better
meal.  I hope I was able to give you as much pleasure as you gave me,
and if you are going to be here long enough, I'd appreciate the
opportunity to feed from you again.

"Affectionately,
    "Enna"


It was odd thinking of himself as a delicious meal, but Thompson found
it tickled him; sure, he'd feed her again if he and his team were here
long enough.  In the meantime, until he got orders, he and his team
were on leave, and as he'd told Audra, they might as well take
advantage of their stay in a System Palace.

For the rest of the day, they did just that.  Their status as the
Count's guests let them enjoy the prerogatives only local nobility or
above usually got, and they took advantage of it in the ways their
various interests dictated.  For Thompson, that meant a run through the
Count's target range, a hearty lunch, a trip through the planetary
zoo--he'd need a week to do justice to the whole thing, but this was a
good start--a four-course supper, and an evening at the local classics
theater to see Last Starfighter for perhaps the twentieth time.

He went to bed feeling comfortably tired, and for several hours slept
well, if with increasing unease, but about 0200 he woke and couldn't
get back to sleep.  His throat itched, and he felt restless, bloated,
so irritable he had to get up and move around.  For awhile he prowled
around his apartment, but that didn't help for long; eventually, he put
on a robe and went out.

He prowled the Palace corridors, rubbing the fang marks on his throat
from time to time, his unease and restless irritability growing.  He
didn't like being this way--it was nothing like his usual self--but he
couldn't seem to do fight his way out of it.

After what felt like decades, he found himself at the System Security
office complex.  Something inside him seemed to say "That's it," so he
went inside.

The desk sergeant--the same one who had been there the day before--looked
at him in surprise.  "Is there something I can do for you, Captain?"

"I . . . I don't know."  Thompson rubbed at the fang marks, frustrated
that it didn't seem to help, then began scratching at them.  "Is Chief
Kaufman here?"

"No, sir, she's patrolling.  You can wait here till she gets back, if
you want to.  Uh . . . you shouldn't be doing that."

"Doing what?" Thompson snapped.

"Scratching yourself like that.  You could . . . well, hurt yourself."

"Dammit, they itch!"  The reminder made it worse; Thompson's scratching
went deeper, beginning to draw blood.  That helped a little, so he dug
in more.

"Sir, don't!"

Thompson paid no attention, needing that bit of relief, small as it
was, even when the desk sergeant hit the station alarm.  Half a decade
troopers seemed to materialize around him, and he heard the sergeant
order him restrained.

When they grabbed him and tried to force his arms down behind his back,
though, he started fighting.  IntelDiv had some nasty moves picked up
from combat techniques developed by a couple of decade cultures; he'd
decked three of his assailants before reinforcements arrived and took
him down, handcuffing him and confining him to a padded holding cell.

An indeterminate, almost painfully frustrating amount of time later, he
felt some relief and slumped to the padded floor; a Kin was
approaching. Whoever it was stopped, perhaps at the desk, then he
sensed anxiety, and the Kin started moving again.  Not long after, Enna
Kaufman was at the door of his cell, opening it and entering.  She
knelt beside him.

"Jase, what's wrong?"

Her nearness calmed him; Thompson breathed deeply, his tension easing.
"I wish to Chaos I knew!  I damnsure didn't bargain for anything like
this when I wanted you to feed on me."

"Neither did I, or I wouldn't have."  She removed the handcuffs, then
stroked the wounds on his throat; he relaxed.  "I can feel what you
want, Jase, but I can't do anything about it; I fed off you last night,
so you have another nine days before any Kin will touch you again."

"I . . . don't think I'll last another nine hours, much less nine days.
Chaos, Enna, what do I have to do?"

"I don't know.  Prince knows, I'd help you if I could!"

      *      *      *      *      *

The Count was having a night as restless as Thompson's.  Finally, not
long after he'd been put in the holding cell, she got out of bed--
carefully, so she wouldn't disturb the Donor she'd mated with--and went
into her living area to call Security.  "Is anything wrong?" she
demanded as soon as the desk sergeant appeared on her screen.

"Not really, my Lady," the desk sergeant replied.  "Captain Thompson
came in a few minutes ago looking for Chief Kaufman, but she's out on
patrol, so I told him he could wait.  But he was scratching his throat,
drawing blood, and he wouldn't stop--I had to order him restrained.
He's handcuffed and in the holding cell till she gets back.  He's
trying to climb the walls, but at least he can't hurt himself."

The Count frowned.  That was a peculiar reaction to an attempted
Change, even to one she and Kaufman had known would be unsuccessful--
but it did explain the feeling of strain she sensed.  Perhaps the
attempt had had some effect after all; though it certainly hadn't made
him into a Kin, he was reacting as strongly as if it had.  "Call me
when Chief Kaufman arrives.  I want to see for myself exactly what is
happening."

"Yes, my Lady."

The Count switched off and dressed, thinking.  It had never seemed
reasonable to her that ten percent of susceptibles didn't react except
to become Donors of a class that was unusual, but didn't require most
to be susceptible or go through Change.  There had never been evidence
of more than a difference in degree, however--or not until now,
perhaps.  Thompson's reaction might indicate a difference in kind, a
Change to . . . what? Something that would complement the Kin Change?

It was half an hour before the desk sergeant called to report that
Kaufman had come in, but when she did, the Count lost no time getting
to Security and the holding cell.  She arrived as Kaufman was using a
damp cloth to gently wipe blood from scratches on Thompson's neck.

She felt immediate sympathy for the Marine; reading him told her that
he was in pain, as well as under the terrible strain she'd felt in him
earlier. She had sensed that strain before, she realized now, though
far less intensely: in some of the others who hadn't--or apparently
hadn't--Changed, near the end of the ten days that separated their
allowable Donations.  That irritability and anxiety had been attributed
to a natural desire to Donate as often as they could, but now the Count
was beginning to think it might be a physiological need as real as a
Kin's need for blood. Thompson certainly hadn't had time to miss
Donating to that degree, not with Kaufman having taken him the day
before.  "Captain," she said gently.

The face that turned to her held desperation and sudden hope.  "Y . . .
yes, my Lady?"

"Did you dream tonight?"

"Huh?"  Thompson was startled at the question, but he nodded.  "Yes--a
dragon wearing a crown.  An Oriental dragon.  He . . . approves of me."

"The Dragon Prince," Kaufman said softly.  "The one who used the virus
to make us what we are.  He always appears to a new Kin."

"But never, to the best of anyone's knowledge, to anyone else."  The
Count swore briefly, though only to herself.  They had never thought to
ask the supposedly-unChanged ones about their dreams, and they--or at
least she!--should have.  It was stupid to think Change had to bring
about a visible change; she could only excuse herself by pleading the
press of other problems that had claimed her attention since Kins began
appearing.  "Your desire to feed Kins is more than simple desire now,
Captain; I can tell that.  It is a physical requirement." She turned to
her Chief of Detectives.  "He needs you."

"But it's only been a day," Kaufman said.

The detective chief's heart wasn't in her objection; the Count nodded.
"The law will have to be changed to accommodate Captain Thompson and
the other . . ."  What was a good word for them?  They weren't Kins,
though they were of the--the Kindred, yes.

Thompson chuckled harshly.  "Call me a Bloodmate, my Lady.  I give
blood, and I damnsure feel like Enna's mate."

The Count nodded, raising an eyebrow.  "Appropriate; very well.  Care
for your Bloodmate, Enna."

Kaufman didn't have to be told twice; she took Thompson into her arms
and nuzzled his throat, breaking the skin to sip but not piercing his
carotid. Thompson relaxed, his irritable frustration easing, and he
felt his consort's satisfaction at that.  There was far more to his
need than her gentle sipping; he was responding to her physically as
well, knew she felt it, and luxuriated in her answering caress.  There
was no such thing, he realized dreamily, as a casual liaison between
Kin and Bloodmate; he was free to accept her love-making, as well as
her feeding.

"But not in a detention cell," Kaufman murmured against her Bloodmate's
throat.  He might be too far gone to care, but she had no intention of
taking him on the floor, no matter how well padded it might be.  She
picked him up, sensing the Count's approval, and carried him to the
duty officer's apartment.

Thompson was content to wait; for now, the promise of her delicate
fangs, the strength of the body he would nourish, were enough.  She
would make love to him, and when he peaked, she would sate her fierce
hunger in their shared ecstasy.  She would care for him, yes . . .

The Count watched them leave, pleased.  She had hoped for an ex-E-Team
leader turned Kin as Liaison Officer, though she would have settled for
whatever benefit a team-full of Donors might bring; now she had
something beyond her most optimistic hopes.  She would give Kaufman and
Thompson time for--she grinned to herself--a honeymoon.  While they
were indulging in each other, she would name the Kindred--Kins and
Bloodmates alike--as the System's local nobility.  And then she would
designate the pair of them as Liaison.  Thompson had lost his team,
yes, but he had gained at least as much in the way of companionship and
more in physical satisfaction; he would be fine.  And what a team those
two would make!




END









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Teams, by Ann Wilson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TEAMS ***

***** This file should be named 25744.txt or 25744.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/7/4/25744/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the
PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything
for copies of this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may
use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative
works, reports, performances and research. They may be modified and
printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING with public
domain eBooks. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license,
especially commercial redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.
This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

http://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
http://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***
