The Project Gutenberg eBook, Nancy McVeigh of the Monk Road, by R. Henry
Mainer


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Nancy McVeigh of the Monk Road


Author: R. Henry Mainer



Release Date: June 30, 2008  [eBook #25938]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NANCY MCVEIGH OF THE MONK ROAD***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 25938-h.htm or 25938-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/5/9/3/25938/25938-h/25938-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/2/5/9/3/25938/25938-h.zip)





NANCY MCVEIGH OF THE MONK ROAD

by

R. HENRY MAINER







[Frontispiece: "Tommy wus one o' the boys, an' a pal o' ours."]



Toronto
William Briggs
1908

Copyright, Canada, 1908, by R. Henry Mainer.





  These few stories of a good old
  woman I dedicate to the
  memory of

  A. R. S. M.

  who sat beside me while I wrote
  them and offered many happy suggestions.




  "Her face, deep lined; her eyes were gray,
  Mirrors of her heart's continuous play;
  Her head, crowned with a wintry sheet,
  Had learned naught of this world's deceit.
  She oft forgot her own in others' trials,
  And met the day's rebuffs with sweetest smiles."




CONTENTS.


    I. THE WOMAN OF THE INN
   II. THE ANTAGONISM OF MISS PIPER
  III. JOHN KEENE'S EDUCATION
   IV. THE WRECK AT THE JUNCTION
    V. JENNIE
   VI. NANCY'S PHILOSOPHY
  VII. THE STRENGTH OF TEN
 VIII. A DESERTER FROM THE MONK ROAD
   IX. THE KERRY DANCERS
    X. THE HOMECOMING OF CORNELIUS MCVEIGH




ILLUSTRATIONS


Cover art

"Tommy wus one o' the boys, an' a pal 'o ours." . . . . _Frontispiece_

"'Give me that gun, Johnny,' she called softly."

"Ye can just pull down the cover, an' I'll do me own fixin'."




NANCY McVEIGH.



CHAPTER I.

_THE WOMAN OF THE INN._

During the _regime_ of Governor Monk, of Upper Canada, the military
road was cut through the virgin pine from Lake Ontario to the waters
leading into Georgian Bay.  The clearings followed, then the
homesteads, then the corners, where the country store and the smithy
flourished in primitive dignity.  The roadside hostelry soon had a
place on the highway, and deep into its centre was Nancy McVeigh's.

Nancy McVeigh's tavern was famed near and far.  In earliest days the
name was painted in letters bold across the high gabled face, but years
of weather had washed the paint off.  Its owner, however, had so long
and faithfully dominated its destiny that it was known only as her
property, and so it was named.  A hill sloped gently for half a mile,
traversed by a roadway of dry, grey sand, flanked on either side by a
split-rail snake fence, gradually widening into an open space in front
of the tavern.  The tavern had reached an advanced stage of
dilapidation.  A rickety verandah in front shaded the first story, and
a gable projected from above, so that the sill almost touched the
ridge-board.  A row of open sheds, facing inwards, ranged along one
side of the yard, terminated by a barn, which originally had been a low
log structure, but, with the increase of trade, had been capped with a
board loft.  Midway between the sheds and the house stood the pump, and
whilst the owners gossiped over the brimming ale mugs within the house,
the tired beasts dropped their muzzles into the trough.  Some of the
passers-by were of temperate habits, and did not enter the door leading
to the bar, but accepted the refreshment offered by Nancy's pump, and
thought none the less of the woman because their principles were out of
sympathy with her business.  The place lived only because of its
mistress, and an odd character was she.  Fate had directed her life
into a peculiar channel, and she followed its course with a sureness of
purpose that brought her admiration.  She was tall, raw-boned, and
muscled like a man.  Her face was deeply lined, patient, and crowned
with a mass of fine, fair hair turning into silvery grey, and blending
so evenly that a casual observer could scarcely discern the change of
color.  It was her eyes, however, that betrayed the soul within, their
harshness mocking the goodness which was known of her, and their
softness at times giving the lie to the roughness which, in a life such
as hers, might be expected.

Nancy McVeigh, the tavern and the dusty Monk Road were synonymous, and
to know one was to know all three.

Nancy was within the bar when two wayfarers, whose teams were drinking
at the trough, entered.

"It's a foine day, Mistress McVeigh," greeted old Mr. Conors, at the
sight of her.

"It is that, and more, too, Mr. Conors," she assented, including the
two men before her in her remark.

"This spell o' weather's bad fer the crops.  I'll have to stop at the
pump altogether if it don't rain soon."

"You're welcome to your choice.  If ye want a drink and can pay fer it,
I am pleased to serve ye, but I ask no man fer what he cannot afford,"
was Nancy's rejoinder, as she wiped her hands on her apron after
drawing the mugs.

"Been to town?" she inquired, after a minute's reflection.

"Yes, and a bad place it is to save money.  The women folk have so many
things to buy that I often wonder where the pay for the seed grain'll
come from.  Had to buy the missus a shawl, and two yards of flannel for
the kids to-day, and heaven only knows what they will be wanting next
week, when school begins again," commented Mr. Conors.

"'Tis a God's blessing to have your childer, the bright, wee things!
They keep us from fergittin' altogether," said Nancy, sighing, and
looking abstractedly out of the window.

"She is thinkin', poor woman," observed Mr. O'Hagan, in a low tone.

"Ye have quite a squad yerself, Nancy," ventured Mr. Conors.

"Yes," she agreed, "there's Sam Duncan's little girl.  You remember big
Sam, who was drowned in his own well?"  Mr. Conors nodded.  "And
Jennie--but she's a rare young lass now, and waits on table as well as
I can do.  If I could spare her I'd send her to school, fer she needs
book learnin' more than she's got at present, but it's hard work I have
to keep up the old place, and I'm not as able fer it as I was the first
years after McVeigh died.  Then I have Will Devitt's boy.  He's past
eighteen now, and handy about the stables.  If it was not fer him I'm
thinkin' old Donald would never manage at all."

"An' you'd take in the very nixt waif that comes along," declared Mr.
O'Hagan.

"Maybe," answered Mistress McVeigh, thoughtfully.

Mr. Conors broke in with the question, "Where's yer own boy, Corney?
It's a long while since he was about the place with his capers and
curly head.  Only t'other day my missus was talkin' about the time he
and my Johnny learned to smoke behind my barn, and almost burnt the
hull of us into the bargain."

A smile flitted across Nancy McVeigh's face at the recollection.  "My
Corney's a wonderful lad, Mr. Conors.  He doesn't take after either of
his parents, fer he'd give over the best game in the world fer a book.
He's livin' in Chicago, and he writes home now and then.  He's makin'
lots of money, too, the scamp, but he's like his father fer spendin'.
Sometimes he borrows from me, just to tide him over, but he says that
he will make enough money some day to turn the old tavern into a
mansion.  Then I'll be a foine lady, with nothin' to do but sit about
and knit, with a lace cap on me head, and servants to do all the work.
Though I'm afraid me old bones would never submit to that."

"Do ye believe the nonsense he writes, Mistress McVeigh?" questioned
Mr. Conors.

"Aye, an' I do that, sir.  It's me, his old mother, that knows the grit
o' him, and the brains he has."

Tears were shining in Nancy's eyes, and she dried them on her apron,
under cover of a sharp order which she called to a maid in the
dining-room.

"Ye have a rare good heart in ye, Nancy McVeigh," Mr. O'Hagan commented.

"Heart, ye call it, sor.  It's a mother's heart, and nothin' else," she
answered, quickly, and then continued, somewhat bitterly, "It's nigh
broke with anger and trouble this day.  It's not that the work is hard,
nor the trade fallin' away, for it has kept me and mine these many
years, and it'll never fail while I have me health.  But my interest
falls due this month."

"It's a power o' interest ye hev paid that old miser, John Keene, since
McVeigh took over the tavern," Mr. Conors observed.

"It is that, Mr. Conors, and he treats me none the better fer it.  A
week come Tuesday he stalks into the bar here, and, before my
customers, he threatens to put me into the road if I fail to have the
amount fer him on the due date.  I jest talked back to him with no fear
in me eye, and he cooled off wonderfully.  I have since got the money
together, and a hundred dollars to pay on the principal, and to-morrow
I'm goin' to give it to him with me compliments."

"Ye need not be afraid o' his puttin' ye out, Mistress McVeigh,
begorra.  He knows right well the place wouldn't be fit to stable
horses in if ye were to leave it, and then who'd pay him his dirty
interest?" sagely remarked Mr. Conors.

"Well, if that ain't James Bennet comin' along the road, and tipsy,
too," broke in Mr. O'Hagan, catching sight of a new arrival from
townwards.

"The likes o' him!" sniffed Nancy, contemptuously.  "Not a drop will I
serve him, the good-fer-nothin'!  There's his poor wife with a
two-weeks-old baby, and two other childer scarce able to walk, and him
carryin' on and spendin' money as if he could afford it."

The three waited, watching in silence, whilst the semi-intoxicated
fellow tumbled out of his rig and walked with uncertain footsteps to
the tavern door.

"An' what be ye wantin' the night?" spoke up Nancy, barring his
entrance, and all the softness gone from her voice.

"Wantin', ye silly woman! what d'ye suppose I'd chance breakin' me neck
gettin' out o' me buggy fer, but a drink o' yer best brewed?"

"Not a drop, James Bennet.  Ye needn't come round my door askin' fer
liquor.  You, with a sick wife and a house full o' childer!  It's a
wonder ye're not ashamed.  Better put yer head under the pump and then
git ye home.  Ye're no man at all, James, and I've told ye so before."

"It's not refusin' an old frien', are ye, Mistress McVeigh?" Bennet
asked, coaxingly.

"Ye're no frien' o' mine, I'd like ye to understand, and if Mary O'Neil
had taken my advice years ago, ye'd hev niver had the chance o' abusin'
her."

"Ye're not doubtin' that I have the change?" pleaded Bennet, digging
his hands deeply into his pocket, as if to prove his statement.

"More's the pity, then, fer it should be at home with yer wife, who'd
know how to keep it."

"Ye're very hard on me," he whined, edging up the steps.

"Ye may thank yer stars I'm no harder," threatened the unyielding Nancy.

"I tell ye, Mrs. McVeigh, I'm burnin' with thirst, and I'm goin' to
have only one."

"Ye're not, sor."

"I will, ye old shrew!  Out o' my way!" he exclaimed, with an ugly
showing of temper, and moved as if to force an entrance.  But Nancy
McVeigh had learned life from the standpoint of a man, and, reaching
forward, she sent him tottering from the verandah.  Nor did she
hesitate to follow up her advantage.  With masculine swiftness and
strength she seized him by the collar, and in a trice had him head
downwards in the horse-trough.

"Now will ye go home, ye vagabond?" she exclaimed, with grim certainty
of her power.  The man spluttered and wriggled ineffectually for a few
minutes, and then called "Enough!"

"Off with ye," she said, releasing him, but with a menace in her tones
which suggested that to disobey would mean a second ducking.  The
drunken coward climbed into his buggy, muttering imprecations on the
head of the obdurate hostess of the tavern as he did so.  But he had no
stomach for further resistance.  Mr. Conors and Mr. O'Hagan had been
interested spectators, and now came forward to untie their own horses,
laughing loudly at the discomfiture of Bennet as they did so.

In the quiet of the early evening, when the modest list of boarders had
eaten of the fare which the tavern provided, with small consideration
of the profits to be made, Mrs. McVeigh put on her widow's bonnet, and
a shawl over her gaunt shoulders, and, leaving a parting injunction to
old Donald to tend to the bar during her absence, she set off down the
road to the Bennets'.  The night was setting in darkly and suggestive
of rain, and the way was lonely enough to strike fear into the heart,
but the old tavern-keeper apparently had no nerves or imagination, so
confidently did she pursue her intention to see how fared the sick wife
of her troublesome customer of the afternoon.

Bennet met her at the door, and he held up his finger for quietness as
he made way for her to enter.  He was sober now, and evidently in a
very contrite mood.  He knew it was not for him that Nancy McVeigh had
come, and he expressed no surprise.  "She be worse the night," he
whispered, hoarsely.  Nancy shot a glance at him, half-pitying,
half-blaming, as she stepped into the dimly-lighted bedroom, where a
wasted female form lay huddled, with a crying baby nestled close beside
her.  Two children in an adjoining bed peeped curiously from under the
edge of a ragged blanket, and laughed outright when they saw who the
visitor was.

"Go to sleep, dears," Nancy said, kindly, to hush their noisy
intentions.

"It's you, Mistress McVeigh?" a weak voice asked from the sick-bed.

"It is, Mary, and how are ye?"

Mrs. Bennet was slow in answering, so her husband spoke for her, and
his tones were tense with anxiety.

"She's not well at all, at all."

Nancy turned impatiently to Bennet and bade him light the kitchen fire.

"I've brought somethin' with me to make broth, and it's light food I'm
sure that ye're wantin', Mary," she explained.

As soon as Bennet's back was turned, Nancy took off her wraps and drew
a chair into the middle of the room.

"Give me the baby, Mary; yer arms must be weary holdin' it, and I will
see if I can put it to sleep."

One thing Mrs. McVeigh's widowhood had not spoilt, and that was her
motherly instincts in the handling of a baby, and the room seemed
brighter and more hopeful from the moment she began to rock, singing a
lullaby in a strange, soothing tone.

Mrs. Bennet gazed in silent gratitude for awhile, then she spoke again.

"The doctor was here."

"And what did he say?" Nancy inquired.

"I'm not goin' to get better," she faltered.

"Tut, tut, Mary!  Ye're jest wearied out and blue, and ye don't know
what ye say.  Think of yer poor childer.  What would they do without
their mother?"

"I don't know," murmured Mrs. Bennet, beginning to cry.  "The doctor
says I might recover if I had hospital treatment and an operation.  But
it's a terrible expense.  Just beyond us altogether.  He said it would
cost a hundred dollars at least."

"And would ye be puttin' yer life in danger fer the sake o' a sum like
that?" Nancy said, feigning great unbelief.

"It may not seem much to such as you, Mrs. McVeigh, who has a business,
and every traveller spending as he passes by, but Jim is none too
saving, and with three crying babes and a rented farm it's more than we
can ever hope fer," answered Mrs. Bennet.

"Don't you worry one bit more about it, Mary.  Maybe the good Lord'll
find a way to help you fer the sake o' Jim and the childer," Nancy
said, encouragingly, and then she went into the kitchen to direct
Bennet in the preparation of the broth, the baby still tucked under her
arm, sleeping peacefully.

It was almost midnight when Nancy arrived at the tavern.  She carried a
key for the front door, and passed up through the deserted hallway to
her room.  A child's heavy breathing a few feet away told her that
Katie Duncan was in dreamland.  Jennie had left a lamp burning low on
her table, and Nancy carried it over to the cot and looked at the
little plump face of her latest adoption.  "Her own mother would smile
down from Hiven if she could see her now," she thought.  Presently she
set the lamp back on the table, and ensconced herself comfortably in
her capacious rocking-chair.  Directly in front of her, two photos were
tacked on the wall, side by side, and her eyes centred upon them.  One
was that of a boy, sitting upright, dressed in a suit of clothes
old-fashioned in cut and a size too large for his body.  The other,
that of a young man with an open, smiling countenance, a very high
collar, and a coat of immaculate neatness of fit.  It was a strange
contrast, but Nancy saw them through the eye of a proud mother.  A
debate progressed within her mind for some time, and then she arose,
with decision prominently expressed in her every movement.  She
unlocked a small drawer in the ancient black walnut bureau and withdrew
a tattered wallet.  Returning to her seat, she carefully spread out the
contents, counting the value of each crumpled bill as she laid it on
her knee.

"I'm not afeard o' old John Keene.  There's sufficient to pay him his
interest, and plenty left to keep Mary O'Neil at the hospital for a
month or two," she muttered.  She replaced the money with a sigh, but
it was of pleasure, for Nancy never felt a pang when she had a good
action to perform.

Next morning she sent Jennie over for Father Doyle, the parish priest.
The good man was always pleased to call on Nancy, because she was a
life-long friend, and her solid common-sense often helped him over the
many difficulties which were continually cropping up in his work.

"It's something that has to be done at once, Father Doyle, and I think
it lies with me to do it," she said, after they had gossiped awhile.

"I've known Mary O'Neil since she was the size o' my Katie, and many a
day have I watched her and my boy Corney, as they played, before
McVeigh was taken.  It's no fault o' hers that their cupboard is empty,
and it's something I can do that will not lose its value because of the
habits o' the husband.  But ye must arrange a compact with Bennet not
to take another drop if I help him.  He loves his wife and would be a
good man to her if he could control his appetite."

"But ye will be damaging your trade with your precious sentiments,"
Father Doyle remarked, to test, in a joking way, the principles of his
charitable parishioner.

"I'm no excusin' my business, Father Doyle, and ye've known me long
enough to leave off askin' me such questions.  I have never taken the
bread out o' a livin' creature's mouth yet, to my knowledge, and
another might run a much, rougher house, should I give it up."

"It's only a joke, I'm telling you," put in the priest, hastily; then
he added, kindly, "You are a strange woman, Nancy McVeigh, and the road
is no longer for your open doorway and the free pump.  I have a mind to
put in half of the amount with you in this case, though it is only one
of many that I would do something to help if I could."

"Thank ye, Father Doyle.  Ye have a keen understandin' o' what is good
yerself; but ye'll be sure to name the compact with Bennet," cautioned
Nancy, as she counted out fifty dollars from her assortment of bills.

"That I will," he answered.

The priest immediately went over to the Bennet place, and called the
husband aside before mentioning his errand.  He had long waited for
some chance to secure an advantage over his thriftless neighbor, and
now that it had come he drove it home with all the solemnity and
earnestness that he could command.  Bennet listened with eyes staring
at the earth, and the veins throbbing in his bared neck, until the talk
had reached a point where he must promise.

"Father Doyle," he began, thickly, "I have been a sad failure since the
day ye married me to Mary O'Neil, and Nancy McVeigh's tavern has been a
curse to me an' mine; but, if ye will do this fer me, I'll swear never
to touch a drop again."

"Say nothing against Mistress McVeigh.  You owe her more than you
think," Father Doyle interjected sharply.

"Perhaps," admitted Bennet, grudgingly.

"It's a compact, then," the priest observed, smiling away the wrinkles
of severity, and they clasped hands over it.

That afternoon a covered rig passed by the tavern while the hostess was
serving the wants of a few who had stepped in.

"It's Jim Bennet, takin' his wife to the hospital.  Poor thing, she'll
find a deal more comfort there than in her own home!" Nancy explained,
in answer to the exclamations of curiosity.

"It's a wonder he doesn't stop for a drink," one of the bystanders
remarked.  But Nancy did not heed it, for she was thinking of two
children playing in the road when she had a husband to shoulder the
heavier duties of life.




CHAPTER II.

_THE ANTAGONISM OF MISS PIPER._

Miss Sophia Piper had passed that period of life popularly known on the
Monk Road as the matrimonial age.  She had reached that second stage of
unwed womanhood when interest in material things supersedes that of
sentiment.  She no longer sighed as she gazed down the stretch of walk,
lined with rose hedge, that led from the verandah of her Cousin James'
home to the Monk Road gateway, for there was no one in the wide world
who might desire to catch her waiting on the step.  Bachelors,
especially young ones, were a silly set to her, useful only to girls
who had time to waste on them.  Her time was too precious, and she
prided herself somewhat on the fact.

True, she had had her day.  She well remembered that, and even boasted
of it.  Off-hand she could name a half-dozen men who once would have
accepted the custody of her heart with alacrity, but she was too
discerning.  The Piper standard on the feminine side of the family was
raised high, and he must be an immortal, indeed, who climbed to its
dizzy height.  She was past thirty-five, and had no regrets.  She was a
close student of the Bible, and brought one text from it into her own
life.  "When I was a child I played as a child, but now that I am old I
have put aside childish things."  She often quoted this in defence of
her industrious maidenhood.

She really felt that she had an object in life to accomplish, one that
was wider than personal benefit.  She occupied the chair as President
of the Church Aid.  For five years she had been the delegate to the
County Temperance Convention.  She was also a regular contributor to
the religious columns of a city newspaper, and she held many other
responsible duties within her keeping.  Then, her cousin, James Piper,
had three children to bring up properly, and their mother was dead.
This work, along with the superintendence of the domestic features of
his home, gave her plenty to fill up any spare time which she might
have had.  She took a pardonable pride in her station in the little
community that knew her, yet above all she strove to exercise a fitting
humility of spirit.

Her face was a pleasant one to see, shapely almost to prettiness, but
growing thin and sharp-featured; though bright, smiling eyes made her
appear more youthful than her years.  Her hair, smoothed back from her
forehead, was streaked with grey, and harmonized perfectly with the
purity of her countenance.

Despite her brave front and ever-abundant faculty to console others,
she had known trouble of a kind that would have crushed others of
weaker nature.  From early girlhood she had been alone, her parents
having died within a year of each other before she had passed her
fifteenth birthday.  She had no sisters, and her only brother had
widened the gap between them by a life of recklessness.

Tom Piper was the exact antithesis of his sister.  A good fellow with
everybody, and liked accordingly; none too particular in his choice of
comrades; a spendthrift, and unable to apply himself for long at any
one occupation, 'twas a fortunate circumstance that Cousin James took
in his orphan sister, otherwise she would have had the additional
burden of poverty to harass her endeavors to sustain the respectability
of the family.  Tom might also have made his home with his cousin, but
he showed no inclination to accept such charity.  He was older than his
sister, and quite able to take care of himself, so he thought.  He
secured work with a firm of timber contractors, and almost immediately
disappeared into the wide expanse of pine in northern Ontario.
Occasionally he wrote to his sister, and in his letters his big heart
stood out so clearly that even her strict code of propriety could not
stay the tears of sympathy which blotted his already bedaubed
scribbling.  When spring came, and the logs had been rafted down the
river, leaving the timber men a few months of well-earned idleness,
Tom's first action was to hasten out to the Monk Road to visit Sophia,
and a very unconventional caller he proved to be.  The rough life had
taken off much of his exterior polish, but otherwise he was the same
good-natured Tom, generous to a fault, and, therefore, blessed with but
little to give.  These were grand opportunities for Sophia, and she
lectured him roundly for his loose habits.  She told him that he could
have a good position in the neighboring town, and society more in
keeping with the ancestors of the Pipers, should he so desire.  But he
always answered her with a laugh that echoed strangely through the
quiet decorum of Cousin Jim's big house, then he kissed her for her
advice.

"Never fear, little girl, I will never do any great harm either to you
or the family.  It is my way of enjoying life, and I guess I am a free
agent.  But keep on in your good work, and it will do for the both of
us.  I have brought something with me to brighten your eyes, sister.
This will buy new clothes for you."

While he spoke, he counted out and handed over to her a large share of
his winter's wages.  This always made Sophia cry, and she would forget
her scoldings for the balance of his stay.

As Tom grew older, tales travelled ahead of him, of his reckless
spending and his drinking while in town.  Cousin Jim heard them first,
and he took Tom to task sharply whenever he met him.  Then Sophia
learned the truth, and her heart was almost broken.  She prayed for her
brother, and wept over him when he came to see her, and was rewarded
with promises which were broken as soon as her influence had worn off.
Gradually a coldness grew between them.  Tom, obstinately set in his
way, and angry at the continued interference of his sister and cousin;
Sophia hurt by his neglect and bitter from the sting of his disgraceful
conduct; and Cousin Jim, hard, matter-of-fact business man that he was,
refused to extend even the courtesy of a speaking acquaintance.  So
affairs ran along very unhappily, until, at last, Sophia determined to
forget that Tom was her brother, and henceforth she put her whole soul
into a crusade against sin, and Nancy McVeigh's tavern soon came under
the ban of her displeasure.

Nancy's place was four miles from town on the Monk Road, and Tom Piper
had found it a convenient spot for rest and refreshment, both going and
returning from his visit to Cousin Jim's.  Sophia had often warned him
against the house, saying that it was an evil den, peopled with the
thriftless scourings of the countryside, and presided over by a sort of
human she-devil, who waited by the window to coax wayfarers in to buy
her vile drinks.  Tom answered by repeating some of the good acts
traceable to Nancy McVeigh's door.  He explained to her that the
hostess was just a poor, hard-worked woman, who reaped small reward for
her labors, and divided what she got with any who might be in need of
it.  He also told of waifs whom Nancy had mothered and fed from her own
cupboard until they were old enough to shift for themselves.  But
Sophia was firm in her convictions, and only permitted herself to know
one side of the story.

"No good can come out of that tavern," she had said, with a stamp of
her foot and a fire in her eye that forbade contradiction.

Through the vale of years Sophia never forgot the grudge, and when she
made herself an influence in the highest circles of reform, she turned
with grim persistence to the agitation for the cancelling of the tavern
license.

Nancy McVeigh, the woman against whom this thunderbolt was to be
launched, kept patiently at her work.  She had heard of the efforts
being put forth, and often wondered why the great people bothered about
one of so little consequence as herself.  She did not fight back, as
she had nothing to defend, but waited calmly, telling her neighbors,
when they came to gossip, that they need not worry her with news of it
at all.

Sophia championed her pet theme at the County Convention, and carried
it to an issue where she and a committee were empowered to wait on the
License Board with a strong plea in favor of the abolition of the
tavern.  The three stout gentlemen who listened to their petition were
all good men who had families of their own and wanted as little evil as
possible abroad to tempt their boys from the better path.  They gave a
long night's deliberation to the question, and then brought in a
verdict that they would extend Nancy's rights for another year.  Sophia
was completely overcome by the decision, and straightway sought out one
of the Commissioners, a friend of Cousin Jim's, whom she knew quite
intimately.

"Why did you do it?" she asked wrathfully.

"My dear Miss Piper," he replied, "perhaps you have not realized that
Nancy McVeigh has a heart as big as a bushel basket, and we can find no
instance where she has abused the power which she holds.  If we take it
away from her, some other will step into her place, and he might be ten
times worse."

Sophia brought the interview to a close very abruptly, and went home
angry and unshaken in her resolve; but an unexpected event changed the
course of her meditation.  Cousin Jim was planning a winter's stay in
California for her and his children.  She needed the rest and change,
and so did the youngsters.  Their preparations were completed in a few
days, and the big house was closed.  Thus the questions which had
raised such an excitement were shelved for a more convenient season.

It was in the spring of the next year that Jennie, Nancy McVeigh's
adopted daughter, brought her the news from town of Tom Piper's illness.

"The poor fellow's goin' fast, wi' consumption, and he's at the
'ospital.  It was Dan Conors who told me, an' he said, 'Tom hasn't a
dollar fer the luxuries he requires,'" Jennie explained.  Nancy's face
relaxed somewhat from its habitually austere expression when Jennie had
finished.

"The idee o' that lad dyin', forsaken like that, an' his own sister
gallivantin' about California.  It's past me understandin' entirely,"
she remarked, as she fastened on her widow's bonnet and threw her heavy
shawl over her shoulders.

"Tell Will Devitt to harness the mare, and I'll go and see what can be
done fer him."

Nancy arrived at the hospital late in the afternoon, and was admitted
to the sick man's bedside.  She found him delirious and unable to
recognize her, but instead he called her "Sophia."

"It's so good of you to come, Sophia.  I knew you would," he kept
repeating as he clasped her hand in his.  All that night Nancy stayed
by him, attending to his wants with the skill of a mother, and soothing
him by her words.

In the morning he died.

"I guess it will be the potter's field," the hospital doctor told her,
when she inquired about the burial.  "He came here almost penniless,
and has been in the ward six weeks."

Nancy gazed into space while she made some hasty mental computations.
"What balance is due ye?" she asked, suddenly.

The doctor produced a modest bill, at half the current rate, amounting
to twenty-five dollars.  It meant a good week's business out of Nancy's
pocket, but she paid it without objection.  "I want the body sent to my
tavern out on the Monk Road, sir, and ye can complete all arrangements
fer a decent Christian funeral, an' I'll pay all the expenses," she
said, before leaving.  She went to the telegraph office and left
instructions to wire to all the known addresses of Miss Sophia Piper;
then, satisfied with her day's work, she hurried home.

The tavern bar was closed during the two days while the body lay in the
little parlor, and callers came and went on tiptoe, and spoke only in
whispers.  A steady stream of roughly dressed people, river-men and
their friends, struggled over the four miles of snowy road to pay their
last respects to the dead, and some brought flowers bundled awkwardly
in their arms.

The night preceding the funeral, two great, long-limbed fellows,
wearing top-boots, came stumbling into the tavern, more noisily because
of their clumsy efforts at gentleness.  Nancy knew them as former
friends of Tom Piper, so she led them in at once.  The men took the
limit of the time usually spent there, and yet they were loath to go,
and Nancy guessed that they had something further to say but scarcely
knew how to commence.  She encouraged them a little, and finally one
spoke up.

"Ye see, Mistress McVeigh, Tommy wus one o' the boys, an' a pal o'
ours, an' we hate to see ye stuck for the full expenses o' this
funeral.  God knows we owe him plenty fer the generous way he stayed by
his mates, an' we don't want him receivin' charity from no one.  We had
a meetin' o' the lot o' us down town las' night, and every man put in
his share to make Tom right with the world.  We've got fifty-five
dollars here, and we want ye to take it."

The men counted out the money on the table, silver and bills of small
amounts, until it made quite an imposing pile, then they placed a piece
of paper upon it, with the words, written very badly, "For Tommy, from
his pals."

They looked towards Nancy, and her averted face was wet.  She did not
sob, yet tears were streaming down her cheeks.

Sophia Piper was home in ten days, having received a message after
considerable delay.  The resident minister met her at the station and
comforted her as well as his kindly soul knew how.  He told her all the
circumstances connected with the death and burial of her brother, and
took particular pains to place Nancy McVeigh's part in it in its true
light, as he had a warm spot in his heart for the old tavern-keeper.
They drove together out to the home of Cousin Jim, where the servants
had opened the house in preparation for their coming.  The
weather-stained gable of Nancy McVeigh's tavern, like some old familiar
face, came into view by the way, and Sophia asked to be set down at the
door.

Nancy, tall, angular and sympathetic, walked into her parlor to meet
her guest.

The minister did not stay, but left them together, the younger woman
sobbing on the breast of the older, who bent over and stroked the
troubled head softly.




CHAPTER III.

_JOHN KEENE'S EDUCATION._

"If the world had no mean people, there'd be little use fer kindness,"
remarked Nancy McVeigh to Moore, the operator at the railway junction,
who always enjoyed a smoke and a half-hour chat with his hostess after
his midday meal.  They were discussing the escapades of young John
Keene in the little parlor upstairs, whither Mistress McVeigh had gone
to complete a batch of home-knit socks for her son, Cornelius, who
lived in Chicago.

"I can't understand such a difference in the natures of father and
son," Moore continued, after Nancy's interruption.  "The father starts
life penniless, without education, friends or business training.  He
settles in a locality where the majority of his neighbors find it a
heart-breaking struggle to make ends meet, and amasses a fortune.  Such
a performance in a country where business is brisk and natural
facilities favorable to the manipulations of a clever man would not be
so surprising, but we all know the Monk Road has no gold mines or
streams of commerce to disturb its dreamlike serenity."

A tone of irony pervaded Moore's words, for he was past forty, and had
but a paltry bank account and a living salary to show for his ten
years' sojourn in the place.

"Compare the father's record with that of his son.  The boy is given
all the advantages that money can obtain, and plenty of time for
growth, and he has also the example of his parent.  Why, the lad was
the terror of the school, never out of mischief, and costing his father
a pretty sum to keep him from serious consequences.  Before he was
fifteen he spent his Saturdays carousing with the wildest set in the
town, and incidentally built up a very unenviable reputation.  Then he
was sent to a city college.  Did you hear the rumors that came back of
what he did there?"

"There was some talk," Nancy agreed.

"Talk!  Mistress McVeigh; downright scandal, I should call it!  I know
he was expelled for attending a party at the Principal's own home in an
intoxicated condition, and afterwards fighting with a teacher who
undertook to reprimand him."

Nancy looked up from her knitting, and an amused twinkle was in her
eyes.

"The lad sowed wild oats sure enough, Mr. Moore, and good, tall ones,
with full heads at that, but he's only an image o' his father, in that
old John's recklessness runs to makin' money, and young John's to
spendin'.  It's not that I like bringin' up bygones, but the father was
a bit loose in his day, too.  I can remember, before old John married,
he would come from town takin' the width o' the road fer his path, and
singin' at the top o' his voice something he learnt out o' a Burns'
book o' poetry.  It was the wife that he brought from the city, bless
her good soul, that turned his work into a gold-mine.  She guided him
out o' his evil way and kept him hard at his dealin's from morning till
night.  It'll be the same with young John.  He's spendin' his money
now, and makin' the whole countryside ring with his pranks, but a foine
miss'll spy him out some day, and then his mind'll forget his throat
and dwell on his pocket.  He'll never fail, fer he takes after his
mother in the face, and she was the envy of the people the length o'
the Monk Road, and farther.  It's an old woman I'm gettin' now, an'
I've watched many young men developin' character, an' I'm just a bit o'
a judge.  Ye'll admit I've had a grand opportunity to study their evil
side, and what I don't see is told me by the neighbors; then their good
side turns up after awhile, like a rainbow after a shower.  I find it
takes wise men to be really bad ones, but, after they've learnt their
lesson, they see what a dried-up skeleton an evil life is, and then
it's a race to make up fer their wasted years.  Course, if a fool is
led into idle habits, he must be led out again, and it's doubtful
whether the process is very purifyin'.  But it's different when a man
like John Keene's son sees the error o' his ways.  I tell ye, Mr.
Moore, it's only a question o' time, an' young John'll be as set as his
father, but he'll no be as tight, I'm thinkin'.  He's got his mother's
heart, ye know."

"You have rare assurance in the strength of human nature, Mistress
McVeigh.  Perhaps it is because you're fairly strong in that quarter
yourself," commented Mr. Moore, after he had digested Nancy's crude
philosophy.

A smile crept into the corners of Nancy's mouth at the compliment, and
she let it rest there a few minutes before replying.

"Ye've noticed that young John's a regular visitor at the tavern
lately?" she asked.

"I have."

"Doubtless ye think I'm profitin' mightily with the money he passes
over my bar."

"The gain will do you no good if you are," Moore declared, stoutly.
His hostess was a very plain-spoken woman, and he knew that he could be
equally outspoken and yet incur no disfavor.

Nancy lingered over his remark, carefully revolving its significance in
her mind before attempting to defend herself.

"Tavern-keepin' is a mighty peculiar business, Mr. Moore.  Ye're open
to a lot o' criticism, and sometimes ye know in yer heart it's not
quite fair.  When I was married, my friends thought the inn would be a
foine chance fer us to get along, so McVeigh bought it.  I cooked good
vittals, and waited on table meself in those days, an' times were
brisk, because the railroad was bein' built past our door.  Then
McVeigh died, an' I had to stay by the old place, because I had nowhere
else to go.  'Twas after that people began accusin' me o' fattenin' on
the bones o' their misfortunes.  And d'ye know why?"

Moore remained silent, but his looks were expectant, so Nancy
continued: "Because I was makin' enough money to pay me debts with and
keep a respectable house.  I have always endeavored to give honest
value, and let no man go beyond his means in the spendin'.  Of course,
I must have my trade, fer my expenses are high, seein' that I keep a
few children about me whom nobody else wants, an' I have my Corney to
do fer occasionally, but I never made more'n I could comfortably get
along with.  My interest to John Keene is no such a small item, an' why
should I refuse if the son helps me to pay it with his trade?  It's no
so unjust, ye see.  But, for all that, I have a mother's love for young
John.  Ever since he was ten years old I have carried him into town in
me buggy, wheniver he had a mind to go.  Ye see, he an' me had some
great talks then, an' since he brings all his troubles to me.  While
other people have been blamin' him fer his capers I've been makin' up
my mind whether he will turn into the right again or no."

"And what think you about him now?" questioned Moore, won into a more
conciliatory frame of mind.

"Ye can mark my words, Mr. Moore, the day is not far distant when young
John Keene'll be the most respected man in the country."

Moore laughed doubtfully as he said, "I hope so," and then hurried out,
for it was past the hour when he should be at work.  The day was very
warm, and the sun's rays smote the grey sand of the Monk Road,
reflecting back with trebled intensity.  The traffic had ceased
completely, and the quietness of Nancy McVeigh's tavern was
undisturbed.  Old Donald lay asleep in the haymow above the barn.  Will
Devitt had gone to town early in the morning, and Jennie and Katie
Duncan were over at the cool edge of the lake, which lay a half-mile
down the side road.  Nancy was still sitting in the little parlor, but
her knitting had dropped from her fingers, her eyes were closed, and
her head pillowed against the chair-back.

A sudden noise awakened her, and going to the top of the stairs she saw
two ladies hesitating in the entrance, as if they wished to come in but
were somewhat doubtful of their welcome.  One she recognized as Miss
Sophia Piper, the housekeeper for James Piper, who owned the big house
down the road; the other was a much younger woman and a stranger.

"Come up to my parlor, ladies," she invited, wondering what meant this
unexpected visit.

"Thank you, Mrs. McVeigh," called Miss Piper, and the two of them
ascended the stairs and took the seats which Nancy pushed into the
middle of the room, dusting them carefully with her apron as she did
so.  Miss Piper had shown a kindly feeling to Nancy ever since the
death of her brother Tom, and she addressed the tall, grey-haired woman
before her with a cordiality of manner and a lack of reserve unusual in
her conversations with the commoners of the countryside.

"I hope you are well, Mrs. McVeigh," she began, as she seated herself
comfortably.

"I'm not complainin', miss," Nancy answered.

"I've brought my dear friend Miss Trevor with me because we are both
very anxious to do a little missionary work for the benefit of a mutual
acquaintance whom we are interested in," Miss Piper explained with
winning directness.

"Indade, Miss Piper, an' ye think I can help ye, doubtless."

"Yes, we are sure of it.  It's Mr. Keene that we wish to speak about."

"Ye mean young John, of course," Nancy interrupted, as a smile gathered
slowly over her rugged face.

"Young Mr. Keene, yes.  I was his Sunday-school teacher, years ago, but
since then, I am afraid, I have lost touch with him, until recently,
when Miss Trevor brought him back to my mind."

"It's about his drinking," Miss Piper continued, nervously, as if at a
loss to know how to broach the subject without giving offence.

"Ye come to blame me fer servin' him, I suppose?" Nancy suggested,
without the slightest trace of animosity in her tones.

"We don't blame you, Mrs. McVeigh.  Please do not misunderstand our
intentions.  The fact is, we know you to be--er--different from most
women, and your house is your living, but Mr. Keene is a young man with
an exceptionally bright future, if he will only settle down to it.  I
have heard a great deal about you, Mrs. McVeigh, and I know the
goodness of your heart from the part you took at Brother Tom's death.
We were sure of your co-operation, and that is why we have come to you."

"And what can I do?" Nancy asked, kindly.

"Stop his drinking, please," burst out the younger woman, impetuously,
and then she blushed furiously, while Miss Piper frowned.  Nancy,
however, let the remark pass unnoticed, and asked, with feigned
innocence, "Is he yer young man, Miss Trevor?"

The girl, for she was easily under twenty-one, was more embarrassed
than ever at the keen intuition of the old tavern-keeper, and an
awkward silence ensued, during which Miss Piper vainly tried to say
something to bring the conversation back to more conventional lines.

"Do you love him?" Nancy questioned further, relentless in her desire
to enjoy the privileges of being a confidant in Miss Piper's plans.

Miss Trevor would have answered haughtily enough if it had been an
ordinary acquaintance who thus probed into her secrets, but the strong,
trustful influence of this woman humbled her into a school-girl
demeanor.

"Yes," she answered, simply, and Miss Piper became more uncomfortable.

"Does he know it?" Nancy persisted.

"No,--er--perhaps.  Oh, Mrs. McVeigh, you seem to have taken all my
sense out of me," the girl gasped, helplessly, and covered her crimson
face with her handkerchief.

"I'm glad to know this.  Begging your pardon, Miss Piper, but if you
come to me fer advice I must have more than half-truths.  I've known
Johnny Keene since he was a baby, and it's little good I've to his
credit either, but I'm no sayin' it's not there.  He takes after his
mother, ye know.  He's about run his course, and if Miss Trevor will
take the word of an ould woman, who has learned from long experience,
I'm thinkin' he'll be a good man fer her."

"You think so?" asked Miss Piper, brightening up.

"I'm sure of it, miss; it's in the blood, so it is."

The three women were now on a basis of plain understanding, and the
balance of the conversation was easier and productive of results.
After the two had departed, Nancy sat a long time gazing out of the
window, and pondering the situation which had arisen.  She did not
entertain a doubt as to the ultimate fulfilment of her prophecies, but
she wondered how long.  The afternoon waned into evening, and she had a
grand opportunity to knit and think, which two occupations were her
chief enjoyments.

After supper, the usual company dropped into the bar.  It was the
common meeting-place for gossip and good-fellowship, and during the
early hours Will Devitt did a lively business.  But a curious change
was taking place within Nancy McVeigh.  From her rocker, in the rear
apartment, where she and the girls spent their evenings, she could hear
the loud laughs and talking that passed between her customers, mingled
with the clink of glasses, and the noise was offensive to her.  The
thought repeated itself in her mind, Was the continued harassing of her
teetotaller friends awakening a new phase in her life?  For the first
time, perhaps, since her deceased husband had bought the tavern, her
surrounding's appeared distasteful, and almost sordid.  More than once
she arose and walked into the bar, where her presence was the signal
for doffing of caps and a lowering of voices.  She went for no
particular purpose, and the men who were buying her liquor were
surprised at the frown and curt replies which they received to their
greetings.

"Nancy's in a bad humor," blurted one old fellow, who was a nightly
caller, as she turned her back.  Mistress McVeigh heard the remark, and
it aroused her anger more than she would have cared to admit.  She
retraced her steps, and her glance wandered severely over the
half-dozen men present.

"Ye should be at home with yer wife, Mr. Malone, and not wastin' yer
toime waitin' about my premises fer some one to buy ye a drink," she
said to the man who had spoken.

Malone laughed foolishly, and treated her words as a joke.  He was on
the verge of a maudlin state, and prepared to contest his rights to be
there.

"Another drink, Mr. Devitt, and a glass all round," he blustered,
throwing a piece of silver on to the bar.

"No, Mr. Malone, ye have had yer fill, an' it's no more ye'll git the
night," Nancy insisted.

Malone grumbled a reply, and some of the others took sides with him,
and their demands were aggressively loud.

"I tell ye, it's no more liquor'll be served in this bar to-night,"
Nancy again declared, and stepping from behind, she began a steady
movement towards the door.  The men shot a few irresolute glances at
Will Devitt, but his face gave no encouragement to disobey, and
gradually they dispersed, all but Malone, who had a wish to be
troublesome.  His mutiny was short-lived, however, for Nancy's fingers
suddenly clutched his collar, and she precipitated him on to the
verandah, with scarce an apparent effort.

"I'm not well the night, Will, and the noise hurts my head," she
explained to Will Devitt, as she passed into her sitting-room.

A crunching of wheels sounded from the roadway, and presently a rig
came to a stop in the open sheds.  Boisterous talking ensued, and then
four young men came into the light of the hallway.  They were all well
dressed, and of a different class to the usual run of custom.

"Ho, Mistress McVeigh, a room please, and a few bottles of the best in
your house."  Almost simultaneously Nancy appeared, and a tolerant
smile again hovered in the corners of her mouth.

"Faith, an' are ye back again, John Keene?" she asked.

"I am, most assuredly; who could pass your welcome doorway without
dropping in?" young John answered, laughing.

"It's high time ye quit yer loose ways," Nancy commenced, trying to
frown, but her voice had none of the harshness of her previous
ill-humor.

"No preaching, now, Mistress McVeigh," young John interposed, as he
flung his arm affectionately across her shoulders.

"Ye're always takin' advantage of a poor ould woman," Nancy retorted,
good-naturedly, as she led the way upstairs to the parlor, where Jennie
had already placed a lamp.

"I've a bad head the night, sirs, so I'll be thankful if ye make no
noise," she said, before descending the stairs.

The hours passed quietly enough, and, when it was closing time, she
ordered Will Devitt to lock up the house and blow out the lights.  The
four young men still occupied the parlor, and the steady cadence of
their voices came down to her.  Will Devitt had supplied their order at
the commencement, so that it was unnecessary to give them any further
attention.  It had been the rule for young John Keene and his
companions to stay as long as it pleased them, and, when they had
finished, to let themselves out with a key which he had coaxed out of
the indulgent hostess.  Nancy knew that young John was using her rooms
for gambling purposes.  At first the knowledge disturbed her peace of
mind, and she had determined to speak to him about it, but after mature
consideration, her theory that until his sin had lost its pleasure it
would be only driving him away from under her watchful eye to
interfere, made her decide to wait.

"Sin in the loikes o' young John Keene is the same as a person
sufferin' from the fever, and no remedy can successfully combat its
ravages until the poison has worn itself out," she declared to Jennie,
who had mildly criticised the appearance of the room after a night's
occupation.  The night previous to the call of Miss Piper and her
friend young John had held Nancy in a serious conversation.  From it
she gathered that his conscience was disturbed, for he had made
repeated references to his losses at the game, and vowed that could he
forsake his idle habits without running the gauntlet of his friends'
derision, he would be better pleased with himself.

"'Tis the work of a lady, Mistress McVeigh," he had confessed, and
Nancy went to her bed with a light heart when she heard of it.

Nancy did not retire after Will Devitt had reported everything closed
for the night.  Instead, she went to her room and started a letter to
Corney, her second effort in that direction in three months.  Her
correspondence was one of the sweetest trials of her existence.  She
took weeks of silent reflection between her busy spells to plan out
what she would write before she was satisfied to take up her pen, and
then her trouble began in earnest.  This night it was next to
impossible to compose her thoughts, as young John Keene's affairs had
been thrust before her with startling vividness.  The midnight hour
passed, and still she sat by her little table, with pen lying flat on
the paper and a great daub spreading outward from its point.  Her head
dropped upon her arm, and she was dreaming of Corney.  The disturbance
of the party breaking up in the adjoining room made her eyes open, and
she listened intently, for she had a premonition that she had not seen
the last of them.  The men were talking in low tones, but with evident
suppressed passion.  Presently one spoke up clearly, as if in temper,
and then she heard John Keene laugh, but it was a bitter, mirthless
sound, as he replied, "I tell you, lads, I'm done with you all, so
clear out; and I'll bide here till morning."

"Well, do as you d---- please," the one addressed answered, and then
a scuffling of feet echoed in the passage and went noisily down the
stair.  Nancy waited until they had closed the entrance door behind
them, and then she stole out on tiptoe into the hallway.  The door of
the room which they left was ajar, and the lamp's rays struck out
brightly from it.  She stepped over and looked in cautiously.  As she
expected, young John was still there, seated tightly against the table,
a pile of cards and some stained glasses in front of him.  Something in
his hand, and on which he was bestowing much attention, made her gulp
down a sudden choking sensation.

"Give me that gun, Johnny," she called, softly.

[Illustration: "'Give me that gun, Johnny,' she called, softly."]

"God! how you frightened me!" the young man ejaculated, as he wheeled
around, and then continued shamefacedly: "I was just thinking of my
mother, and wondering if she could see me now, when you spoke.  I
almost thought it was her voice."

Nancy stood over him, her masterful eyes looking into his, and her
great hand reaching outwards.  He laughed recklessly, but he handed her
the weapon.

"Now, Johnny, I want ye to tell me all about it," she said, quietly.

"Mrs. McVeigh, I don't deserve your kindness.  I'm not fit.  But you
are the only person in the world to whom I can turn.  Those cads who
just left me fleece me to my face, and then tell me I'm a fool to let
them do it.  My father has no faith in me.  He never tried to find out
if there was any good in my rotten carcass.  And there is another who
has weighed me in the balance of her judgment and found me sadly
wanting."

"Now, Johnny, it's no like yerself to be talkin' like that.  Haven't I
told ye that yer conscience would rise up and smite ye.  It's yer own
fault that yer frien's are droppin' from ye like rats from a sinkin'
ship.  Yer plan o' life has been wrong, an' yer friends have been a
curse to ye, an' it's only yer manhood and that gal who kin save ye
now."  A fire burned in Nancy's eyes as she gazed at him, and John
Keene felt a thrill of power, as if her strength was eating into his
veins.

"You don't know the worst, Mrs. McVeigh, but I am ready to confess, and
I don't expect you to pity me after I have spoken.  I have cashed a
forged note against my father at the bank for three hundred dollars,
and the money is gone."

Nancy bent near to him and whispered as if telling her unspoken
thoughts, "Ye have done wrong by yer father's money, John!"

The young man put his face in his hands and rocked to and fro for some
minutes, while his body shook with suppressed emotion.  A great joy
surged through Nancy McVeigh's being, and her hand stole lovingly over
his head and rested there.  She knew that the change was upon him, and
if victory came of it, John Keene of the past would be forgotten.

"Johnny, I've a letter from Corney in Chicago, and he says he could
find a place fer just such a man as you.  Ye must take it and work
hard, and the first money ye earn ye must use it to make it right with
your father."

"'Twould be sending me to hell to go there," John replied, looking up:
and then, as if his answer was not as he wished, he was about to speak
again, but Nancy continued in even tones:

"There was a certain young lass--I'll no tell ye her name, but she is
fit fer the best man in the world--came to me to-day and asked me to
speak to ye fer her sake.  Man, ye must be up and doin', fer she loves
ye.  She told me so with her own lips.  Ye can go away fer two years.
It's no time fer youngsters to abide, and when ye have proved yerself,
come back an' she'll be waitin' and proud o' ye."

Young John Keene slowly rose to his feet.  He took Nancy's hand in his
and looked her squarely in the eye.

"You are not joking, Mrs. McVeigh?" he asked.

"As I hope to live, John Keene, I'm tellin' ye the honest truth," she
replied.

"I'll do it," he muttered, hoarsely.

When Nancy went to her bed she gazed awhile at the two photos tacked on
the wall, then at the sleeping face of Katie Duncan.  "I've won him,
thank God!" she murmured, and fell asleep smiling.




CHAPTER IV.

_THE WRECK AT THE JUNCTION._

The widow McVeigh's face was a picture of sobriety, in fact, almost
severity.  The features were conspicuous because of the abrupt falling
in of her cheeks, and her grey eyes were deep set and touched at the
corners by plenteous crowsfeet.  Yet when the world looked at her
casually it saw a smiling countenance.  Some thought her face hard, and
the smile bold rather than a kindly one; others, that she was of coarse
intellect and smiled because she could not appreciate the daily trials
and troubles of the poor.  These opinions were more generally shared by
the good temperance folk of the neighborhood and in the town.  They
only saw a tall, grey-haired woman, standing amidst the surroundings of
a ramshackle inn of the country road, and taking toll from the rougher
classes that passed to and fro.  But had they probed farther into her
life they might have unearthed the beautiful from the clay.

Moore, the operator at the railroad junction, was a patron of Nancy
McVeigh's tavern, of ten years' duration.  He was a quiet fellow, a
plodder at his work, and without great ambitions.  He knew his signals,
the hour when trains were due, the words that the ticker in his little
glass office spoke occasionally, and so far he was valuable to the
Company.  He never had had an accident, and because of his reliability
his employers thought of him once every two or three years and added a
hundred dollars to his salary.  They made no allowance for illness or
holidays, and it was Moore's proudest boast that he had never missed a
day in all that time.  One afternoon the superintendent stopped his car
at the Junction and called the little man into his sanctum.  Moore
chatted with him for an hour or so, and that night his face was radiant
as he smoked a pipe after supper and retold the conversation to Mrs.
McVeigh.  "It will mean higher pay and more responsibility," he
observed, with a self-satisfied smile.

"And they'll make it a reg'lar station, ye say?" Nancy asked.

"That they will, Mrs. McVeigh.  A company of city men are going to buy
a large portion of the point and build on it a summer hotel.  Then the
people will be coming by the hundreds during the hot season, and
there'll be baggage to check, tickets to sell, and a great deal of
extra work.  I am to have assistants, and a young fellow to handle the
key, and I'll be stationmaster.

"Ye'll be gettin' married, surely?" suggested Nancy, with a sly twinkle
in her eye.

"Well, no saying, but it will be a sore trial for me to quit your
board," Moore answered.

"Ye understand I'm becomin' fairly old fer the tavern, and if those
city men build a big house an' put in a big stock of liquors I guess
there'll be no more fightin' about the license."

Moore deprecated any such result, and endeavored to argue Nancy into a
like belief, but in his heart he knew that she was speaking the truth,
and he really felt sorry for her.

From that day Moore began to study his work with greater zeal.
Morning, afternoon and nighttime found him at his post, and the
thoughts of his prospective advancement seemed to worry him.  He grew
thin on it, and also took a severe cold while tramping back and forth
during bad weather.  He would not take time to secure a doctor's
advice, nor would he listen to Nancy when she scolded him for his
neglect.  The summer passed and the first brush of snow had come and
yet he would not give in.  His chief sent a letter explaining that the
planned changes would go into effect the following spring.  The news
only added a glitter to his eye and a stimulant to his anxiety to prove
his worth, but his cough still remained.

"The man'll break down and spoil everythin'," Nancy predicted to a
crowd of gossips in her bar.  Her prophecy came true sooner than she
expected.

Moore received orders to throw the switch over to the sidetrack at the
Junction, so that a work train might leave a few cars of gravel for the
section-men to use the following morning.  This train was due during
the half-hour which he took for his supper at the tavern.  He shifted
the rails ready before leaving, intending to hasten back in plenty of
time to connect the main line over which the No. 4 passenger would pass
about nine o'clock.  It was quite a usual occurrence in his routine of
work, so that the matter did not cost him a second thought.

Nancy noticed the tired look about his eyes as he sat at his meal, and
she determined to talk to him seriously about his health at the first
favorable opportunity.  Out of doors the night was intensely black, and
a drizzling rain added to its inclemency.

"It's just sich a spell o' weather as'll make his cough very much worse
if he don't attend to himself," Nancy told Jennie, her adopted
daughter, as they saw Moore go to his room before setting out for the
Junction.  The tavern settled down to its accustomed quietness, Nancy
and the girls knitting in the kitchen, Will Devitt leaning over the bar
and talking to a few who found it more comfortable there than in the
raw dampness without.  Old Donald was in the stables finishing up, and
a chance wayfarer snored upon the sitting-room lounge.  Katie Duncan
had occasion to go upstairs, and she came down with the startling news
that Mr. Moore had not left his room.

"He'll no git to be the station-master if he continues the likes,"
Nancy remarked, as she ascended to see what was the matter with him.
She found him lying on his bed apparently asleep, so she shook him, in
righteous indignation at his conduct.  A bottle from her bar, standing
on the table, added suspicions to her wrath.  Moore did not respond to
her efforts as a healthy man should.  Instead he turned a sickly white
face to her and groaned.

"Are ye sick?" she asked.

"I must be.  I can't stand up, I'm so weak," he answered faintly.

"Have ye been drinkin'?" Her eyes snapped as she asked the question.

"I've taken a little, because I'm ill, but--  Heavens, woman! what is
the time?" he almost shrieked.

"It's about nine o'clock," she answered.

"Nine," he spoke as if struggling with a failing memory.  "The switch
is wrong, and there's a gravel train on the sidetrack.  God!  Mistress
McVeigh, help me to get up."  He tottered to his feet, groping for the
door like a blind man, and then Nancy caught him in her strong arms and
laid him back on the bed.

"Jennie, Mr. Moore's sick.  Ye'll attend to him," she called, as she
threw a heavy shawl over her head.

If those who doubted Nancy's unselfish heart and courage could have
seen her plodding through the darkness, with the rain pelting down upon
her, and the mud halfway to her knees, they might have forgiven much
that they had believed against her.  She knew the turnings of the
switches and the different tracks, and it was to save Moore from
disgrace, rather than to avert a disaster, that caused her to tax her
old bones to their utmost, as she climbed over the fences and ran
across the fields.  A whistle sounded far over on the town side, and
she was conscious of a dull throbbing in the air.  Foot by foot she
counted her chances, listening to the approaching train and exerting
herself to the limit.  The headlight of the locomotive was glaring at
her as she climbed the sandy embankment of the track, and then, as her
hands closed over the lever, the great machine went thundering by over
the wrong rails.  The engineer evidently had read that the signals were
somewhat amiss, for his air brakes were already screaming, and he was
leaning far out of his cab with his hand shading his eyes.  The sand
cars were a short distance up the track, and the moving train struck
them with a terrific rending of iron and hissing of escaping steam.
The force of the contact was lessened because of the sudden slowing up
of No. 4, but it was sufficient to send two of the passenger coaches
tumbling on to the boggy earth six or eight feet below the track level.
The engine stood still on the rails in a cloud of steam, and the
engineer was out of his cab limping towards Nancy before her mind had
regained its normal conception of things.  His appearance roused her to
instant action.  She made no explanations, nor were any questions asked
of her, but the two of them ran to where the crying of pain-stricken
humanity came from the derailed cars.  A chaos of confusion reigned.
People who were not hurt were shouting hysterically, others were making
efforts to liberate the wounded.  Nancy was strangely cool.  She sent
one to the tavern to summon help, another to the Junction to telegraph
into town for doctors, and then she turned to those in the wreckage.
One after another was extricated from the mass, and as they came before
her on the wet grass, where coats and everything that could be found
were used to lay them upon, she examined their hurts, bound up bleeding
cuts, and did all that her knowledge could suggest.  Soon a crowd from
the neighborhood gathered and they joined in the work, and then the
doctors came.  By this time a second woman was helping by Nancy's side.
The old inn-keeper paused once to see who it was, and nodded in
recognition.

"It's a sad business, Miss Piper," she remarked, huskily.

Soon a long procession slowly wound its way across the fields to the
tavern, men carrying those unable to walk, and the others who were not
so badly hurt leaning on the shoulders of their companions.  Nancy and
Miss Piper went with the first to prepare beds and other necessaries,
and all that night the two women stayed by their grim task.

"You should be a nurse," young Dr. Dodona observed to Sophia Piper,
during a moment's respite.

"I would, gladly, if I had that woman to help me," she answered, and
they both turned to watch Nancy, who was deftly binding a fresh bandage
on the crushed leg of an elderly gentleman who seemed more concerned
over the soiling of his clothes than his wound.

"Are you tired, Mrs. McVeigh?" she asked, kindly.

Nancy only smiled back a reply, and bent her grey head over her patient
again.

Thirteen slightly injured, three seriously, and no deaths, was the
result of the accident, and after a few days everything at the Junction
was as it had been always, excepting that Nancy McVeigh's tavern had
won a new guest and lost an old one.  Moore had recovered from his
attack a few hours after his seizure, and was taken into custody by the
law to stand his trial for wilful neglect of duty, and Mr. Lawrence
Hyden lay in his room with a very impatient temper and a badly crushed
leg.  The Wednesday of the following week was set as the day for
Moore's trial, and Nancy received a summons to appear as a witness.

"I'll do that with pleasure, sure, fer it's meself that's doubtin' the
senses of yon pack o' lawyers.  It's jist capital they are tryin' to
make out o' this affair to injure me in the eyes of the Commissioners,
I'm thinkin'," she said, when the blue paper was handed to her.

The scene in the courtroom was highly interesting to her, and she
wondered, as she listened to the learned talking, how their charge
against Moore could have any foundation.  When her name was called she
was fully prepared to give them all a piece of her mind.

"Now, Mrs. McVeigh, the whole case against Mr. Moore rests on your
testimony.  We want to know from you if the accused was addicted to the
use of liquor," the presiding counsel asked, in suave tones.

"He was not, yer worship," she answered, promptly.

"But one witness states that liquor was found in the accused man's
room, and also that his breath was strongly tainted shortly after the
time of the accident," the counsel continued.

The whole truth of the misunderstanding suddenly came home to Nancy,
and after some bickering between the lawyers, she was allowed to
narrate, in her own homely way, the current of events from the first
time she had noticed the illness coming over Mr. Moore, until she had
stood by the switch watching the train going to destruction.  Every man
in the room had heard somewhat of Nancy's peculiar existence, and they
listened with doubly aroused interest to her simple tale.  Suddenly an
interruption came from a very unexpected quarter.  Moore was swaying
unsteadily, and but for the timely arm of the officer near him, would
have collapsed on the floor.  The court immediately adjourned whilst a
doctor was sent for.

"There'll be no case, Mrs. McVeigh.  It is clear in my mind that the
prisoner is a very sick man and should be sent at once to the hospital.
If I have my way the verdict of this examination will be a testimonial
of some substantial nature to be given to a very generous-hearted old
lady," the counsel said, shaking her hand warmly.

"An' who are ye blarneyin' now, Judge?" Nancy asked, not the least bit
abashed at the learned man's importance.

"A certain Widow McVeigh, of the Monk Road," he answered, laughing.

'Twas a short time after this that ugly rumors of rowdyism were spread
over the countryside, and while matters were at white heat the question
of cancelling Nancy McVeigh's tavern license was again brought before
the Commissioners.  Miss Sophia Piper heard of the complaint, and made
it her business to interview the stout gentleman on the Board with whom
she was on friendly terms.

"You came to me once to urge the abolition of this license, but now you
defend the woman," he said to her, in surprise.

"I know that Mrs. McVeigh is honorable and good, and this report is
being circulated by parties who wish to secure her rights for their own
purposes.  If liquor is to be sold on the Monk Road, then, sir, I can
speak for the whole temperance people of that section.  Let Mrs.
McVeigh have the selling," she answered, pleadingly; and so the license
was extended for another year, as usual.  But Moore did not receive the
appointment as master at the new station of Monk the following spring.




CHAPTER V.

_JENNIE._

Mr. Lawrence Hyden stayed at Nancy McVeigh's tavern on the Monk Road
while his leg, which had received a severe crushing in the railroad
accident at the Junction, healed sufficiently for him to depart for his
home in the city.  During his sojourn the widow McVeigh was ofttimes
sorely tempted to take him out and stand him on his head in the
horse-trough, so cantankerous was he over his enforced idleness.  She
had plenty and to spare of compassion for weaklings, who had not
physical strength such as hers to carry them through troubles, but this
irate old man only annoyed her.  She had not been well herself since
that long night's work in the rain, when half of the passenger train
had toppled into the ditch, and her patience was correspondingly
short-lived.  The doctor who attended Mr. Hyden noticed the weary look
about her eyes, and offered his advice.

"You should go to bed for at least a fortnight," he suggested.

Nancy smiled as she replied: "'Twould be a merry riot, surely, doctor,
if I gave in to my complaints, with noisy customers downstairs and two
cranky patients above."

However, she gave over the attendance on the obdurate old gentleman,
who from force of necessity was her guest, to Jennie, her adopted
daughter.

"If he finds too many faults, Jennie, just leave him a spell without
his food.  That'll teach him to value the fare with a kinder grace,"
she explained.

Contrary to Nancy's expectations, Jennie wrought a wonderful change for
the better in her patient.  Mr. Hyden seemed to form an attachment for
the girl from the very beginning.

"You remind me of someone," he remarked during the first few hours of
her service; and afterwards he would listen to Jennie for a whole
evening while she struggled through some reading matter.  One evening
he told her about a grandchild of his whom he had lost through being
over-harsh with the mother, and his words impressed Jennie so much that
she retailed them to Mistress McVeigh the very next morning.

"It's no unloike yer own mother's troubles," Nancy observed, critically.

"And will ye tell me of them, Granny?" Jennie asked, eagerly, for it
had often been hinted to her that Nancy McVeigh was not her grandmother.

"It's a burden o' sorrow, dear, and not fit for young ears to listen
to," Nancy replied, evasively.  Jennie, however, was not satisfied, and
the next time that Mr. Hyden was in a talkative mood she introduced the
subject to him.  He seemed deeply interested, and promised that he
would endeavor to persuade Mistress McVeigh to divulge her secret.
After Mr. Hyden could hobble from his room to other parts of the house,
a photo of Jennie's, taken when she was a very young child, disappeared
from the upstairs parlor, and Nancy suspected at once that her guest
had taken it.  She told Jennie to look for it when she was cleaning up
his room, and sure enough, she found it amongst a miscellany of papers
and letters which littered his table.  This was enough to rouse Nancy's
ire to a point where an understanding of all grievances up-to-date was
necessary, so she proceeded upstairs, with a sparkle in her eye which
boded ill for the victim of her wrath.  He was in his room, writing,
and without waiting for him to finish, as was her custom, she demanded
the lost photo.

"I have it, Mistress McVeigh.  I meant to put it back in its place, but
it slipped my memory," he stammered, guiltily; and then he asked her,
frankly, "May I keep it?"

"Kape the swate child's picture, the only wan I have, barrin' her own
silf!  Ye have great assurance to ask it!" Nancy exclaimed, though
somewhat mollified at his mild explanation.

"My son married beneath him, and I treated his wife very badly.  They
had one child, a girl, and I have often wished since that I could
discover her whereabouts.  I have a sort of guilty feeling that I was
not exactly honorable in my dealings with my daughter-in-law, and it
has so preyed on my mind that I think every strange child may be hers.
I remember seeing the mother two or three times, and her face peers at
me now when I am in reverie.  A vengeance of fate for a social crime, I
expect," he said, laughing nervously.  Then he continued: "You may
wonder, Mistress McVeigh, why I am telling you this, but your Jennie's
face is that of my son's wife.  It may be the result of long years of
remorse which have created a myth in my brain, but when she comes to
wait on me the likeness is very real.  I hope you will excuse my action
in taking that photo, and perhaps you will sell it."  Mr. Hyden spoke
seriously, lest Nancy should suspect him of subterfuge.

"Sure, sir, ye think it is like yer own flesh and blood?" Nancy
questioned, softly, her eyes filling suddenly.

Mr. Hyden's brow contracted into a frown, and he seemed on the point of
regretting the confidences which he had spoken, but Nancy interrupted
him.

"Jennie is not my own," she said, sadly.

"Not your own!" he ejaculated, pausing in the act of handing back the
photo.  "I knew it, for that child is no more of your family than I am,
even to the eyes of a stranger, begging pardon if I speak too freely."

"Perhaps ye would care fer the story?" Nancy asked, beaming with
renewed friendliness.

"Please tell it, Mistress McVeigh," he answered, eagerly, as he pushed
a chair towards Nancy and seated himself.  Nancy gave herself over to
silent musing for a few minutes, and Mr. Hyden prepared his pipe in the
interval.

"Jennie'll be eighteen come twentieth o' March," Nancy began, then
checked herself while she counted on her fingers.  "No, maybe
nineteen," meditatively.  "Ye see, Mr. Hyden, times on the Monk Road
are so much the same that one fergits the exact date o' things.
Anyhow, it all occurred the year before the railroad was completed
through these parts, fer well I remember takin' Jennie in me arms
across the fields to see the first passenger train go by the Junction,
with her engine all flags, and banners hung the length o' the cars with
mottoes in big red letters on them.  Dan Sullivan, Heaven rest his
soul, was the engineer that day, and fer five years afterwards he took
time fer lunch at the tavern until he was killed up the line
somewheres.  There were a lot o' officials on board that day, too, and
the Superintendent came out o' his car to pat Jennie's head.  He could
not help it, fer the child had a winsome mass o' golden curls, if I do
say it meself."  Nancy paused to sigh, and Mr. Hyden interposed:

"I was on that train, Mistress McVeigh, and I remember the scene, now
you mention it."

"Were ye?" Nancy exclaimed, incredulously.

"To finish about Jennie's comin' to me.  It was the previous year that
they built the bridge over the Narrows a mile or two back from the
Junction.  I had most o' the men stayin' at the tavern, and the likes
o' the business I have never had since.  But I was younger then, and
the work never tired me.  The foreman's name was Green, and he occupied
the big room with the gable window."

"The scamp--er--I beg your pardon, Mistress McVeigh, but I knew that
fellow, and his name wasn't Green," interrupted Mr. Hyden.

"I thought as much, sir," continued Nancy, "for he carried on something
awful with the table help and the girls along the road, and it was just
his way to leave no traces o' his real name behind him.  But he was not
a bad fellow, mind ye.  As liberal in his spendin' as if he couldn't
abide the feelin' o' money, and as nice a gentleman about the house as
any one could wish fer.  He was a handsome chap, too, and lively with
his tongue.  The pick o' the whole countryside was his, and it was the
joke o' the tavern, who'd be his next love.  I was terrible busy at the
time, but I heard the men talkin' at the bar and at their meals, an' I
knew there was scarcely two girls on speakin' terms with each other
over him.  Finally he settled down to courtin' Florence Raeburn, the
daughter of old Silas, who owns the big stock farm on the fourth
concession.  The Raeburns were English, an' they had high notions o'
their position.  The mother was dead, and the three girls managed the
home.  Florence was the youngest, and the other two were older than her
by ten years or more.  Consequently, they thought her a bit flighty,
an' needin' o' some restriction.  They did not let her associate with
any o' the neighbors, an' a great fuss they raised when she made
friends with me while her horse took a drink at the trough when she was
passing.  I pitied the child, fer she had a pretty face, an' big, sad
eyes that seemed to yearn fer companions.  After that, the sisters
drove her in to town to school in the old buggy which their father had
brought from England.  However, she managed to see me quite often, and
I encouraged her, although, mind ye, I never let her know the looseness
o' the ways o' a tavern.  The sisters had the Methodist parson picked
out fer her, an' he, poor man, was fair crazy fer her heart, too, but
she had the givin' o' it herself, and this it was that caused all the
trouble.

"Green, the foreman, spied her talkin' to me on the verandah one day,
an' he came out an' praised her horse--a sure way to win her approval,
fer she was very fond o' the animal.  I believe the young minx had seen
him before, fer she was over-ready to converse with him, an' whin I
left them they were talkin' and laughin' like old friends.  That was
the beginnin', and soon the rumor went about that the foreman had at
last met his match.  She occupied his time so much that the bridge work
was like to suffer, an' I heard that a letter came from the city askin'
about the delay.  The sisters bitterly resented the clandestine
meetings when they heard o' them, an' Florence had a weary time o' it
between their scoldin's and the tongues of envious neighbors, but she
was a wilful child an' liked to have her own way regardless o' their
interferin'.  I was afeard o' the outcome mesel', an' I spoke my mind
freely to Mr. Green.  He resented my words at first, an' then, whin he
saw that I was really anxious, he told me that he loved her an' would
do what was honorable in the matter.  I knew that he was earnin' big
pay, an' was well brought up an' educated, so I tried to convince
meself that he would make Florence a good husband; but I can't abide
people flyin' in the faces o' their families in such matters, an' I
told Florence so one day when she had dropped in fer a drink o'
buttermilk.  She just took my hands in hers, an', lookin' me in the
eye, said, 'Mrs. McVeigh, ye do not understand.  He is a fine, strong
man, an' will take me away to the city, where my sisters can't make my
life a burden.  They are like ye, and doubt the worth o' him, but I
have had more chance than any o' ye to study his character, and I know
that he can make me happy.'  I just couldn't reason with her against
that opinion, so I prayed every night that she wouldn't be
disappointed, and every day I lectured Green about his sinful habits,
an' impressed him with the sweet smile that fortune was beamin' upon
him, and how careful he must be not to shake the maid's faith in him.
'Never fear, Mistress McVeigh, I'm solid forever now,' he answered,
laughing at my seriousness.

"'Twas only a short while afterwards that a telegram came to Green to
go to the city.  He told me o' it with a very grave face, an', says he,
'We must be married to-night, an' I will return in a week, after I have
completed my arrangements in the city.'  I knew he meant it to be a
secret ceremony at my tavern, fer the sisters would niver permit it at
home.  I worried all day long, wonderin' what was my duty in the
matter, one moment ready to go over an' tell the family o' their plans,
an' nixt feelin' guilty at my disloyalty to the brave girl.  The
preacher came, an' they were married that night."

"They were married that night?" interrogated Mr. Hyden, who had been
following Nancy's story intently.

"They were, surely," declared Nancy, positively, as if resenting the
interruption.

"Thank God!" he muttered, as he resumed the smoking of his pipe.

Nancy gazed at him queerly for a few moments, and then continued:
"Green left for the city nixt mornin', an' Florence went back to her
home with my kiss on her lips as a weddin' gift.  A month passed, an' I
was wonderin' why Florence had not been over to see me, an' then Silas
Raeburn came into my tavern in a mighty rage.  'Ye old witch, where's
my girl?' he roared.

"I was so surprised at his words that I didn't know what to say, but I
knew my face was a guilty one to him.

"'Ye have encouraged her in her disobedience against her own family,
and then ye let a drunken rascal steal her from me to crown our
disgrace,' he went on fiercely.  Fer once in my life I stood silent,
too ashamed to answer him, while he heaped words upon me that would be
unfit to repeat in decent company.  He was fair torn with anguish and
temper, an' I let him have his say.  Then, when he was calmer, I told
him all I knew, from the first meetin' o' Florence with the bridge
foreman.  He listened, breathing sort o' sharp, as if my words hurt
him, an' then of a sudden he went white an' tremblin', an' dashed out
into the darkness o' the night.

"I hoped that Florence had met her husband in the city, an' that they
were happy, an' I comforted myself with these reflections, but always
had to fight a doubtin'.  The people talked o' it fer a long while, but
it was a forbidden subject in my house, an' one man went out o' my bar
with more speed than dignity, for mentionin' her name in my hearin'.

"One bitterly cold night in December, a farmer came in from the road
with strange news.  'I found a woman an' child freezin' by the
roadside, an' I just brought them on to ye,' he said.  'Bring them in
an' welcome,' I answered, an' then the woman slipped by him an' was
sobbin' in my arms.

"'Florence, darlin', is it ye?' I asked, with my own feelin's stirred
so that I could scarcely speak.  She pushed me away from her with a
sort o' frenzy, an' she says, 'Ye should not shelter the likes o' me,
whose own people have turned their backs fer the shame o' it.'

"'Ye trust me, surely, darlint,' I answered, takin' her baby from her
arms, an' leadin' the way to the kitchen, where we would be alone, with
a great, cracklin' fire in the stove to sit by.  I gave her food and
comforted her, an' tended the baby, while she told me about hersilf,
with an occasional spell o' cryin' an' a wild, weird expression on her
face that gave me bad dreams fer many a night.

"'He was more than bridge foreman,' she said, 'he was a son o' the
contractor himself, an' when he left for the city, the mornin' after
our marriage, it was to go away to forrin parts, South America or some
other outlandish place.  His father made him do it, fer he was full o'
pride, and wanted no country lass as a wife fer his son.  I stayed at
home as long as I could, an' then my sisters discovered the truth.
They scolded me dreadfully, an' my father threatened to lock me up.
That evening I walked into town, an' took the train fer the city.  I
searched fer two or three days before I learned the true name o' my
husband, an' when I went to his home, which was grander than any
building I had seen before, they told me I was crazy.  I had married a
man named Green, and he was not their son.  I knew that they were
deceivin' me, but I was frightened an' I hurried away.  I struggled fer
a while alone, an' then, when the baby came, a good woman out o' pity
took me in an' kept me till I could go to my work again.  Then his
family heard o' the child an' sent fer me.  When I called, they told me
that they were sorry for me an' wished to help me, although they would
not admit that they were bound by law to do so.  They had secured
permission to place my baby in a home, an' I was glad enough o' the
chance, fer I was afeared that I could never support it myself.  I had
the privilege of seeing her once or twice a week, an' those visits were
the bright spots in my life.  I worked very hard, thinkin' that it
would cure my broken spirit an' the yearnin' which I had fer my child.
But it seemed useless to try, fer my will power was weakened by my
sufferin', so I went over to the home, an' the good people, knowin'
that I was her mother, let me take her out with me for an airin'.  I
just couldn't part with her again, so I went to my rooms, gathered my
clothes into a bundle, and started fer home.  I was sort o' wild then,
an' did not know what I was doing, but now I know that I did wrong, fer
there is no welcome fer me under my father's roof.

"'Will ye keep me fer a week, till I am stronger, Nancy McVeigh?' says
she, 'an' then I'll go back, an' perhaps I'll be more content.'

"I tell ye, Mr. Hyden, my heart bled fer the lass.  The likes o' her
pleadin' with a rough old tavern-keeper fer her very livin'.  'Ye did
right to come home to me, Florence Raeburn.  I'm not ashamed to have ye
here,' I answered her."

Mrs. McVeigh paused in her story to wipe away the tears which were
stealing down the furrows in her cheeks, but Hyden, in a strange, hard
voice, bade her proceed.

"The mother died two weeks afterwards, sir.  I think it was her lungs
that were affected, but never a word of it did I send to Silas Raeburn
or his people.  I could not fergit the sting of the words he had spoken
to me.  I felt that it was my secret, an' when I took the baby from
Florence's arms fer the last time, she smiled and whispered, 'Ye'll no
give Jennie up, Nancy.  Ye'll be a mother to her yersilf?'"

"I am judged!  I am judged!" broke in Mr. Hyden, standing before her,
his features working in a desperate struggle with his emotions.  Then
he spoke with more calmness.  "She is my grandchild," he said.

The days that followed were full of torture for the old keeper of the
inn.  Mr. Hyden wanted to take Jennie back to the city with him to be
educated.  He would do for her all that he could, as the repentance for
his harshness to Jennie's mother was upon him.  He waited day by day,
until Nancy could make up her mind.  Of all Nancy's troubles this was
the sorest, for Jennie had been closer to her than her own son.  Her
years were creeping over her, and she leaned on the young girl for
sympathy and advice.  Yet in her heart she knew that Jennie must go,
and it was her duty to permit it.  Her victory came suddenly, and one
morning saw her face free from clouds, and in their place a glimpse of
her old kindly smile.

"Take her, Mr. Hyden, an' make her a lady, fer the lass is above the
best that I can give her.  You'll let her come to see me sometimes, an'
ye'll promise to be good to her?" she asked, wistfully.  So it was that
Jennie left the old tavern on the Monk Road, jubilant in her innocent
way at the happy prospects which old Nancy painted for her, but when
she was gone Nancy turned to her work again with a heavy heart.




CHAPTER VI.

_NANCY'S PHILOSOPHY._

Nancy McVeigh was in her garden behind the tavern when young John Keene
called on her for the first time since his return from Chicago, after
two years' absence from the homely atmosphere of the Monk Road.

Nancy's garden was a source of great enjoyment to her, and many happy
hours she spent within the enclosure, which old Donald had built so
securely that not even a chick could trespass to harm the sprouting
seeds.  Early spring saw her with tucked-up skirt, a starched
sun-bonnet on her head, and hoe or rake in her hand, availing herself
of every quiet hour in the day to plant and mark out the beds.  Then
followed a ceaseless watchfulness, throughout the hot summer, to
regulate the watering and weeding, interspersed with pleasant
speculation as to the results, and in the later months her well-merited
boastings over her success.

She was picking beans for the dinner, and incidentally noting the
progress of her early vegetables, when Katie Duncan ushered young John
Keene through the tavern to the rear door and into the garden.

"At your old tricks, Mistress McVeigh," the new-comer called, cheerily,
as he advanced with out-stretched hand.

"Well, bless me soul, Johnny!" she exclaimed, rising and kissing him
with motherly blindness to his manly appearance.  "I heard yesterday
that ye had returned.  Mrs. Conors told me, an' she said ye might be
takin' a wife before ye leave.  She's a rare gossip, that body, an'
knows a thing a'most before it happens," Nancy added, in an explanatory
way.

"As if you didn't know that yourself," young John answered, laughing.

"The two years went by so quick like, that I scarce felt the loss o'
ye.  Faith, an' the older one gets the shorter the days, it seems.  The
garden's lookin' promisin'," she observed, inviting his opinion.

"Splendid!" he replied, giving it a hasty scrutiny.

"I've beans, an' radishes, an' new potatoes already, an' the cucumbers
and corn'll be fit to pick in a week," Nancy said, proudly.  Then she
remembered her hospitality.

"We'll go in the house, fer it's not a very clean place fer ye to be
wi' all yer fine clothes."

"I'd rather we just sit down on those two chairs by the porch and have
a good talk," he suggested.  They seated themselves in the shade, for
the morning sun was very warm, and young John lighted a cigar.

"Have ye been doin' well since ye left?" Nancy inquired.

"Aye, Mistress McVeigh.  Corney helped me, you know.  I went to work in
his office the very day of my arrival in Chicago, and, thanks to your
advice, I never allowed my old habits to interfere with my progress."

"Ye didn't think I doubted yer ability to do that?" she asked,
reproachfully.  Then, with a twinkle of humor in her eyes, she added,
"It was yer love fer a certain young lady that kep' ye at it."

"Maybe," he assented, meditatively.

"An' I suppose Corney has a grand place, wi' a desk and books as thick
as a family Bible?"

Young John laughed.  "His office is as big as your house.  He has
twenty desks and a clerk for each one, and a private room, all glass,
and leather-bound furnishings.  I tell you, Mrs. McVeigh, your son has
developed a wonderful business, and you will live to see him a rich
man, too," he remarked, enthusiastically.

"Well, d'ye hear that now, the brains o' him!  I always knew it!" Nancy
ejaculated, with tears of pride glistening for a moment in her eyes.
"It's been in me mind these ten years to go there an' see him.  D'ye
think he'll likely be Mayor o' Chicago?" she asked, wistfully.

Young John quibbled with an easy conscience.  "His chances are as good
as the best of them," he said.  "But tell me about yourself, Nancy.
How have you been keeping?  And have you had any more young men to
reform since I left?" he asked, suddenly changing the subject.

"Oh, barrin' the cold I got whin Moore left the switch open at the
Junction, an' the pain at me heart over losin' Jennie, I'm as fit as
iver," she answered, complacently.  "Ye heard about Jennie's leavin'?"

"Corney read your letter to me," young John replied, sympathetically.

"It was a trial, to be sure, but I'm not complainin'.  It's better fer
the lass, and Katie Duncan helps me a'most as much.  Ye see, Johnny,
I'm goin' to be satisfied in this life, no matter what troubles I meet.
I've plinty o' belongin's, an' a deal o' honest work to do, which
leaves no time fer frettin'.  I've had me ups and downs, an' it seems
I've known all the sorrows o' me neighbors as well as me own, but I
just keep smilin' an' fergittin'.  There's so many bright spots whin
one looks hard fer them.  It's one thing to be wishin' fer somethin' in
the future that never comes, and another to be content wi' the
blessin's that we get every day.  I try fer the last.  Some people, if
they had me tavern, would be wantin' a better house, or a fresh coat o'
paint every year er two.  If they had me garden they'd hope that a good
angel would grow them enough fer themselves and a profit on what they
could sell.  They'd be always envyin' the Raeburns' fine horses, an'
the grand house o' James Piper, an' their servants, and thinkin' the
world was treatin' them unkindly because wishin' wouldn't satisfy their
desires.  But it's me honest pride in makin' the best o' things, and
bein' thankful they're no worse, that keeps me smilin'."

"You are quite a philosopher," observed young John, gazing at her with
the old affection lighting up his features.

"Philosopher or not, I care not a whit, but so long as Nancy McVeigh
runs a tavern on the Monk Road there'll be no lost sunshine," she
declared.

"Father tells me that the city company are building a summer hotel on
the Point, and also that you may have to sell out," young John
remarked, cautiously, lest he hurt the old inn-keeper's feelings.

"Faith, an' he's speakin' the truth, too," Nancy replied quite
unconcernedly, and then she laughed quickly to herself at some
recollection.

"I must tell ye about it, Johnny," she explained.  "When the agent came
up from the city to go over the property, he walks up and down past the
tavern wi' a sheet o' paper in his hand, an' a map, or somethin' o'
that nature.  I went out on the verandah to see if he had lost his way,
an' he comes over an' takes off his hat as politely as if I was the
Queen.

"'Your tavern stands just where we want to put the gateway,' he
remarked, consultin' his paper.

"'Is that so?' says I, my temper suddenly risin', fer I had heard a lot
o' talk about the big hotel an' the driveway fer the carriages, an' the
parks.

"'Of course, we will allow ye a fair price fer yer property when we
need it,' he explained.

"'If ye think yer price'll put a gateway here, ye're sadly mistaken,' I
said.  'Ye can put up yer hotel, an' every drop o' spirits that's sold
in the country can go to ye, an' I'll no complain, but I warn ye that
I've spent thirty-five years gettin' this tavern into my keepin', an'
it'll take forty more to get it out again.'  I jist let him have it
straight, an' then I wint in an' slammed the door to show me contempt
fer the loikes o' him.

"Then, a few days afterwards, two gentlemen called on me, an' they said
they wanted to make a proposition to me, but I just told them to see me
lawyers about it, an' they sort o' fidgitted awhile, an' then they
asked me who I was employin' to look after my interests.  I just bid
them go and find out if they thought it worth while, an' I left them
sittin' there like two bad boys in school," Nancy stopped while she
laughed again, and young John broke in with a question.

"Was my father one of those two men?"

"Now, Johnny, ye needn't be mixin' yer father in the talk at all.  Ye
know he an' I never agreed," Nancy demurred.

"But I want to know for a reason," he persisted.  "You have a
payment--the last, I believe--on the mortgage falling due shortly?" he
inquired.

"I have," she answered, somewhat perplexed.

"Well, my father would like you to miss making that payment, because he
wants to get a commission for securing the sale of your property, and
that would give him a hold on you.  I can appreciate your desire to
stay with the old place, so I would advise you to be early in sending
him this amount.  Can you raise it?" young John asked.

Nancy sat for awhile in mental perturbation, and then somewhat
dubiously answered, "Yes."

"Oh, that just reminds me that Corney bade me give you a hundred
dollars," young John said, hurriedly, his face lighting up.

"Now, John, it's yer wish to help me that's makin' ye talk nonsense,"
Nancy put in, but young John did not heed her.

"You will take the money?" he asked, pleadingly.

Nancy gazed back at her old ramshackle hotel, and then her eyes rested
softly on young John's face.

"You made me promise once, now it's your turn," he continued.

"Ye're not deceivin' me, John?" she said, hesitatingly.

"It's from Corney, sure," he affirmed, handing her the roll of bills.

"It's in me will fer Corney an' the girls, an' it's all I have to leave
them.  I couldn't give it up," she said, brokenly, as she took the
money.

"Faith, it's dinner time, an' I'm sittin' out a-gossipin' when I should
be at work," she announced, springing up.  "Ye'll stay fer dinner,
surely?" she asked of young John.

"I will with pleasure, Nancy," he assented.

Miss Sophia Piper dropped into the tavern during the afternoon.  She
could not help it, for she was full of news, and her aversion to the
premises was fast drifting from her.  In her heart she loved the
strange old woman with the kindly eyes and rugged manner.  Her talk was
all of young John Keene's return, and she confided with happy tears
stealing down her cheeks that his marriage with Miss Trevor would take
place the following week.

"The wedding will take place at our house, and I'm here especially to
ask you to come," she added.

"And what would ye be thinkin' o' me, without fittin' clothes, a-mixin'
wi' all yer foine folk?" Nancy asked.

"You are my friend, Mrs. McVeigh, and your dress will not alter that.
Promise you'll come."

"Well, it's more than loikely I will," Nancy assented.  "I'm thinkin'
o' givin' up the bar and livin' quiet loike fer the rest o' me days,"
she remarked, reflectively.

Sophia Piper's heart gave a bound of delight, and she seized Nancy's
hands in both of hers.

"I'm so glad to hear you say it," she burst out, and then she added,
seriously, "Can you afford it?"

"Ye see," Nancy explained, "I've had a letter from my son Corney, an'
he says he is goin' to make me a steady allowance.  Anyhow, I'm tired
o' the noise o' drunken men and the accusin' glances o' the good folk
that passes.  I've decided that it's not a fittin' occupation fer the
mother o' the future mayor o' Chicago to be sellin' the stuff.  Others
want the license, an' they can have it.  I used to like the servin' o'
the public, but somehow me mind has been changed o' late," she sighed.

When young John Keene and Miss Mary Trevor were made a happy unit the
next week, Nancy was there with a new silk dress, which she and Katie
Duncan had worked long into the previous nights to finish.  Her sweet
old face was radiant with smiles, and when it was all over, and she had
a chance to speak alone to Sophia Piper, she whispered:

"I'm celebratin' doubly, ye see, miss; I've just sold me stock o'
spirits to the summer hotel people and had a big sign put over the bar
door marked 'Privit.'"

"God bless you, Nancy McVeigh," Sophia Piper whispered back.




CHAPTER VII.

_THE STRENGTH OF TEN._

It was the sudden termination of the jingling of sleigh-bells that
caused Nancy McVeigh to look curiously from her window.  People seldom
stopped before the old tavern since the transfer of the license to the
summer hotel back on the lake shore.  At one time it was an odd thing
for anyone to pass without dropping in, if only for a chat or an excuse
to water his horses at the pump trough.  Nancy sighed when she
remembered it, for it had brought much gossip and change into her daily
existence.  When a chance visitor did intrude upon her quietude, his
welcome was assured.  Also she did much of her knitting by the front
window, so that she could catch glimpses of her old customers, even if
she could not speak to them.

On this wintry day in the early January, it was Dr. Dodona, from town,
who tied his horse to a verandah post and rapped briskly at her door.

"It's a real pleasure to see ye, doctor," Nancy exclaimed, as she gave
him admittance.  "Ye must be cold.  I'll just give ye me best chair by
the fire, an' ye can smoke a pipe while ye're tellin' yer errand."

"You're very kind, Mistress McVeigh.  People like yourself make a
doctor's work less arduous," the doctor answered, heartily.

"It's good of ye to say so, doctor, fer it's little demand fer service
ye get out o' me an' mine."

"I'm on my return from James Piper's, down the road.  His two children
are ill with the cold, and I am afraid something more serious may be
expected.  Miss Sophia has them well in hand, and I have left a course
of treatment, but I'm not at all satisfied."

"Did ye recommend goose grease and turpentine?  The winter Jennie had a
bad throat I used them in plenty, an' it's what saved her," Nancy
remarked, sagaciously.

"Well, not exactly those remedies, but they are very good," the doctor
admitted, laughing.  "Miss Sophia bade me tell you about the children,
as you were expecting her to call some day this week," he continued.

Nancy nodded her head understandingly.  "An' what d'ye expect will
develop from their colds?"

"You needn't be frightened, Mistress McVeigh, as your children are all
grown up.  The boy Willie has a very weak throat, and it was terribly
inflamed to-day.  I am quite worried about it."

"It's bad news ye're bringing to-day, doctor, but niver expect trouble.
Maybe they'll change fer the better before mornin'.  Ye'll have some
tea?" she asked suddenly.

"It's putting you to a lot of trouble," the doctor said, reluctantly,
but Nancy was gone before he had finished his sentence.

When the doctor was ready to depart, she asked, anxiously, "Ye'll let
me know how they are tomorrow?"

"Most assuredly," the doctor called from the verandah.

Two or three days followed, and each brought Dr. Dodona to Nancy's door
with a brief message as to the condition of his patients.  His visits
were very short, however, but he remained longer at the Piper
household, and Nancy missed the smile from his face.  She discussed the
trend of affairs with Katie Duncan, who was her only confidant now that
Will Devitt had gone out West because Nancy McVeigh's bar no longer
needed his services, and she was somewhat pessimistic in her remarks.
A week went over, and they only saw Dr. Dodona as his big sorrel mare
drew his cutter over the Monk Road in a whirl of snow.  Then one day he
passed, accompanied by James Piper, and Nancy could endure the suspense
no longer.

"We'll just have an early supper, an' I'll go over an' ask at the
house," she said, decisively, to Katie Duncan.  But a heavy rap at the
door disturbed them at their meal.  Nancy hastened to answer the
summons, for she knew it was the doctor.

"I regret my not keeping to my word, Mistress McVeigh, but I am
travelling fast these days.  I have a lot of sick people to attend to,
and the Pipers are in very bad shape."

Nancy's eyes bespoke her sympathy as he continued: "Willie Piper has
diphtheria.  Little Annie has it also, and to-day Miss Sophia has
broken down.  I'm afraid she is in for it, too."

"Fer land sakes, ye don't say so!" Nancy exclaimed, more to punctuate
his words, so that she could digest their import thoroughly.

"They've got to have a nurse, and at the present moment I don't know
where such a person can be secured," the doctor declared, desperately.

"An' have ye fergotten the blarney ye gave me the night o' the
accident?" Nancy inquired, in a hurt tone.

"You don't mean you will go?" he asked, his face lighting up suddenly.

"An' why not?  Faith, an' I'm fair sick meself stayin' about the house
doin' nothin' but keepin' comfortable; an' my experience with Jennie
will help me.  Old Mrs. Conors is at the p'int of starvation since her
husband died, an' I've been thinkin' o' takin' her in fer company.
I'll just send Katie over the night to tell her to come in the mornin',
so that the child won't be alone."

"I knew that you would help me out of this difficulty, Mistress
McVeigh.  I don't want anything to happen to Miss Sophia, she is such a
great friend of mine."

Nancy was about to speak, then checked herself and looked at him
keenly.  "The wonders o' the world are no dead yit," she ejaculated,
under her breath.

"I took the liberty of mentioning your name to James Piper before I
came here to-day, and he will see that you are well paid for your
work," the doctor added, hurriedly, guessing what was passing in the
mind of the old woman.

"Ye can just tell James Piper I'll have none o' his money.  The very
impudence o' him to offer it!  It's to help the children and Miss
Sophia, an' not fer any consideration o' that sour-faced dragon, that I
go," Nancy flung back her reply in a somewhat scornful manner.

"I'll go now, but will see you there in the morning," Doctor Dodona
called, as he hastened away.

"So that's how the wind blows," Nancy muttered, thoughtfully, as she
watched him depart; then she laughed softly in spite of the bad news.

Mrs. Conors, growing very feeble, was garrulously comfortable before
the fire in Nancy McVeigh's kitchen.  She was in a happy frame of mind,
as her worldly anxieties were now very much a dream of the past.  Nancy
herself, with her strong, resolute face, her kindly eyes and tall gaunt
frame, enrobed in a plain, home-made black dress, was setting things to
rights in the home of James Piper.  Her coming brought order, and a
fearless performance of the doctor's commands.  She was a herald of
fresh hope, and carried into the gloomy house her sense of restful
security.  Her sixty-five years of life, a portion of which was spent
as proprietress of a tavern, wherein the worst element of a rough
countryside disported itself, had given her nerves of steel, and yet
the chords to her heart were tuned to the finest feelings of sympathy.
Sophia Piper felt the glow of her presence as she lay tossing and
moaning in the first grips of the malady.  The children cried less
frequently, and Willie's temperature lowered two points by the doctor's
thermometer after the first day's service of the new nurse.  And yet
Nancy only went about doing the doctor's wishes and whispering to each
in her motherly way.  Her confidence in herself seemed to exert a
pleasing influence with the sick ones, and then she was so strong.  The
hours of night found her wakeful to the slightest noise, yet patient
with their fretful humors, and in the morning she came to them as fresh
as a new flower in spring.

Doctor Dodona noticed the change, and marvelled.  He came morning and
evening, and each time sat a long while by Miss Sophia's bedside.  He
was wondering why he had never guessed something long before, and he
did not suspect that Nancy read him like an open book.  He had known
Sophia for years, had gone to the same school with her, had worked by
her side on committees of the charitable and religious organizations of
the county, and here he was on the verge of confirmed bachelorhood and
only learning the rudiments of love.

"His heart's fair breakin' fer her," was Nancy's muttered comment.

Then came the long night's fight for the life of Annie, the little
daughter of James Piper.  A struggle where only two could join, the
doctor and the Widow McVeigh, as the infectious nature of the disease
forbade any assistance from without.  Annie's illness had taken a very
serious turn just as the doctor arrived on his evening call.  He
studied her case for a long ten minutes, and then he remarked to Nancy,
"It is the crisis."  Nancy smiled, not that his words amused her, but
rather as an expression of her confidence in her powers to hold the
spark of life in the little body.  From then until early dawn they
watched her, the life flickering like a spent torch in the wind.  The
doctor had taken extreme measures to combat the disease, and his
greatest fear was that his efforts to cure might have a contrary effect
by reason of the frailty of the child.  Once he despaired, but, looking
up, caught a momentary glint of steel in Nancy's eyes.  His very fear
that she might detect his weakness compelled him to continue.  For ten
hours she sat with the child on a pillow in her lap, apparently
impassive, yet conscious of the slightest change in the hot, gasping
breathing.  Occasionally the doctor arose and passed into the room
where the others lay, to see that they were not suffering through lack
of attention.  Returning from one of these silent visits, just as the
sun shot its first shafts of light under the window blind, he noted a
change in the little maid.

"She'll live," he declared.

"I've not been doubtin' the fact at all, at all," Nancy responded,
bravely trying to cover her weariness.

From that night both children began to mend rapidly, and more time was
left for the care of the elder patient.  The case of Miss Sophia was
somewhat different.  Her age made it a much more difficult problem to
unseat the poison from her system.  It had committed sad ravages with
her constitution before she had given in, and though Dr. Dodona felt
reasonably certain that he could check the trouble, yet it seemed
doubtful if her strength would sustain the fight.

As the days passed he could see plainly that she was unimproved.  His
professional training told him that, and he threw into the work all the
skill that he possessed.  He suddenly became conscious that he had lost
some of the assurance in himself which had been the backbone of his
former successes, but it took him a short while to comprehend fully his
own incapacity.  As he drove over the miles of snowy road into town,
after an evening at her bedside, the truth became a conviction in his
mind.  His heart was too deeply concerned, and it had shattered his
nerves.

He wired to the city for a specialist before going to his home.  Next
morning he told Nancy McVeigh of his action.  That good old soul fell
in with the idea on the spot, and her comments caused him to turn away
his face in foolish embarrassment.

"It's what I have been expectin' ye to do all along, but I didn't care
to suggest it to ye before, as yer professional pride might not welcome
my interference.  It's her poor, thin face an' her smile that kapes yer
mind from the rale doctorin'.  Ye just git a smart man from the city,
an' it'll do ye both a power o' good," she said.

When he was gone Nancy went to the sick-chamber.

"Are ye able to stand good news?" she inquired.

Miss Sophia turned her face towards her, and smiled encouragingly.

"Surely, if it is really bright and hopeful," she replied, weakly.

"Ye may suppose I'm takin' liberties wi' yer privit concerns, but ye
will learn to fergive me whin ye are well an' the spring is here again
wi' its quiet sunshine, its flowers an' the grass growin' by the
roadside wi' patterns worked in dandelions like a foine carpet."

"I love the spring!" Miss Piper exclaimed, with animation.

It had seemed a wonderful thing to the doctor, the power to rouse the
suffering woman contained in the homely phrases of Nancy McVeigh.

"As if that was all to love," Nancy impatiently returned.  "Did it ever
come right home to yer heart that ye loved a man an' ye didn't
recognize the feelin' fer a long time afterwards.  Fer instance, one
who is makin' piles o' money out o' the ills o' others?" she added,
pausing in her dusting to gaze shrewdly at her friend.

"It's all a riddle to me," Miss Sophia answered, although her words
betrayed a rising interest.

"Aye, a foine riddle, to be sure, an' one that has its answer in the
face of Doctor Dodona."

Sophia Piper's pallid face suddenly changed color, and she frowned
irritably.  Nancy sat down on the foot of the bed and took the sick
woman's hand in her own long, hardened fingers.

"Ye must get well soon, dearie; the doctor's fair beside himself
thinkin' he might lose ye, an' he can scarce compose himself long
enough to mix his own medicines.  He's a lonely man; can't ye see it,
child?"

"Do you think so?" Miss Sophia whispered, wonderingly.

"It's not a matter o' thinkin', it's the rale truth, so it is.  What is
that rhyme I hear the young ones say, 'Somethin' borrowed, somethin'
blue, somethin' old and somethin' new'?  May I be somethin' old at yer
weddin'?" Nancy asked, tenderly.

Miss Sophia drew the old woman's hand to her cheek and kissed it
affectionately.

'Twas after the above conversation that Sophia Piper began to evince a
determined desire to recover her health.

"Will the doctor be here this afternoon?" she asked.

"Ye couldn't kape him away.  He's bringin' a friend wi' him, too,"
Nancy vouchsafed.

"Then you'll please tidy my hair, and have the curtains drawn back from
the windows so that the sun can shine in the room," she ordered,
sweetly.

"An' I'll put some fresh flowers on yer table," Nancy agreed.

The specialist came in the afternoon.  He was a portly man, with
iron-grey hair, clean-shaven face and a habit of emphasizing his
remarks by beating time to them with his spectacles.  He examined the
patient thoroughly, whilst Dr. Dodona stood by deferentially, though
impatiently, awaiting his opinion.  Then they adjourned to another
apartment, and the great man carefully diagnosed the case to his
_confrere_.  "She has been very ill," he admitted, summing up the loose
ends of his notations, "but I see no necessity for a change in your
remedies.

"Do you not see a recent improvement?" he asked, shortly.

Dr. Dodona shrugged his shoulders.  "Since last night, yes."

"Continue as you have been doing.  I will give you a few written
suggestions as to diet and tonic," the specialist explained, and then
he dropped his professional air and slapped his fellow-practitioner
familiarly on the shoulder.

"You were afraid because you have lost your heart as well as your
nerve.  Is that a correct diagnosis?" he asked jovially.

"Evidently you have diagnosed symptoms in the wrong party," Dr. Dodona
answered, drily.

"You had better settle it while I am here," advised the city medical
man, who showed much aptitude for other things than cases of perverse
illness.

"By Jove, I will!" the doctor burst out, and in he went with a rash
disregard of the noise he was making.  He did not heed the warning
"Sh-h!" of the widow McVeigh, so engrossed was he in his mission.

Sophia Piper's face lit up with a glad welcome, and she held her hands
towards her lover in perfect understanding.

"Hivin bless them!  In all me experience I have niver met with such a
love-sick pair before.  They're old enough to be more discreet," Nancy
observed to the specialist, who chatted with her whilst the two were
settling their future happiness.

"And you are a judge of human nature, too?" put in the learned man,
admiringly.

"The older we git the wiser we grow, sometimes," was Nancy's retort.




CHAPTER VIII.

_A DESERTER FROM THE MONK ROAD._

Father Doyle had just stepped from the white heat of an August day on
the Monk Road into the modest parlor of the widow McVeigh.  He was
growing very stout as his years advanced upon him, and trudging through
the dust was warm exercise.  But the sultriness without made the cool
interior of the tavern (for such the people still called the old place,
although Mrs. McVeigh no longer extended hospitality to the public)
more appreciable.  Wild pea vines clambered over the windows, and the
ancient copings protruded outwards far enough to cast a shade, so that
the breeze which entered was freshened and sweetened with a gentle
aroma of many-colored blossoms.

Nancy McVeigh was unburdening a whole week's gossip whilst the priest
helped himself generously to the jug of buttermilk which she had
brought in from her churning.

"I have seen wonderful changes on the Monk Road in my time," he said,
reflectively, in answer to Nancy's observations concerning the summer
hotel on the Point, now filled to overflowing with people seeking
health and pleasure in its picturesque surroundings.

"One would scarcely know the place.  What with grand rigs full o'
chatterin' women and children a-drivin' past the door, and the whole
Point a picture o' lawns an' pretty dresses," sighed Nancy.  "But it
does me heart good to see the brown on the cheeks o' the little 'uns
after they've been here awhile."

"Doubtless you find some trade with them?" the priest surmised.

"Considerable; first in the mornin' it's someone askin' if I have fresh
eggs, then it's milk or butter or home-made bread, and so it keeps
agoin' all day long.  I'm no needin' much o' their money, now that
Corney sends me my allowance once a month as regular as the sun, but
I've still quite a family to support, so I just charge 'em enough to
make them appreciate what they're gettin'.  I've got Mrs. Conors an'
old Donald still on me hands, an' Katie Duncan's at an age whin she
wants a little spendin' fer ribbons and fancy things.  So many foine
people about just pricks the envy o' the child, an' I wouldn't, fer the
sake o' a dollar or two, have her ashamed o' her position.  It's
different from the old days, as ye say, Father Doyle."

"It is that, sure enough," he agreed.

"I'm thinkin' o' takin' a trip," she remarked, with an air of mystery.

"And where are you going?" he asked, in surprise.

"To Chicago," she vouchsafed, proudly.

"Is that not rather far for your old bones?" he inquired, with a merry
twinkle.

"Ye're fergittin', Father Doyle, that I'm only as ould as I feel, an'
that's not beyond a bit o' pleasure an' the sight o' my boy.  It's such
a time since I've seen the lad that I'm most afeared I'll not be
knowin' me own son."

"Tut, tut!  You don't think that.  I'd know a McVeigh anywhere if I met
him," the priest expostulated.

"I've been savin' me odd change these two or three years, an' I've
plinty to pay me way comfortably.  I'm wonderin', though, how the ould
place would git on without me!" Nancy remarked, dubiously.

"Never suffer in the least," the priest affirmed.

"Ye may think so, but whin I've been here day in an' day out since me
hair was as fair as Katie Duncan's, ye can understand it takes a deal
o' courage fer me to trust to others," she retorted.

The priest nodded his head slowly in acquiescence.

Two weeks of laborious calculations and preparations preceded the day
set for Nancy's departure, and during the interval her many friends
discussed the journey so fully with her that her mind was a maze of
conflicting doubts.  But her contumacious nature did not permit a
retreat from her decision, and to make it utterly impossible she went
over to the new station and gave over forty-eight dollars for a ticket.
It seemed a reckless expenditure, but a peep every night at the
photographs on the wall of her room drove the mercenary aspect of it
from her and left her firmly resolved and intensely happy.

The fateful hour came at last, and quite a gathering of familiar faces
was at the station to see her depart.  Father Doyle, Mrs. Jim Bennet
and family, Katie Duncan, Mrs. Conors, old Donald, Dr. Dodona and wife,
the two Piper children and a host of others saw that she was
comfortably established in the big car, much to the evident amusement
of the loitering tourists.  She must have kissed at least twenty people
before the conductor came briskly on the scene and sent them pell-mell
on to the platform.  The whistle shrieked and the train glided slowly
away.  Nancy, a strange figure, with widow's bonnet, bright colored
shawl and face wreathed in smiles, leaned far out of the window, waving
an answer to the shouted farewells.

Mistress McVeigh spent a major portion of the evening in getting
acquainted with her environments.  Her previous ride in the cars had
been her honeymoon, but that was so long ago that she had forgotten
even the sensation.  Its novelty now intruded on her peace of mind, and
she enjoyed it, although it was tiring.  She sat gazing about in silent
contemplation until the lamps had been lighted and the negro porter was
shouting his evening dinner call.  His words reminded her that she had
a basket of good things, so she took off her bonnet, spread her shawl
on the adjacent seat and proceeded to lay out the contents.  Most of
the people in the coach were going forward to the diner, but such
extravagance did not appeal to her.  But she did notice that a very
delicately featured lady, with a small baby and a boy of two or three,
was endeavoring with patient though apparently ineffectual effort to
satisfy the fretful wants of her little ones.  The worried flush in the
young mother's cheek, and the trembling of her lips, roused Nancy's
compassionate nature, and, although she would not have confessed it,
she was lonesome.  To be amongst people unspoken to and unnoticed was a
revelation that had never existed in her tiny world.  She watched the
struggling woman covertly for a short time, while she nibbled at her
lunch, and then she could bear it no longer, so she stepped across the
aisle.

"If ye please, ma'am, I'll take the baby fer a spell, while ye give the
boy his supper," she volunteered.

The lady shot a grateful glance at the queer old body who had accosted
her.

"If you don't mind the bother," she replied, sweetly.

"It's no bother, sure," Nancy declared, emphatically, and her eyes
dwelt over-long on her new acquaintance.  The lady reminded her of
someone, then like a flash it came to her, and she looked again so
persistently that the lady was embarrassed.  It was Jennie's mother she
remembered, the night she came, sick and broken, into the tavern, with
her baby in her arms.

"The poor wee thing's fair excited," she murmured, as she cuddled the
tiny bundle against her breast.

"Won't you take tea with us?" the mother inquired, her face lighting up
at the prospect.

"Ye must just help yerselves from my basket, then," Nancy protested, as
she brought it over.

Mrs. Morris, for such was the lady's name, proved an excellent
travelling companion.  She was not only a splendid conversationalist,
but also she knew how to procure warm tea from the porter.  Soon she
and Nancy were quite at ease with each other, Nancy contributing her
share at the entertaining, with her homely gossip of the Monk Road and
its people.  The baby was her chief solace, however, and its mother
only had it during the midnight hours, so constant a nurse was she.
And the atom itself was tractable beyond its own mother's belief.

The process of making up the beds in the sleeper gave Nancy an
unpleasant half-hour.  She did not admire the masculine performances of
the porter.

"It's no work for an ignorant black man," she informed Mrs. Morris, in
a deprecatory tone.  Then she spoke directly to the negro: "Ye can just
pull down the cover, an' I'll do me own fixin'."

[Illustration: "Ye can just pull down the cover, an' I'll do me own
fixin'."]

"Yes, mum," he answered, grinning, but he did not desist from his
duties.

"He's one of thim furriners, who don't know what ye're sayin', I
suppose," she observed, resignedly.

When the conductor made his last round of the cars, before the lamps
were extinguished, Nancy stopped him and questioned anxiously, "Ye'll
be sure to waken me at Chicago?"

"Why, ma'am, we won't arrive there until tomorrow evening," he answered.

"So ye say, but I'm strange to the run o' trains, an' I don't want to
be goin' miles past the place and niver know it," she objected.

"Never fear, missus, you'll be looked after properly," he said,
consolingly.

The night and day journey to Chicago was so full of pleasant happenings
that Nancy could scarcely realize it was almost over.  With the Morris
baby asleep in her arms, she would gaze from the window at the panorama
of country drifting past, interested in its strangeness only in a
superficial sort of way, while her inmost thoughts pictured the great
city to which she was going, and wherein she expected her son to be the
most predominant figure.  Each hour seemed to be bringing him closer to
her, and a mild yearning centred about her heart.  Occasionally a
twinge of apprehension would mar her tranquillity.  She wondered if he
would know her, and if he had received the postcard which she had
written with so much care a week previous.  She was too conscious of
her happiness to let such thoughts disturb her for long, and then Mrs.
Morris lived in Chicago and had promised to watch over her welfare
until she was safe in Corney's keeping.

The gradual increase in houses clustered into villages along the way
warned her of the near approach to her destination.

"I hope I may see more of ye," she observed to Mrs. Morris, after a
long silence of reflection.

"It's a big city, and you will be very busy," the little lady
explained.  "But I shall never forget your kindness to me.  I should
have been very lonely and tired if you hadn't made friends," she
continued.

"It's been a God's blessin', the knowin' o' ye an' the kiddies," Nancy
assured her.

This simple-minded old body had made a deep inroad into the city
mother's affections, and her joy at the early prospect of meeting her
husband was tempered with a sincere sadness at the parting which it
would entail.

The evening was growing quickly into darkness as they sped along, and
an unusual bustle amongst the other passengers had commenced.  Now that
the hugeness of the outlying districts of Chicago were being unfolded
to Nancy with the long lines of lighted street, and starry streaks of
electric cars flashing by like meteors in a southern sky, she became
aware of a keen sense of fear.  It was all so different from anything
in her past experience.  It seemed as if she had broken ties with
everything familiar except the sweet face of her companion and the two
sleeping children.  The roar of the city had now enveloped the train,
and presently it began to slacken speed, as it had done a score of
times before in the last hour.  The conductor came into the car,
calling out, "Chicago!" and Nancy's heart beat so that it almost choked
her.  The bright glare of the station came down into their window from
the roofs of adjacent trains, and then, before she rightly understood
what was happening, she was out on to the platform with her arms full
of her own and Mrs. Morris' bundles.  A short man detached himself from
a crowd that waited without the gates far in front, and came dashing
towards them.

"It is my husband," Mrs. Morris whispered, breathlessly.  Next moment
she was locked in his arms.  Nancy gazed furtively about, peering at
the faces, and hoping that one might be her son.  After a long
scrutiny, she turned a despairing, helpless face to her late travelling
companion.  Mrs. Morris understood, and came to her rescue quickly.

"You are a stranger in this big city, so you had better come home with
us for to-night," she suggested.

"I wrote him to be waitin' fer me, but he must have forgotten," Nancy
returned, brokenly.

"Yes, you must come, Mrs.--" Mr. Morris began, then hesitated.

"Mrs. McVeigh, from the Monk Road," his wife told him, with a happy
smile.

"The Monk Road, where is that, pray?" Mr. Morris asked, in puzzled
tones.

"D'ye not know that?" Nancy exclaimed, incredulously.

The man shook his head.

She considered awhile, then made a gesture of utter helplessness.  She
knew no adequate description of the geographical position of her home.
It was just the Monk Road, running from an indefinite somewhere to an
equally mysterious ending, and anyone who did not know that was lacking
in their education.  They threaded their way through the press of
people to the narrow street, and entered a cab.  Then, while the
husband and wife talked in subdued tones, Nancy listened to the babel
of clanging gongs and footsteps of many people on the pavements over
which they were passing.  She suddenly bethought herself of questioning
Mr. Morris as to his knowledge of her son Cornelius.  His answer was as
perplexing as everything else she had encountered in that strange new
world.  He had never heard of him.  Fortunately she had a business card
of her son's firm, and after much cogitation Mr. Morris decided that he
could find the establishment in the morning.

Nancy secured a much-needed night's rest at the home of the Morris
family, and was up and had the kettle boiling on the range before the
appearance of the household.

"I'd no enjoy the day at all if I wasn't doin' somethin' o' the sort!
An' ye're tired," she responded to Mr. Morris' surprised ejaculation.
She had to curb her anxiety to be off until after the noon hour, and
then, with a promise to return, if her plans miscarried, she was
piloted aboard the Overhead by Mr. Morris.

"I'll drop you off in front of the block in which your son's offices
are situated," he informed her by the way.  The run through the city
was perhaps a distance of four miles, and while Nancy gazed in
open-mouthed wonder, the little man pointed out to her the places of
note along the route.

"It's all just wonderful," was the text of her replies.

They drew up at a little station, and from it descended to the
pavement, and at a great door in a block that made her neck ache to see
its top, he left her, with a list of directions that only served to
shatter the remnant of location which her mind contained.  She looked
uncertainly about her until her eyes rested on the sign, "Beware of
Pickpockets!" then she clutched her old leathern wallet, and with
frightened glances hurried inside.  But here a second labyrinth opened
to her.  A glass door led into a very spacious apartment, where a
number of men were counting money in little iron cages.  She boldly
marched in and asked the nearest one, "Please, sir, is this Cornelius
McVeigh's office?"  The man addressed stopped his counting and scowled
at her, but something in her wrinkled, serious face caused him to
relent of his churlishness.

"A moment, ma'am," he replied.

Next instant he was by her side, and very gallantly led her to the
outer hall and over to the elevator man.  That Mecca of information
scratched his head before venturing to assist them, then he hazarded,
briskly, "Fifth floor, No. 682."

"If that's wrong, come back," the young man said, kindly, as he left
her.

The elevator drew her up almost before she could catch her breath, and
landed her on the fifth floor.  The man pointed along a hallway, and
she followed this until a name in big gilt letters arrested her
attention and caused her heart to flutter spasmodically.  "Cornelius
McVeigh--Investments," it read.  And this was really her son's
Eldorado!  A mist crept over her eyes as she turned the brass knob and
entered.  A score of young men and women were before her, busily
engaged at desks, writing and sorting over papers.  Beyond them, other
doors led to inner offices, and from some invisible quarter a peculiar
clicking cast a disturbing influence.  Whilst she was taking it in, in
great sweeping glances, a small boy stepped saucily up and demanded her
wishes.

"I'm Mistress McVeigh, o' the Monk Road, an' I've come to see
Cornelius," she told him.

The boy looked at her, whistled over his shoulder and grimaced.

"What yer givin' us, missus?" he asked.

"I'll have ye understand I'll take no impudence," she retorted,
wrathfully, shaking her parasol handle at him.

"If yer wants the boss, he's out," he informed her, with more civility.

"Is there anything I can do?" a young lady asked, coming over to her
from her desk.

"It's just Mister McVeigh that I want to see.  I'm his mother," Nancy
replied, simply.

"You are his mother!" the girl exclaimed, doubtfully.

"That I am," Nancy declared, emphatically.

"Mr. McVeigh is out of the city, but Mr. Keene is here.  Will he do?"
she again questioned.

At this juncture someone stepped briskly from an inner room, and then a
man dashed impetuously across the general office, scattering books and
clerks in his eagerness, and crying, "Why, it's Mrs. McVeigh!" as he
caught her gaunt body in his arms.

"Johnny, me lad, is it yerself?" she gasped, after he had desisted from
his attempts to smother her.

Young John Keene held Nancy's hand within his own whilst he showed her
everything of interest in the office, for the mother loved it all
because it was her son's.  The clerks were courteous and attentive, and
the girls fell in love with the quaint old lady on the spot.

"It's fer all the world like a school," she murmured in young John's
ear.

"And I'm the big boy," he answered, laughing.

A telegram searched the far corners of Mexico that afternoon, and at an
unheard-of place, with an unpronounceable name, it found Cornelius
McVeigh, the centre of a group of gentlemen.  The party had just
emerged from the yawning mouth of a mine, and were resting in the
sunshine and expelling the foul air from their lungs, whilst the young
promoter of the western metropolis was explaining, from a sheet of
paper covered with figures, the cost of base metal to the producer.
The mine foreman suddenly interrupted his remarks with a yellow
envelope, which he thrust respectfully forward.  "A telegram, sir," he
said, and withdrew.  The array of men sighed gratefully at the respite,
and Cornelius McVeigh hastily scanned the message.

"Your mother in Chicago, much disappointed at your absence.  When may
we expect you?" so it read.

The young man folded it carefully, put it into his pocket and continued
his discourse, but his words were losing their pointedness, and he was
occasionally absent-minded.

"It's dinner-time.  I move an adjournment to the hotel," one of the
grey-haired capitalists suggested, and, with scant dignity for men of
such giant interests, they hurried to take advantage of the break in
the negotiations.  Cornelius McVeigh did not go in to lunch, but
strolled the length of the verandah for a full hour, absorbed in
thought, then with characteristic energy he hastened to the little
telegraph room and wrote a reply to his home office:

"Will close a great deal if I stay.  Cannot leave for a week at least.
Persuade mother to wait."

He then walked to the smoking apartments, where his late associates
were trying to forget business.

"I am ready, gentlemen," he observed, in his crisp, convincing manner
of speech.

Young John Keene handed the message to the Widow McVeigh.  He knew it
would hurt, and his arm stole about her shoulders as it did when he was
the scamp of the Monk Road gossip.

"I'm tired o' this great noisy city," she faltered, after she had
studied the message a long time.  "I'm no feelin' meself at all, at
all, an' my head hurts.  I must be goin' home."

"You shall stay with me, Nancy.  Corney will be back in ten days at the
least.  My wife wishes it, as well as myself, and we want you to see
our little Nancy.  That's our baby," he said, in lower tones.

Nancy gazed at the hurrying people on the hot pavements below, at the
buildings that shot upwards past her line of vision, at the countless
windows and tangled wires; then she turned to young John and he knew
that she had seen none of them.

"I'll try, Johnny," she answered.

The days that followed were battles with weariness to Nancy McVeigh.
She did not complain, but her silence only aggravated the loneliness
which had crept into her soul.  Young John Keene talked to her, amused
her, cajoled her, pleaded with her, and yet her mood was impenetrable.
Even tiny Nancy Keene's dimpled fingers could not take away the strange
unrest in her eyes.  Then, when the ten days had elapsed, a second
message came: "Kiss mother and tell her to wait.  Can't return for
another week.  Am writing."  Nancy read it and cried; not weakly, like
a woman, but with harsh, dry sobs.

"I'll be goin' home in the mornin'," she said, firmly.

The train took her away in the damp, sunless early hours, when the city
was just awakening.

"She's crazed with homesickness," young John's wife confided to her
husband, in a hushed, sad voice.

The way home was long, and Nancy chafed at the slowness of the express.
So long as it was light she watched from the car window, and not till
the pleasant quiet of the vicinity of Monk Road was reached did the
gloom-cloud rise from her face.  Her heart seemed to beat free once
more, and her eyes were full of tears, but they were tears of
happiness.  She left the train at Monk, and the first person to greet
her was Father Doyle, who by chance was at the station.  He read a tale
of disappointment in his old friend's appearance, and he remarked,
sympathetically, "You are looking thin and tired, Mistress McVeigh."

"It's a weary day, sure enough," she admitted.  The two walked side by
side, the stout priest carrying her heaviest travelling bags, until
they came to the road which the summer hotel management had built in a
direct line from the station to their gate, and here Nancy stopped
abruptly.

"Well, if the old tavern isn't right over there, just as I left it,"
she ejaculated, and a smile broke over her countenance the like of
which it had not known for days past.




CHAPTER IX.

_THE KERRY DANCERS._

Nancy McVeigh treasured her disappointment over the visit to Chicago
for many months, but only Katie Duncan and those who saw her daily knew
of it.  She was not the strong, self-reliant Nancy whom people had so
long associated with the ramshackle inn of Monk Road.  But her smile
grew sweeter and her sympathies ran riot on every side where little
troubles beset her less fortunate neighbors.  Her mind turned oftener
to the church which stood on the side-road, beyond the home of Father
Doyle, and her influence for a better life was remarkable with the
younger generation.  The stormy period of her own existence was past,
and like a silvery rivulet twinkling in the sun at the mountain crest,
speeding downward until it roars and foams in an angry cataract, then
emerging into the cool, placid stream, lazily flowing past the village
cottages and on through the silent woodland, she had reached a stage
where only goodness and friendship mattered.

Her great neighbor, the summer hotel proprietor, was perhaps the
solitary person who did not understand her.  In vain he waited
patiently, as the seasons opened and closed, for her to accede to his
importunities to sell her property.  There the old inn stood, a blot
within the terraced grounds and clean-cut park, unsightly to his eyes,
and the humorous butt of his patrons.  But Nancy had made her plans
when the new order of things was first suggested, and she turned her
rugged face to the sandy Monk Road and held her peace.

Cornelius, her son, had written her often and voluminously since her
trip southwards.  He had also made a definite promise that he would
come home the very next summer.  'Twas this that brightened her eyes
and put a lightness into her step.  It also provided a subject of
constant conversation between herself and Katie Duncan.  Together they
would count out the months and weeks and days to the time when he
should arrive.

"The lad's worried, so he is, an' he wants to see his ould mother, in
spoite o' his foine clothes an' his dealin's," she repeated, during
those happy confidences.

Although Nancy had abandoned the public service, yet hers was no
humdrum existence.  She still had duties to perform which occupied her
thoughts from daylight to dusk.  She frequently visited the Dodonas,
who lived in the big Piper house.  And the Piper children played about
her front door, much as her own son and Johnny Keene had done so many
years before.  Other children, too, found the vicinity of the widow
McVeigh's a very tempting resort, and their parents were well
satisfied, for they had learned to love and respect the white-haired
woman who chose to be their guardian.

"I'll niver get enough o' the dears," she would say to the mothers, and
they quite believed her.

In the winter of the following year Will Devitt came home from the
North-West.  He had been absent three years, and during that time had
secured a grant of land.  He boasted of his possessions to his
foster-mother, and she was almost as proud of them as he was himself.

"It's a grand country, sure, this Canada of ours, an' were I younger
I'd go back wi' ye, Will.  D'ye think we could find business fer a
tavern?" she asked him one day.

"You would just make your fortune," Will responded, enthusiastically.

Nancy smiled and shook her head.

"I'm only talkin' like a silly ould woman, laddie.  In the first place,
I'm no fit to run a tavern, an' in the second, it's no fittin'
occupation fer the loikes o' me."

Will had been home a short while when Nancy's suspicions were aroused,
and being unable to lay them bare to Katie Duncan, she told them to
Mrs. Doctor Dodona.

"There's somethin' mysterious in the behavior o' the young folk," she
confided.  "I'm uncommon versed in the language of sighs an' tender
looks, an' it's comin' to somethin' before long."

"You don't mean that Will Devitt is in love?" the doctor's wife asked,
in mild surprise.

"I'm afeard it's just that," Nancy admitted, regretfully.

"And with whom, pray?"

Nancy bent forward and whispered in her ear.

"Your Katie!" Sophia Dodona exclaimed.

Nancy nodded, and they both laughed.

Nancy knew instinctively that her two foster-children had something
they wished to say to her, and she purposely kept them at arm's length,
whilst she enjoyed their discomfiture.

"It's rare fun," she told Sophia.

Will Devitt was becoming desperate, for he must soon get himself back
to his prairie farm.  So, after a lengthy twilight consultation with
his heart's desire, he came tramping awkwardly into the presence of the
widow McVeigh.

"Ye're lookin' serious the night," she greeted, as she paused with her
knitting.

"I'm feeling that way, too," he conceded, sighing.

"Maybe ye're thinkin' o' the closeness o' yer leavin'?" she questioned.

"It's partly that," he admitted, sheepishly.

"Only partly, ye say.  Fer shame, to let anythin' else be a part o'
such thoughts," she observed, somewhat severely.

"Now, granny, it is no use you being cross with me.  I'm full of love
for you and the old place, and you know it," he expostulated.  "There's
something else, all the same," he continued, with a forlorn pleading in
his voice.

"Then ye had better out wi' it, lad," she replied, giving him her whole
attention.

"It's about our Kate," he commenced.

"I thought as much.  Ye go away an' get a plot o' land somewhere, an' a
bit o' a cabin, an' then ye come back pretendin' it was yer love fer
yer poor granny.  But ye had other plans, which ye wouldn't tell till
ye were driven to it," Nancy interrupted, with a strange lack of
sympathy.

Her words aroused Will's latent passion, and drove him to a confession,
regardless of consequences.

"Katie an' I have been lovin' each other fer years, in fact, ever since
we were children.  We made it up then that we should marry some day.
When I went West it was to earn enough money to buy a home fer us.
I've got a farm now, an' I can keep her.  We've talked it over every
night fer a month, an' she's willin' to go if ye will give yer
consent," he burst out, earnestly.

Mistress McVeigh listened in silence, rocking her chair to and fro.  As
the night became darker only her outline was visible to the youth, who
poured into her ears his love story with an unfettered tongue.  He
talked rapidly of his plans, his chances and his faith in his ability
to maintain Katie Duncan as comfortably as she had been at the tavern.
When he had finished, Nancy called sharply to Katie, whom she rightly
guessed was not far away, to fetch a lamp.  Katie obeyed with
commendable alacrity, and deposited it on the table.  She had never
seemed so grown-up and pretty to her foster-parent as she did at that
moment.

"Katie," began Nancy, with ominous slowness, "Will has been tellin' me
that ye have been courtin' under me very nose.  Do ye love him truly,
lass?"

"Yes, granny," the girl answered, almost defiantly.

"God bless ye, children.  The sooner ye're married, then, the better,"
Nancy exclaimed, and she drew them both to her and kissed them again
and again.

It was a real old-fashioned country dance that followed the wedding of
Katie Duncan and Will Devitt.  The ceremony was performed by Father
Doyle in the early morning, and all afternoon the preparations for the
evening were being rushed to completion with tireless energy.

"Katie's the last o' my children, an' I'll give her a fittin'
send-off," Nancy explained to Sophia Dodona, and her words were not
idly spoken.

The doctor's wife was in the kitchen, superintending the baking.  As a
result, such an array of good things to eat had never before graced the
modest board.  The task of decorating was in the care of Will Devitt
and his bride, and a gay dress they were putting on the interior of
their old home.  Flags were draped over the walls, evergreens fastened
to cover the door and window-tops, and flowers from the Piper
conservatory were placed wherever space would permit.  Nancy had no
especial work, so she assumed the _role_ of general advisor and final
court of appeal.  Such a concourse of guests had been invited that it
was doubtful if the accommodation was sufficient.  But, as Will Devitt
suggested, they danced closer together nowadays, so that the room
required would not be so much.

By eight o'clock the merry sleigh-bells were jingling over the Monk
Road.  Boys and girls, some older than the term would imply, were
tumbling out of the robes in the glare of the big tin lamp, hung to the
gable end, which Nancy had borrowed from the church gate.  The fiddlers
arrived early, and after a warm at the hall stove, began tuning up on
the improvised platform at the end of the parlor.  The floor manager, a
tall young Irishman named O'Connell, raised his voice above the babel
of talking and laughing, and proclaimed the opening number.

"Partners fer the Lancers!" he shouted.

A hush ensued, and Sophia Dodona and her staff came from the kitchen to
see the start off.

"No, doctor, I'm too ould," Nancy was saying to Dr. Dodona, who wished
to set the pace for the younger guests.  But her words did not ring
true, and amidst the hearty plaudits of the rest she took the doctor's
arm.  The others fell in line as if by magic, and then the fiddles
began with vim.  Oh, how they danced!  Everyone, old and
young--quadrilles, reels, polkas, Irish Washerwoman, Old Dan Tucker,
and all.  Even Mrs. Conors, after much persuasion, did a jig as it was
performed "whin I was a gal in ould Ireland," and Patrick Flynn, the
aspiring County Member, was her partner.  How the old tavern creaked
and groaned with the unusual tax upon its timbers, and how bright the
windows looked from every side of the rambling edifice!  When midnight
was past the tables were set in the bar-room of ancient times, and the
cleverest productions of Sophia Dodona disappeared like snow before an
April sun.  As Dr. Dodona remarked afterwards to his wife, "'Twould be
a round century of health to the bride and groom should the wishes of
the feasters be realized."

When it was all over, and the last "Good-night" had passed the
threshold, Nancy went to her room.  She sat a long while, resting in
her big rocking-chair and reflecting on the changes in the future which
the day had meant for her.  Her eyes gradually centred on her
photographs of Cornelius, and her face immediately brightened.

"Heigho," she sighed, "it's no my religion to worry."




CHAPTER X.

_THE HOME-COMING OF CORNELIUS McVEIGH._

Cornelius McVeigh sat in his private office, thinking.  A telegram lay
open before him on the desk, and its contents had all to do with the
brown study into which he had fallen.  Presently his senior clerk
appeared in answer to a summons he had given a moment before.

"John, I'm going home for a holiday," he said.

Young John Keene's face brightened perceptibly at the announcement.

"It's the right thing to do, Corney, and the trip will do you a world
of good," he replied, with a familiarity which business rules could not
overcome.

"I must go at once.  You see, I've a telegram.  Perhaps you would care
to read it," Cornelius McVeigh continued, moodily.

Young John took up the missive and read it aloud: "Come home at once.
Mother seriously ill.--Dodona."  He looked up to find his employer's
eyes searching his face anxiously.

"You will go at once, Corney?" he said, quietly, but with a note of
challenge.

"The train leaves at noon.  Help me to pack up, John," the other
answered.

The Tourist Express stopped at The Narrows for half an hour just at
lunch time.  The Narrows was a pretty place.  The peninsula jutting
from either way, separated only by a shallow strait, was spanned by the
railroad bridge.  The station formed a centre at one end to a thickly
settled district of summer cottages, and quite close by stood two
rather pretentious hotels.  East and west the glistening surface of the
lakes, dotted with islands, spread out like two great sheets of chased
silver.  Out beyond, the white trail of the sandy Monk Road zigzagged
until it was lost in the trees.  'Twas a half-hour well spent to lounge
about the platform and take in the grandeur of the landscape.

The usual crowd of gaily dressed humanity was waiting for the train,
surging about it as the passengers alighted.

Cornelius McVeigh stepped from the parlor car and looked at his watch
irritably.  Thirty minutes seemed an age to his impatient mind, and the
richly upholstered car was too confining for him to think properly.  To
the outward eye he was the Cornelius McVeigh of the city, tall, of
military bearing and faultlessly attired, who gave his fellow-beings
the privilege of calling at his office between the hours of ten and
four each business day, that they might lay before his highly trained
faculties their little monetary affairs, and also the fee which his
wide reputation for successful manipulating could demand.  He moved
only until he was free of the people, then paused whilst his gaze
shifted from his late companions to the station and on to the dim,
sunny, leafy country beyond.  Disappointment lurked in the corners of
his eyes and gradually spread over his entire countenance.  Suddenly he
realized that it was exceedingly warm on the unsheltered platform.  He
wished to think quietly, so he shifted his raincoat to his other arm
and sought a shaded place against the railing.  His mind was struggling
in a vortex of ancient history, and this was the picture which arose
from the strife.  A very commonplace, bare-legged lad, with curly,
uncombed hair and face so freckled that a few yards' distance merged
them into one complete shade of reddish brown.  He surveyed the
neighboring bridge, and it came into his mental vision unconsciously.
The long, lean girders he had once trod with the careless ease of a
Blondin.  Farther out, the rotting tops of the piles of the old
foot-bridge had been his seat from which he caught the crafty pickerel.
Beyond, the opening in the shore reeds marked the passage to the secret
feeding-ground of the black bass.  He remembered it perfectly.  A
fleeting sarcastic smile dwelt on his deeply-lined features as he
watched a number of boats, filled with noisy, gesticulating campers,
who fished in the open water where no fish lived.  A small lad,
certainly a native of the place, dressed in knee trousers and a shirt
which let in the air in places, was holding high carnival with the
nerves of the onlookers.  He was performing daring feats on the
trestle-work of the bridge.  Suddenly, accidentally, or maybe
purposely, the expected catastrophe occurred, and he plunged head
foremost into the running water twenty feet below.  A chorus of
feminine shrieks greeted the termination of his exploits, but his
grinning face as he reappeared, treading water and rubbing his eyes,
turned their consternation into laughter.  Then, with a final howl of
boyish delight, he struck out for the nearest pier.

Cornelius McVeigh awoke from his reverie as the express began to move.
He swung aboard and proceeded to gather his baggage together.  He had
scarcely finished when the train slowed up at the end of his journey.
He stepped out with a feeling of expectation.  Home at last!  The
thought was predominant, and he let it sway him with a selfish
disregard to other influences.  Everything had changed during his
twenty years of absence; and the strangeness broke in upon him as if in
condemnation.  Here again was the chattering, light-hearted throng, and
their presence only added additional pangs.  Not a familiar face to
greet him.  Even the fields and woodlands had a different aspect.  All
the success of the past decade, which had given wealth and a recognized
place in the world of business, could not wipe out the impression of a
youth of dreamy idleness and simplicity.  Where he had hunted rabbits
and slept under a tent of tattered carpet during the warm summer nights
stood a gaudily-painted hotel, flanked with wide verandahs and terraced
lawns.  And all about were people, in hammocks, on chairs or rustic
seats, or wandering about enjoying the cool freshness of the lake
breezes.  He hurried along the wide newly-cut road which led from the
station.  At the high wire gate, erected so recently that the sods from
the post-holes were yet green, he stopped.  The successive changes of
the place were so startling to him that he wished to contemplate them
more slowly.  It was an ideal spot and filled the soul with pleasurable
anticipation.  The children played on the grass, and the hotel
employees sang as they dawdled by in pursuit of their duties.
Everything bespoke luxury and ease.  In the entrance doorway of the
hotel stood a stout man, probably the proprietor.  He was looking from
under his hand in a speculative way at the stranger by his gate.
Cornelius saw these things mechanically.  Then, as his eyes passed from
one point to another, his mother's tavern came within the circle of his
vision.  He looked no farther.  There it stood, the oddest, drollest
structure that ever marred so perfect a landscape.  Its weather-beaten
shingles curled to the sky.  Its cracked chimneys and protruding gable
leaned towards the roadway, and every board was rusted to a natural
paintless hue.  The pump stood apart, the trough green with moss and
the handle pointing outwards threateningly, like a grim sentry guarding
against the curious passers-by.  A grove of trees generously shaded the
rear porch, and beyond them, behind the high fence, he knew, was the
garden.  The log barn, with its plastered chinks, had not altered a
particle, and the cow might have been the same one he had milked, so
like her she appeared as she munched at the trailing wisps of hay
hanging from the loft.  The outspoken cackle of hens also added to the
rustic environments.  It filled his heart with gladness to see the old
place, but it was not complete.  The quaintest figure of all was
missing--his mother, tall and white-headed, standing on the verandah
watching down the road for his return.  Something was hanging to the
soiled brass knob of the front door, and as he approached he saw that
it was a streamer of black crepe.  His heart, which for twenty long
years had thrilled only to the hard-won successes of a self-made man,
beat with a sudden passionate fear, and a tear stole out upon his
cheek.  A new-born awkwardness grappled with him as he stumbled along
the roadway.  Somehow he saw a pair of dirty, sun-scorched feet encased
in his shining leather shoes.  The languid eyes of the hotel guests
followed him, and some wondered as to the nature of his errand.
Arriving at the door, he knocked lightly.  An old woman, with
dishevelled grey hair and shoulders enveloped in a bright homespun
shawl, answered his summons and shrilly demanded what he wanted.

"Is it Mrs. Conors?" he asked, scrutinizing her face earnestly.  She
turned with a look of open-mouthed wonder upon him, and hesitated
before speaking, so he continued:

"Have you forgotten Corney?"  He trembled with a vague fear, and the
old woman's failing memory smote him painfully.

"Be ye Corney McVeigh?  A-comin' home to see yer poor dead mammy, an'
ye the ounly boy she had?  But surely Corney wouldn't have sich foine
clothes.  I can scarcely believe ye," she muttered, doubtingly.

"Dead!  Mother dead!" he ejaculated, passing his hand across his
forehead.  He swayed a moment as if struck, and then he answered, with
forced calmness:

"Yes, Mrs. Conors, I am Corney, and I want to see my mother.  I've been
coming home these many years, but something always turned up to spoil
my plans.  I knew the money I sent her every month was sufficient to
keep her in comfort, but I didn't think it would be like this--not like
this!"

Corney McVeigh stepped across the ancient threshold and gazed long and
searchingly at the face in the darkened parlor; a face seamed and thin
with toil and worry, yet infinitely sweet and motherlike to the
world-lost man who choked back the tears as he felt again that almost
forgotten child-love.

Mrs. Conors broke the silence.

"I put her ould spinning-wheel there in the corner, where she could see
it 'fore she went.  Those socks on the table was her last work fer ye,
Corney.  She said to keep yer father's pictur' an' hers togither in the
album.  I was also tould to warn ye 'gainst sleepin' in the draught,
'cause ye were always weak about the lungs, an' yer father died o' thet
complaint.  She thought maybe ye wouldn't be wantin' the ould house, so
if the hotel man offered ye a good figure ye could sell it.  The cow
and the chicks were to go to me, an'--well, bless me heart, if he
hasn't fainted!"

Mrs. Conors ceased her explanations and called to the occupants of the
rear room, whose conversation came in to her in low monotones.  "Mrs.
Dodona!  Jennie! it's Corney, and the lad's fainted."

The blindness, for that was all that Corney experienced, passed off in
a few minutes, and when his eyes could notice he saw that they had
carried him to the little room which had once been his own bed-chamber.
Two women were placing cool cloths on his head.  When he revived, one
stepped quietly out.  The other remained.  She was young and decidedly
pretty, but her face showed plainly the effects of recent grief.
Cornelius McVeigh noticed her appearance particularly because it was
peculiarly familiar to him.  The harsh shock of his bereavement had
passed, leaving him weakened but calm.

"Corney, do you remember me?" the girl asked him, gently.

"Jennie," he answered, hesitatingly, as if it was an effort for him to
collect his thoughts.

"We have lost our mother--ours," she said, tremulously, and lowered her
head, weeping.

He hastily arose, and his arm clasped her shoulder with brotherly
affection.  It seemed to him the only way to comfort her.  She did not
resist him, and they sorrowed together.

Cornelius McVeigh did not hasten away from the scene of his great
sorrow.  To tell the truth, he had lost for the time being his craving
for the bustling of the city and the subdued activity of his office.
In the place of the latter came hours of quiet, apathetic reverie while
he lingered beneath the roof-tree of home.  He modified his dress and
waylaid sundry travellers who passed the door in lumbering farm wagons.
Ofttimes he clambered aboard and went a-visiting, and in exchange for
his city stories received tales of the Monk Road and his mother that
were as balm to his wounded heart.

Jennie was also loath to leave the peaceful spot.  Her grandparent, who
found a new joy in living because of his affection for her, came to the
neighboring hotel and hired a suite of rooms for an indefinite period.
He proved a worthy comrade in idleness for the jaded business man, and
the three of them, Jennie, Cornelius McVeigh and Mr. Hyden, were always
together.

Jennie had been an apt pupil, and the few years of education which her
grandparent had provided for her had transformed her from an
uncultivated country girl into an accomplished young woman.  Nor was
she lacking in comeliness.  Ofttimes the eyes of Cornelius McVeigh
followed her with a strange light glistening in their depths.

The boy and girl love of years gone by, so prematurely blighted and so
long dormant, was struggling again to the surface, and who knows but
another wedding, the last of so many which have been recorded in the
previous chapters, may yet be an accomplished fact?  But that involves
another story, and it has not the presence of Nancy McVeigh.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NANCY MCVEIGH OF THE MONK ROAD***


******* This file should be named 25938.txt or 25938.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/5/9/3/25938



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

