The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Desert Fiddler, by William H. Hamby

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Desert Fiddler

Author: William H. Hamby

Release Date: July 3, 2008 [EBook #25960]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESERT FIDDLER ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Frontispiece: Charles Ray as Bob Rogeen,
  and Barbara Bedford as Imogene Chandler.]






THE DESERT FIDDLER


BY

WILLIAM H. HAMBY




PHOTOPLAY TITLE

PERCY



  ILLUSTRATED WITH SCENES
  FROM THE PHOTOPLAY
  A THOS. H. INCE PRODUCTION
  RELEASED BY PATHE PICTURES




NEW YORK

GROSSET & DUNLAP

PUBLISHERS




COPYRIGHT, 1919, BY

CURTIS PUBLISHING COMPANY


COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY

DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY



ALL RIGHTS RESERVED


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES

AT

THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y.




ILLUSTRATIONS


Charles Ray as Bob Rogeen, and
  Barbara Bedford as Imogene Chandler . . . _Frontispiece_

Jenkins and Lolita awed by Percy's fiddling.

Lolita tries her wiles on Percy.

Reedy Jenkins makes a proposition to Imogene.

A mutual discovery--they both cared.

Holy Joe shanghaies Imogene's ranchmen and discovers
  Percy--a willing ally.

"Make it plain to the Chandler girl that this is her
  last chance to sell before I ruin her crop."

"Shut off the water?  Why all the cotton in the valley
  will be withered in a day."




THE DESERT FIDDLER


CHAPTER I

Bob Rogeen slept in the east wing of the squat adobe house.  About
midnight there was a vigorous and persistent shaking of the screen door.

"Yes?" he called, sleepily.

"They have just telephoned in from the Red Butte Ranch"--it was Dayton,
his employer, at the door--"the engine on that tractor has balked.
They want a man out there by daylight to fix it."

Bob put up his arms and stretched, and replied yawningly:

"Well, I guess I'm the fixer."

"I guess you are," agreed the implement dealer.  "You know the way,
don't you?  Better ride the gray; and don't forget to take your gun."
The boss crossed the _patio_ to his own wing of the house.


The young fellow sat up and kicked along under the edge of the bed,
feeling for his shoes.

"A love--lee time to go to work," he growled, good-naturedly.  "Here is
where the early bird catches the tractor--and the devil."

When he came out of the door a few minutes later, buttoning his
corduroy coat--even in Imperial Valley, which knows no winter, one
needs a coat on a March night--Rogeen stood for a moment on the step
and put up his long arms again to stretch some of the deep sleep from
his muscles.  He was not at all enthusiastic about odd jobs at
midnight; but in a moment his eyes fell on the slanting moonlight that
shone mistily on the chinaberry tree in the _patio_; the town on the
American side was fast asleep; the wind with the smell of sagebrush
stirred a clump of bamboo.  The desert night had him--and when he rode
away toward the Mexican line he had forgotten his gun and taken his
fiddle.

He passed through Mexicali, the Mexican town, where the saloons were
still open and the lights over the Red Owl, the great gambling hall,
winked with glittering sleeplessness; and out upon the road by the
irrigation canal, fringed with cottonwood and willows.

He let the reins drop over the saddlehorn, and brought the fiddle round
in front of him.  There was no hurry, he would be there before
daylight.  And he laughed as he ran his right thumb over the strings:

"What a combination--a fool, a fiddle, and a tractor."

Bob could not explain what impulse had made him bring a fiddle with him
on the way to mend a balky gasoline engine.  As a youth--they had
called him rather a wild youth--he had often ridden through the Ozark
hills at night time with his fiddle under his arm.  But in the last
eight years he had played the thing only once, and that once had come
so near finishing him that he still carried the receipt of the
undertaker who came to bury him the next day.

"Oh, well," Bob grinned into the night as he threw his right knee over
the saddlehorn and put the fiddle to his shoulder, "we'll see how she
goes once more."

For three miles he rode leisurely on, a striking figure in the dim
moonlight--a tall young man on a gray horse, fiddling wildly to the
desert night.

He crossed the bridge over the main canal, left the fringe of
cottonwood and willow, and turned across the open toward the Red Butte
Ranch.  The fiddle was under his arm.  Then he saw a shack in the open
field to the right of the road.  It was one of those temporary
structures of willow poles and arrow weed that serve for a house for
the renter on the Mexican side.  The setting moon was at its back, and
the open doorway showed only as a darker splotch.  He lifted the fiddle
again.  "Chinaboy, Jap, Hindu, Poor Man, Rich Man, Beggar Man or
Mexican--I'll give you a serenade all the samee."

The gleeful melody had scarcely jigged its way into the desert night
when, in the black splotch of the doorway, a figure appeared--a woman
in a white nightdress.  Swiftly Bob changed the jig tune into a real
serenade, a clear, haunting, calling melody.  The figure stood straight
and motionless in the dark doorway as long as he could see.  Someway he
knew it was a white woman and that she was young.

He put the fiddle back in the bag and turned in his saddle to mark the
location of the hut in his mind--there was a clump of eucalyptus trees
just north of it.  Yes, he would know the place, and he would learn
tomorrow who lived there.  That listening figure had caught his
imagination.

But again he grinned into the night, ruefully this time as he
remembered the disaster that had followed his last two experiences with
this diabolical instrument of glee and grief.

"Oh, well," he shook his head determinedly and threw his leg across the
saddle, "the first time was with a preacher; the second with a gun; now
we'll give the lady a chance."

The fiddle and the figure in the doorway had stirred in Bob a lot of
reflections.  At twenty he had given up his music and most of the
careless fun that went with it, because a sudden jolt had made him see
that to win through he must fight and not fiddle.  For eight years he
had worked tremendously hard at half a dozen jobs across half a dozen
states; and there had been plenty of fighting.  But what had he won?--a
job as a hardware clerk at twenty dollars a week.

"Oh, well"--he had learned to give the Mexican shrug of the
shoulder--"twenty dollars in a land of opportunity is better than fifty
where everything is already fixed."

That must be the Red Butte Ranch across yonder.  He turned into the
left-hand fork of the road.

"Hello, there!"  A tall, rambling fellow rose up from the side of the
road.  "Are you the good Samaritan or merely one of the thieves?"

"Neither," replied Bob, guessing this was a messenger from the Red
Butte, "but I work for both.  Where is your balky tractor?"

"This way."  The rambling fellow turned to the right and started down
the road, talking over his left shoulder:

"I'm the chauffeur of that blamed tractor--I told Old Benson I didn't
know any more about it than he does of the New Jerusalem; but he put me
at it anyhow.

"I'm a willin' cuss.  But the main trouble with me is I ain't got no
brains.  If I had, I wouldn't be on this job, and if I was, I could fix
the darn thing myself.

"My dad," continued the guide, "was purty strong on brains, but I
didn't take after him much.  If I was as posted on tractors as the old
man was on hell fire, I wouldn't need you."

Something in this hill billy's tone stirred in Bob a sudden
recollection.

"Was he a preacher?"

"Yep, named Foster, and I'm his wandering boy to-night."

Bob lifted his head and laughed.  It was a queer world.  He inquired
about the trouble with the tractor.

"I sure hope you can fix it," said Noah Ezekiel.  "Old Benson will
swear bloody-murder if we don't get the cotton in before the tenth of
April.  He wants to unload the lease."

The sun was scarcely an hour high when the steady, energetic chuck,
chuck of the tractor engine told Bob his work was done.  He shut it
off, and turned to Noah Ezekiel.

"There you are--as good as new.  And it is worth ten men and forty
mules.  Not much like we used to farm back in the Ozarks, is it?"

"We?"  Noah Ezekiel rubbed his lean jaw and looked questioningly at the
fixer.  "I'm from the Ozarks, but as the silk hat said to the ash can,
'Where in hell does the _we_ come in?'"

"You don't happen to remember me?"  There was a humorous quirk at the
corner of Rogeen's mouth as he stood wiping the oil and grease from his
hands with a bunch of dry grass.

The shambling hill billy took off his floppy-brimmed straw hat and
scratched his head as he studied Bob with the careless but always alert
blue eyes of the mountain-turkey hunter--eyes that never miss the turn
of a leaf nor forget a trail.

Those eyes began at the feet, took in the straight waistline, the
well-knit shoulders.  Bob weighed a hundred and eighty and looked as
though he were put together to stay.  For a moment Noah Ezekiel studied
the friendly mouth, the resolute nose, the frank brown eyes; but not
until they concentrated on the tangled mop of dark hair did a light
dawn on the hill billy's face.

"Well, I'll be durned!"  The exclamation was deep and soul-satisfying,
and he held out his hand.  "If you ain't Fiddlin' Bob Rogeen, I'll eat
my hat!"

"Save your hat."  Bob met the recognition with a friendly grin.

"I never saw you but once," reflected Noah Ezekiel, "and that was the
Sunday at Mt. Pisgah when my dad lambasted you in his sermon for
fiddlin' for the dance Saturday night."

"That sermon," Bob's smile was still a little rueful, "lost me the best
job I had ever had."

"Oh, well," consoled the hill billy, "if you hadn't lost it somethin'
might have fell on you.  That's what I always think when I have to move
on."  And he repeated with a nonchalant air a nonsensical hill parody:

  _I eat when I'm hungry,
  I drink when I'm dry,
  And if a tree don't fall on me
  I'll live till I die._


Then his eyes veered round to Bob's fiddle lying to one side on the
grass.

"I notice," he grinned, "dad did not convert you."

"No," said Bob, "but he cured me--almost.  I've only played the thing
twice since."

Rogeen picked up his fiddle and started for his horse.

"Well, so long, Noah.  You've got a nice place to work out here."  His
eyes swept almost covetously over the five-thousand-acre ranch, level
as a floor, not a stump or a stone.  "If I had this ranch I'd raise six
thousand bales of cotton a year, or know the reason why."

"That ain't what the last fellow said," remarked the hill billy,
grinningly.  "Reedy Jenkins was out yesterday figuring on buyin' the
lease; and he said: 'If I had it--I'd raise the rent.'"




CHAPTER II

Bob was out in front of the hardware store dressed in a woollen shirt
and overalls, and bareheaded, setting up a cotton planter, when an old
gentleman in a linen duster, who had been pacing restlessly up and down
the walk like a distant relative waiting for the funeral procession to
start, stopped on the sidewalk to watch him work.  Whether it was the
young man's appearance, his whistling at his work or merely the way he
used his hands that attracted the old gentleman was not certain.  But
after a moment he remarked in a crabbedly friendly tone:

"Young man, you know your business."

"The other fellow's business, you mean," replied Bob without looking up
from the bolt he was adjusting.  "It is not mine, you know."  Bob had
been repeating during the last two days the remark of the hill
billy--"I'm a willin' cuss, but I ain't got no brains."  He had begun
to wonder if he was not in the same wagon.  He had always thought he
had brains, but here he was at twenty-eight no better off than the hill
billy.  Perhaps not as well, for Noah Ezekiel Foster was getting more
per month for riding one tractor than Bob was for selling twenty.

The old gentleman made a noise in his throat that corresponded to a
chuckle in a less belligerent man.

"Do you sell farm machinery over there?"  The store faced the line; and
he nodded toward the Mexican side.

"Yes," answered Bob.

"Know the country pretty well?"

"Yes."  The young man rose up with the wrench in his hand, and looked
for the first time into the gray-blue eyes under the bushy iron-gray
brows.  "The country is the same as it is on this side.  The people
somewhat different."

"Any good chances to invest money over there?" asked the old gentleman.

"I suppose so."  Bob stopped to pick up another nut and started to
screw it on.  "I'm not bothered much hunting for investments.  But I
reckon there is a chance for a man with money anywhere."

"To spend it," added the other fellow, sharply.  "Any place will do for
a fool and his money to part.  But, young man, it is easier to earn
money with brains than it is to keep it without them."

Bob's eyes looking past the old gentleman saw a youngish woman dressed
in widow's weeds--very expensive weeds--coming rapidly down the walk
from the hotel, and knew she was coming for the old man.  As she came
nearer, Bob saw she had tawny yellow hair, with slate-coloured eyes and
a pious mouth.  Her carriage was very erect, very ladylike, and
patently she was from the East.

"Oh, Uncle," she gurgled and, as the old gentleman turned, with a
little burst of enthusiasm she threw her arms about his neck.

"When did you get in, Evy?"  The old gentleman managed to disengage the
arms without giving the appearance of heartlessness.  His voice was
crabbed, but sounded as though it might be from the length of the vocal
cords rather than the shortness of disposition.

"Last night."  There was an aggrieved touch of self-denying complaint
in the tone.  "And the little hotel is perfectly wretched.  I had such
a horrid room--and I felt so conspicuous alone.  The landlady told me
you had been there looking for me this morning before I was up.  I'm so
glad to see you, Uncle; just as soon as I heard of poor Aunt Ellen's
death I felt that I must come and look after you at any sacrifice."
There was a slight pause in which the old gentleman did not venture a
remark.  "But, Uncle"--there was accusation in the tone--"why did you
ever come out to this awful country?  The dust was simply awful--I
think some of my clothes are ruined."

"The old horse is across the street."  The uncle turned and started
toward a very high-powered, expensive car.

"Who was that old chap?" Bob asked of Dayton, who came up from
breakfast just as the car drove off.

"That's Jim Crill--Texas oil fields.  Staying at El Centro and looking
for a place to drop his money, I hear.  But I wonder who's the lady?  I
saw her get off the train with Reedy Jenkins yesterday evening."

"A dear relative," remarked Bob with a grin, "come to take care of him
since his wife died--and he struck oil."

After a moment--the planter finished--Bob asked casually:

"Does Benson own the Red Butte Ranch?"

"No," answered the implement dealer, "it belongs to the Dan Ryan tract.
Dan is one of the very few Americans who has a real title to land on
the Mexican side.  When Benson leased it two years ago it was merely
sand hummocks and mesquite, like the rest of the desert.  Spent a lot
of money levelling it and getting it ready to water.  He lives at Los
Angeles, and is one of those fellows who try to farm with money instead
of brains and elbow grease.  Lost a lot on last year's crop, and now he
wants to get rid of his lease."

Bob had been thinking of that ranch most of the time since he fixed the
tractor.  He loved the soil, and surely a man could get real returns
from a field like that.

"I wonder," he remarked without meeting his employer's eyes, "if he
would sublease it?"

"Don't know," replied Dayton; "Reedy Jenkins is trying to buy the
lease."

"Then," thought Bob as his employer went into the store, "Jenkins ought
to offer a market for farm machinery.  I'll go up and see him."

On his way to Jenkins' office Bob's mind was busy with his own personal
problems.  He had been struggling with his ambitions a long time and
never could quite figure why he did not get on faster.  He had thought
a great deal the last few days about Jim Crill, the old man with bushy
eyebrows--and oil wells.  Two or three things the gruff old chap had
said stuck in Bob's mind.  He had begun to wonder if it was not just as
easy for a fellow to make a bad investment of his brains and muscles as
it was with his money.  "That's it," he said almost aloud at a definite
conclusion; "I haven't been making a good investment of myself.  I
wonder if I could sublease that Red Butte Ranch?"

The more he thought of it, the more anxious he was to get hold of
something he could manage himself.  Of course, the idea of farming a
five-thousand-acre ranch without capital was merely a pipe dream; but
still, if Benson was losing money and wanted to get loose from his
lease--it might be possible.

Reedy Jenkins' office was upstairs and on a back street.  It had an
outside stairway, one of those affairs that cling to an outer brick
wall and end in a little iron platform.  The only sign on the door was:

  REEDY JENKINS,
    Cotton.


It did not explain whether Mr. Jenkins raised cotton, bought it, sold
it, ginned it, or merely thought about it.  The office was so located
that in a morally crusading town, where caution was necessary, it would
have suggested nocturnal poker.  But as it was not necessary for a
poker game in Calexico to be so modestly retiring, Reedy's choice of an
office must be attributed solely to his love of quiet and unostentation.

As Bob turned up the side street, two people were coming down the iron
stairway--one a dry, thin man who looked as though he might be the
relict of some dead language, wearing a stiff hat and a black alpaca
coat; the other, a girl of more than medium height, who took the narrow
steps with a sort of spring without even touching the iron rail with
her hand, and her eyes were looking out across the town.

"I beg your pardon," Bob met them at the foot of the stairs, "but can
you tell me if Mr. Jenkins is in?"

It was the girl who turned to answer, and at one look Bob saw she was
more than interesting--soft light hair, inquisitive eyes, an intuitive
mouth--nothing dry or attenuated about her.

"Yes," she replied, with a slight twist of the mouth, "Mr. Jenkins is
in.  Have you a lease to sell?"

"No."

"Then go on up," she said, and turned across the street following the
spindle-legged man who was unhitching two horses.

"Blooming sunflowers!" exclaimed Bob, his heart taking a quick twist as
she walked away, "as sure as I'm a foot high, that's the girl who stood
in the doorway that night."

As Bob entered the office Jenkins sat tipped back in a swivel chair,
his left arm resting on his desk, the right free as though it had been
gesturing.  Reedy had rather large eyes, a plump, smooth face that was
two shades redder than pink and one shade pinker than red.  He always
looked as though he had just shaved, and a long wisp of very black hair
dangled diagonally across the corner of his forehead, such as one often
sees on the storm-tossed head of an impassioned orator who is talking
for the audience and working for himself.

"Sit down."  He waved Bob to a chair.  "I've been wanting to have a
talk with you--got a proposition for you."




CHAPTER III

Reedy Jenkins lighted a very good cigar and sat studying Rogeen with a
leisurely air.  Bob was a good salesman and began at once: "Understand
you have been buying up leases, and I came up to sell you some farm
machinery."

Reedy took the cigar from his wide mouth and laughed at the joke.  "I
don't raise cotton, I leave that to Chinamen--I raise prices.  I'm not
a farmer but a financier."

Then returning the cigar to the corner of his mouth he remarked with a
pink judicialness:

"I should say you have a way with the ladies."

Bob blushed.  "I never discovered it, if I have."

"I have, myself."  Reedy bit the end of his cigar and nodded with a
doggish appreciation of his own fascination.  "But I'm too busy just
now to use it."

"Rogeen"--Reedy laid the smoking cigar on some papers on his desk and
faced Bob--"I've had my eye on you for some time.  I am buying up
leases across the line.  I need a good man to work over there.  What is
Dayton paying you?"

"Twenty a week."  Bob was surprised at the turn of the conversation.

"I'll give you a hundred and fifty a month to start, and there'll be a
fine chance for promotion."

"What am I to do?" inquired Bob.

"Here is the whole thing in an eggshell.  No doubt you are acquainted
with the situation over the line.  You know, excepting one or two big
concessions, no Americans own land on the Mexican side.  The land is
all farmed under leases and sub-leases.  If a Chink or a Jap or a
wandering American hayseed wants to open up a patch of the desert, he
takes a five-year lease.  As it costs him from ten to twenty dollars an
acre to clear off the mesquite, level the sand hummocks, and get his
ditches ready for water, he pays only one dollar rent the first year,
two dollars the second, and so on.

"Now"--Reedy picked up his cigar, puffed a time or two, and looked
speculatively over Bob's head--"if a fellow wants to speculate on the
Mexican side, he doesn't deal in land; he buys and sells leases.  That
is my business.  Of course, once in a while I take over a crop that is
planted or partly raised, because I have to do it to get the lease.
But you can say on general principles I'm about as much interested in
farming as a ground hog is in Easter.

"The price of cotton has been low, and for various and sundry other
reasons"--Reedy squinted his large eyes a little mysteriously--"a lot
of the ranchers over there after getting their land in good shape have
got cold feet and are willing to sell leases that have three or four
years yet to run for nearly nothing.

"I'm acquiring a bunch of them and am going to make a fortune out of
them.  One of these days the price of cotton will take a jump, and I'll
be subleasing ten thousand acres of land at ten dollars an acre that
cost me three.

"Now what I want you for"--he brought his attention down squarely to
Rogeen--"is to buy leases for me--I'll give you a list of what I want
and the prices I'll pay.  If you get a lease for less, I'll give you
half the rake-off in addition to your wages."

Bob thought fast.  This looked like a fine opportunity; perhaps he was
worth more as a buyer than as a salesman.

"I'll have a try at it," he said.  "But I won't sign up for any length
of time until I see how it goes."

"That suits me," Reedy assented readily.  His one fear had been that
Bob might want a term contract.

"I'll see Dayton," Bob arose, "and let you know how soon he can let me
off."

Dayton liked Bob and hated to lose him, but was one of those employers
who prefer to suffer some inconvenience or loss rather than stand in
the way of a young man's advancement.

"A hundred and fifty dollars a month is more than I can pay, Rogeen,"
he said.  "You'd better take it.  Begin at once.  I'll get Jim Moody in
your place."

At one o'clock Bob was back at Jenkins' office and reported ready for
work.

Reedy reached in his desk for the map on which all the ranches below
the line were carefully marked.

"The ranches I want to get first are along the Dillenbeck Canal.  It is
a private water system, and the water costs more; but the land is rich
enough to make up the difference.

"The first one I want you to tackle is here"--he made a cross with his
pencil--"Belongs to a little dried-up old geezer named Chandler.  He is
ready to sell; talk to the girl.  Five hundred is my top price for
their lease and equipment."

As Bob went down the outside stairway he passed a Mexican going up--a
Mexican with features that suggested some one of his immediate
forefathers was probably a Hebrew.  Rogeen recognized him--his name was
Madrigal; and he remembered that someone had told him that the Mexican
was in the secret service over the line, or rather that he was an
unofficial bearer of official information from some shady Mexican
officials to some shady American concerns.

When the Mexican entered the office, Reedy got up and closed the door.
Then he took the map again from a drawer and opened it out on the desk.

"I'll get Benson's lease this week."  Reedy put his pencil on the Red
Butte Ranch.  "And these," he pointed to smaller squares along the
Dillenbeck Canal, "are the ones I have marked for early annexation.
How many of them have you seen?"

"Thes, and thes, and thes."  Madrigal pointed off three ranches.

"I've sent the new man down to see Chandler," said Reedy.  "He's the
sort that can win over that girl.  I must have that ranch.  It is one
of the best of the small ranches."

"_Si, si._"  Madrigal grinned, and smoothed up his black pompadoured
hair.  "Eet will be easy.  I gave them big scare about the duty on
cotton next fall."

"And then my friend who manages the Dillenbeck system gave them another
about the price of water this summer," smiled Reedy.  "But"--he
frowned--"if the girl should continue obstinate, and they refuse to
sell?"

"Then I'll attend to the senorita"--the Mexican put his hand on his
heart and bowed gallantly--"the ladies are easy for Senor Madrigal."

"Yes," said Reedy, shutting his wide mouth determinedly, "and if he
fails, I'll 'tend to Rogeen."




CHAPTER IV

It was a little after sundown when Bob rode up to the Chandler ranch.
The girl was out under the cottonwood trees by the irrigation canal
gathering up dry sticks for stove wood.  He hitched his horse and went
to her.

"Good evening," he said.

"Where is your fiddle?"  There was a faint twist of amusement at the
corner of her mouth.

"How did you know?"

"Guessed it," she replied, with a little lift of the eyebrows; and then
stooped to pick up the armful of dry sticks she had gathered.

"Let me have them."  He stepped forward to take the wood.

"Why should you?" she said, without offering to relinquish them.   "I
prefer to carry my own sticks--then I don't have to build fires for
other people."  He laughed, and followed her up the path toward the
shack.

"Let us sit down here."  She led the way to a homemade bench in the
open.  "Daddy has had a hard day and has gone to bed, and I don't want
to disturb him.  He's very tired and has been upset over this lease
business."

That was an opening, but before he could take advantage of it she
abruptly changed the conversation:

"But you haven't told me why you didn't bring your fiddle this time.
I'd love to hear it on a night like this."  Dusk was coming swiftly and
the stars had begun to glimmer.

"Oh, I don't carry it round as a business," he answered.  "Fact is,
until the other night I had not played it but twice in eight years."

"Why?"  She turned to him with curious interest.

"It hasn't usually brought me good luck."

"What happened the other two times?"

[Illustration: Jenkins and Lolita awed by Percy's fiddling.]

He looked off at the very bright star in the west and smiled with
whimsical ruefulness.  "I love music--that is, what I call music.  When
I was in the Ozarks I fiddled a lot, but discovered it did not bring me
what I wanted, so I went to work.  I got a job in a bank at Oakville;
was to begin work Monday.  I was powerful proud of that job, and had
got a new suit of clothes and went to town Saturday.  That night there
was a dance, and they asked me to play for it."  He stopped to chuckle,
but still a little regretfully.  "My playing certainly made a hit.
Sunday morning a preacher lambasted the dance, and called me the
special messenger of the devil.  My job was with a pillar of his
church.  I didn't go to work Monday morning.  It's a queer world; that
preacher was the father of Noah Ezekiel Foster, who is now working for
Benson."

She was looking out at the west, smiling; the desert wind pushed the
hair back from her forehead.  "And the other time you played?"

"That was up at Blindon, Colorado."  He showed some reluctance to go
ahead.

"Yes?"

"An old doctor and his daughter came to the camp to invest.  I
overheard them in the next room at the boarding house, and knew a gang
of sharks was selling them a fake mine.  I tried to attract their
attention through the partition by playing a fool popular song--'If you
tell him yes; you are sure to cry, by and by.'"

"Did you make them understand?"  She had locked her hands round her
knees and leaned interestedly toward him.

"Yes--and also the gang.  The camp made up money to pay the undertaker
to bury me next day.  I still have the receipt."

"You have had a lot of experience," she said with a touch of envy.

"More than the wisdom I have gathered justifies, I fear," he replied.

"Experiences are interesting," she observed.  "I haven't had many, but
I'm beginning.  Daddy was professor of Sanskrit in a little one-horse
denominational college back in the hog-feeding belt of the Middle West.
Heavens!" she spoke with sudden fierceness, "can you imagine anything
more useless than teaching Sanskrit?  His salary was two hundred
dollars a year less than the janitor's.  I hated being poor; and I
hated worse the dry rot of that little faculty circle.  The deadly
seriousness of their piffling, pedantic talk about fine-spun scholastic
points that were not interesting nor useful a thousand years ago, and
much less now that they are absolutely dead.  I hated being prim and
pretentious.  I could not stand it any longer, and made Daddy resign
and go somewhere to plant something.  We came out here and I thought I
saw a fortune in cotton.

"Daddy's worked like a galley slave getting this field in; he's done
the work of two men.  With one Chinaman's help part of the time he's
got in a hundred and sixty acres of cotton.  We've put through two hot
summers here; and spent every dollar we got for our household goods and
his life insurance.  And now"--she was frowning in the dark--"we are
warned to get out."

"Who warned you?" Bob asked quickly.

"A Mexican named Madrigal.  He has been right friendly to us; and
warned us last week that the Mexican Government is going to raise the
duty on cotton so high this fall that it will take all the profit.  He
advises us to sell our lease for anything we can get."

"Have you had an offer?"

"Yes," she shrugged in the dusk and spoke with bitter weariness, "a
sort of an offer.  Mr. Jenkins offered us $500.  Daddy wanted to take
it, but I objected.  I guess, though, it is better than nothing."

Bob stood up, his muscles fairly knotted.  He understood in a flash why
the Mexican Jew was going to Jenkins' office.  They were stampeding the
small ranchers out of the country, and virtually stealing their leases.
The stars ran together in an angry blur.  He felt a swelling of the
throat.  It was lucky he was miles away from Reedy Jenkins.

"Don't take it!" he said with vehemence.


Reedy Jenkins had just opened his office next morning and sat down at
the desk to read his mail when Bob Rogeen walked in.  Reedy looked up
from a letter and asked greedily:

"Did you get it?"

"No."  There was something ominous in Rogeen's tone.

"Couldn't you persuade them to sell?"  Jenkins was openly vexed.

"I persuaded them not to."  Bob's hands opened and shut as though they
would like to get hold of something.  "I don't care for this job.  I'm
done."

"What's the idea?"  There was a little sneer in Jenkins' tone.
"Decided you would go back to the old job selling pots and pans?"

"No," and Bob's brown eyes, almost black now, looked straight into
Reedy's flushed, insolent face, "I'm going across the line to _raise
cotton_."

Reedy's wide mouth opened in a contemptuous sneer.

"It's rather hot over there for rabbits."

"Yes," Bob's lips closed warningly, "and it may become oppressive for
wolves."

Their eyes met defiantly for a moment, and each knew the other
understood--and it meant a fight.




CHAPTER V

Bob had never known a resolution before.  He thought he had, but he
knew now that all the rest compared to what he felt as he left Reedy
Jenkins' office were as dead cornstalks to iron rods.

One night nearly nine years ago, when returning through the hills with
his fiddle under his arm, he had stopped at the door of his cabin and
looked up at the stars.  The boisterous fun of an hour ago had all
faded out, leaving him dissatisfied and lonesome.  He was shabbily
dressed, not a dollar in his pocket--not a thing in the world his own
but that fiddle--and he knew he was no genius with that.  He was not
getting on in the world; he was not making anything of himself.  It was
then that the first big resolution came to him: He would quit this
fooling and go to work; he would win in this game of life.  Since then
in the main he had stuck to that resolution.  He had not knowingly
passed any opportunity by; certainly he had dodged nothing because it
was hard.  He had won a little here, and lost there, always hoping,
always tackling the new job with new pluck.  Yet these efforts had been
simple; somebody had offered him a job and he tried to make good at
it--and usually had.  But to win now, and win big as he was determined
to do, he must have a job of his own; and he would have to create that
job, organize it, equip it.

"What I'll make it with--or just how--I don't know.  But by all the
gods of the desert I'm going to win right here--in spite of the
thermometer, the devil, and Reedy Jenkins."

To raise cotton one must have a lease, tools, teams, provisions--all of
which costs money; and he had just $167.35.  But if that girl and her
Sanskrit father could get in a cotton crop, he could.  It was not too
late.  Cotton might be planted in the Imperial Valley even up to the
last of May.  He would get a field already prepared if he could; if
not, then he would prepare it.

And a man with a good lease and a good reputation could usually borrow
some money on which to raise a crop.  Bob's mind again came back to the
Red Butte Ranch.  It was so big that it almost swamped his imagination,
but if he was going to do big things he must think big.  If he could
possibly sublease that ranch from Benson.  But it would take $100,000
to finance a five-thousand-acre cotton crop.  Then he thought of Jim
Crill, the old man of the Texas oil fields who was looking for
investments.

It was daring enough to seem almost fantastic, but Bob quickened his
step and turned toward the depot.  He could yet catch the morning train
for Los Angeles.

But he passed Benson on the way.  The same morning Bob called at the
Los Angeles office Benson went to Reedy Jenkins in Calexico.

The Red Butte lease had three years to run.  Benson began by offering
the lease and all the equipment for $40,000.  He had spent more than
$90,000 on it.

Reedy pushed back the long black lock of hair from his forehead, shook
his head lugubriously, and grew pessimistically oratorical.  Things
were very unsettled over the line: there was talk of increased Mexican
duty on cotton, of a raise in water rates; the price of cotton was
down; ranchers were coming out instead of going in; no sale at all for
leases.  He himself had not had an offer for a lease in two months.

They dickered for an hour.  Reedy watching with a gloating shrewdness
the impractical fellow who had tried to farm with money.  He knew
Benson had lost money on the last crop, and besides had been thoroughly
scared by the sly Madrigal.

"I'm tired of the whole thing."  Benson spoke with annoyed vexation.
"I tell you what I'll do: I'll walk off the ranch and leave you the
whole damn thing for $20,000."

"I'll take it."  Reedy knew when the limit was reached.  "I'll pay you
$2,000 now to bind the bargain; and the balance within ten days."

As Benson left the office with the check, Reedy began figuring
feverishly.  It was the biggest thing he had ever pulled off.  The
lease, even with cotton selling for only eight cents, was worth
certainly $50,000, the equipment at least $10,000 more.  And the five
thousand acres was already planted and coming up!  In the Imperial
Valley the planting is by far the most expensive part of the cotton
crop up to picking.  It costs from seven to ten dollars an acre to get
it planted; after that it is easy.  There are so few weeds and so
little grass that one man, with a little extra help once or twice
during the summer, can tend from forty to eighty acres.

It was such an astounding bargain that Reedy's pink face grew a little
pale, and he moistened his lips as he figured.  He was trying to
reassure himself that it would be dead easy to borrow the other
$18,000.  He did not have it.  In truth, he had only two hundred left
in the bank.  He thought of Tom Barton and two of the banks from whom
he had already borrowed.  They did not seem promising.  Then he thought
of Jim Crill, and the pinkness came slowly back to his face.  He smiled
doggishly as he picked up the phone, called El Centro, and asked for
Mrs. Evelyn Barnett.

Mrs. Evelyn Barnett sat on the porch shaded by a wistaria vine, her
feet discreetly side by side on the floor, her hands primly folded in
her lap; her head righteously erect, as one who could wear her widow's
weeds without reproach, having been faithful to the very last ruffle of
her handsome dress to the memory of her deceased.

She had insisted on taking Uncle Crill from the hotel, which was
ruining his digestion, and making a home for him.  She had leased an
apartment bungalow, opening on a court, and with the aid of three
servants had, at great personal sacrifice, managed to give Uncle Crill
a "real home."  True, Uncle was not in it very much, but it was there
for him to come back to.

"Uncle," she had said, piously, showing him the homelike wonders that
three servants had been able to achieve in the six rooms, "in the
crudities of this horrid, uncouth country, we must keep up the
refinements to which we were accustomed in the East."  The old
gentleman had grunted, remembering what sort of refinements they had
been accustomed to, but made no outward protests at being thus frillily
domesticated after ten years in the Texas oil fields.

And as Mrs. Barnett sat on the porch this morning, fully and carefully
dressed, awaiting the result of that telephone message from Calexico,
she watched with rank disapproval her neighbours to the right and left.
It was quite hot already and Mrs. Borden on the right had come out on
the porch, dressed with amazing looseness of wrapper, showing a very
liberal opening at the throat, and stood fanning herself with a
newspaper.  Mrs. Cramer on the left, having finished her sweeping, had
come out on the porch also, and in garments that indicated no padding
whatever dropped into a rocking chair, crossed her legs, made a dab at
her loosely piled hair to see it did not topple down, and proceeded to
read the morning newspaper.  It was positively shocking, thought Mrs.
Barnett, how women could so far forget themselves.  She never did.

Directly her primly erect head turned slightly, and her eyes which
always seemed looking for something substantial--no dream stuff for
her--widened with satisfaction and she put her hand up to her collar to
see if the breastpin was in place.

It was Reedy Jenkins who got out of the machine which stopped at the
entrance.  He took off his hat when halfway to the porch--his black
hair was smoothly brushed--his face opened with a flattering smile and
he quickened his step.  Mrs. Barnett permitted herself to rise, take
two short steps forward, and to smile reservedly as she offered her
hand.

Reedy Jenkins had not exaggerated when he said he had a way with the
ladies.  He did have.  It was rather a broad way, but there are plenty
of ladies who are not subtle.

"You have a lovely little place here."  Reedy gave a short, approving
glance round as he took the offered chair.  "It's wonderful what a
woman's touch can do to make a home.  No place like home, if there is
some dear woman there to preside."

Mrs. Barnett's mouth simpered at the implied flattery; but her eyes,
always looking calculatingly for substantial results, were studying
Reedy Jenkins.  He certainly had handsome black hair, and he was well
dressed--and the manner of a gentleman.  He reminded her of an
evangelist she had known back in Indiana.  She had intended to marry
that evangelist if his wife died in time; but she did not.

"It is very hard to do much here," Mrs. Barnett said, deprecatingly.
"There is so much dust, and the market is so poor, and servants are so
untrained and so annoying.  But of course I do what little I can to
make dear Uncle a good home.  It was a great sacrifice for me to come,
but when duty calls one must not think of self."

"No, I suppose not."  Reedy sighed and shook his head until the long
black lock dangled across the corner of his forehead--he did look like
that evangelist.  "But I wish sometime that we could forget the other
fellow and think of ourselves.  I'd have been a millionaire by now if I
hadn't been so chicken-hearted about giving the other fellow the best
of it."

"We never lose by being generous," said Mrs. Barnett with conviction.

"No, I suppose not," Reedy sighed.  "No doubt it pays in the long run.
I know I've been put in the way of making many thousands of dollars
first and last by fellows I had been good to."  Then Reedy looked at
Mrs. Barnett steadily and with wide admiration in his large
eyes--looked until she blushed very deeply.

"It may be a rough place to live," said Reedy, "but it certainly has
been good for your colour.  You are pink as a--a flower; you look
positively swee----"  He broke off abruptly.  "I beg your pardon; I
almost forgot myself."

Then Reedy changed the subject to the matter of business on which he
had come.

"Yes," Mrs. Barnett said, giving him her hand as he rose to go, "I'll
see Uncle to-night; and I'm sure Mr. Jenkins"--he still held her hand
and increased the pressure--"he'll be most glad to do it."




CHAPTER VI

Three days after Bob had returned from Los Angeles and found that Reedy
Jenkins had bought the Benson lease, he rode up from the Mexican side
and jumped off in front of the hardware store.  Dayton was talking to
the old man with bushy eyebrows and a linen duster.

"Here's Rogeen now," said the implement dealer.  "Mr. Crill was just
inquiring about you, Bob."

The two men shook hands.

"How you comin'?" asked the old man, his blue eyes looking sharply into
Rogeen's.

"I'm starting in on my own," replied Bob; "going to raise cotton over
the line."

"Why?"  The heavy brows worked frowningly.

"Got to win through."  Bob's brows also contracted and he shook his
head resolutely.  "And I can't do it working by the month.  Some men
can, but I can't."

"See that?"  The old gentleman pointed to a tractor with ten plows
attached.  "That's success.  Those plows are good and the engine is
good; but it's only when they are hooked up together they are worth
twenty teams and ten men.  That's the way to multiply results--hook
good things together.  Resolution and hard work aren't enough.  Got to
have brains.  Got to use 'em.  Organize your forces.

"Don't tell me," the old chap spoke with some heat, "that a man who
uses his brains and by one day's work makes something that saves a
million men ten days' work is only entitled to one day's pay.  Not a
bit of it.  He's entitled to part of what he saves every one of those
million men.  That's the difference between a little success and a big
success.  The little one makes something for himself; the big one makes
something for a thousand men--and takes part of it.  Has a right to.
Those Chinamen across the line get sixty-five cents a day.  If you can
manage them so they earn a dollar and a half a day and give them a
dollar and thirty cents of it and keep twenty cents, you are a public
benefactor as well as a smart man.  That is the way to do it; use your
brains to increase other men's production and take a fair per cent. of
it, and you'll be both rich and honest."

Bob's brown eyes were eagerly attentive.  He liked this cryptic old
man.  This was real stuff he was talking; and it was getting at the
bottom of Rogeen's own problem.  All these years he had tried to
produce value single-handed.  But to win big, he must think, plan,
organize so as to make money for many people, and therefore entitle
himself to large returns.

"I'm going to try that very thing," he said.  "I've just leased one
hundred and sixty acres.  Half already planted in cotton, and I'm going
to plant the rest."

Bob was proud of his achievement.  He had been really glad he failed to
get the Red Butte Ranch.  It was entirely too big to tackle without
capital or experience.  But he had found a rancher anxious to turn
loose his lease for about half what he had spent improving it.  Rogeen
then convinced a cotton-gin man that he was a good risk; and offered to
give him ten per cent. interest, half the cotton seed, and to gin the
crop at his mill if he would advance money sufficient to buy the lease
and raise the crop.  The gin man had agreed to do it.

Crill jerked his head approvingly.  "Good move.  That's the way to go
at it.  Think first, then work like the devil at the close of a
revival."

Crill paused, and then asked abruptly:

"Know a man named Jenkins?"

"Yes," replied Bob.

"Is he safe?"

Bob grinned.  "About as safe as a rattlesnake in dog days."

As Jim Crill stalked up the outside stairway of Reedy Jenkins' office,
the wind whipping the tail of the linen duster about his legs, he
carried with him two very conflicting opinions of Reedy--Mrs. Barnett's
and Bob Rogeen's.  Maybe one of them was prejudiced--possibly both.
Well, he would see for himself.

Reedy jumped up, gave his head a cordial fling, and grabbed Jim Crill's
hand as warmly as though he were chairman of the committee welcoming
the candidate for vice-president to a tank-station stop.  Reedy
remembered very distinctly meeting Mr. Crill in Chicago five years ago.
In fact, Mr. Crill had for a long time been Mr. Jenkins' ideal of the
real American business man--shrewd, quick to think, and fearless in
action; willing to take a chance but seldom going wrong.

"Evy said you wanted to see me about borrowing some money," the old man
dryly interrupted the flow of eloquence.

"Yes--why, yes."  Reedy brought up suddenly before he had naturally
reached his climax, floundered for a moment.  "Why, yes, we have an
investment that I thought would certainly interest you."  Reedy had
decided not only to get the old man to finance the Red Butte purchase
but his whole project.

He began to explain his maps and figures as volubly as though he were
selling the Encyclopedia Britannica, and again the old man cut in:

"How many acres you got leased?"

"Ten thousand--practically."  Reedy paused to answer, his pencil
touching the Dillenbeck Canal.

"What did you pay for them?"

"I got most of them for about a third to half what they cost the
ranchers."

"Why did they sell so cheap?"

"Oh," Reedy waved, vaguely evasive, "you know how that is; fellows are
like sheep--stampede into a country, and then one makes a break, and
they stampede out.  Now that Benson has sold, a lot more of them will
get cold feet."

"Altogether how much money have you put in over there?"

"Forty-two thousand dollars," replied Reedy, consulting a memorandum.
"You understand," he continued to explain, "I'm not a cotton grower at
all; I am an investor.  I'm dealing in leases; and I merely took over
the planted crop on the Benson leases because I got it so cheap there
is bound to be money in it."

"What is it you want?" demanded Crill.

"Seventy thousand or so for the lease and the crop.  I have 8,000 acres
already planted, some of it coming up.  I'll pay you 10 per cent. for
the money, and half the cotton seed, and give you first mortgage on the
crop.  Those are the usual terms here."

The sharp blue eyes under the shaggy brows had been investigating Reedy
as they talked.  He wanted to make loans, for he had a lot of idle
money.  "There are two sorts of men who pay their debts," the old man
said to himself.  "One who wants to owe more, and one who doesn't want
to owe anything."  Jenkins would want to borrow more, therefore he
would pay his first loan.  Even rascals are usually good pay when they
are making money.  And it looked like this fellow would make money on
these leases.  Anyway, Jim Crill moved a little annoyedly in his chair
at the thought of his niece.  It would be almost worth the risk to be
rid of Evy's nagging him about it.

"Fix up the papers," he said, shortly, to Reedy's delight.  He had
expected to have to work much harder on the old man.

The next morning after the interview with Jim Crill Bob was at the
hardware store assembling the implements he had bought, when a tall,
shambling hill billy sauntered up.

"Hello, Noah Ezekiel Foster," said Bob, without looking up.

"Hello," responded the hill billy.  "Reckon you know a hoss at long
range."

"Reckon I do."  Bob resumed his whistling.

"Don't also know somebody that wants a chauffeur for a tractor?  Benson
sold out my job."

"No."  Bob straightened up and looked at the lank fellow appraisingly.
"But I know a fellow who wants a chauffeur for a team of mules."

Noah Ezekiel shook his head.  "Me and mules have parted ways a long
time ago.  I prefer gasoline."  Then in a moment: "Who is the fellow?"

Bob grinned and tapped himself.  "I'm the man."

Noah Ezekiel shook his head again.

"You look too all-fired industrious; I'd rather work for a fellow that
lives at Los Angeles."

Bob laughed.  "Just as you like."

But Noah Ezekiel ventured one more question:

"You workin' for Reedy Jenkins?"

"Not much!"  Bob put emphasis in that.

"Where is your ranch?"

"On the road a couple of miles north of Chandler's."

The hill billy's forehead wrinkled and his eyes looked off into empty
space.

"I reckon I'll change my mind.  I'll take the job.  How much am I
gettin' a month?"




CHAPTER VII

Some men fail because they invest their money in bad business.  More
fail because they invest themselves in sorry human material.  They
trust their plans to people who cannot or will not carry them out.

Bob from his first day as an employer realized that to be able to plan
and work himself was only half of success.  One must be able to pick
men who will carry out his plans, must invest his brains, his
generosity, his fair treatment, and his affections in human beings who
will return him loyalty for loyalty.

He had made no mistake in Noah Ezekiel Foster.  Noah was a good cotton
planter; moreover, he knew a good deal about Chinese.  Bob had employed
six Chinamen to help get the ground in shape and the cotton planted.

"Noah," Bob stopped beside the disk plow and its double team, "you
understand mules."

"I ought to."  Noah rubbed his lean jaw.  "I've been kicked by 'em
enough."

Bob smiled.  Somehow Noah's look of drollery always put him in a good
humour.  He noticed it also tickled the Chinamen, who thought "Misty
Zeekee" one of the greatest of Anglo-Saxons.

"You see," remarked Noah, picking up the lines again, "as my dad used
to say, 'He that taketh hold of the handles of a plow and looketh back,
verily, he shall be kicked by a mule.' I never calculate to be kicked
in the back.  But if that Chinaman over there"--he frowned at a
Chinaboy who was fumbling over a cotton planter--"don't get a move on
him, he'll be kicked wherever he happens to hit my foot first.  Hi,
there"--Noah threw up his head and yelled to the Chinaboy--"get a move
on.  Plantee cotton.  Goee like hellee."  And the Chinaman did.

Bob laughed.

"Do you reckon you could let me have five dollars to-night?" Noah
Ezekiel asked, looking down at his plow.  "I want to go up to the Red
Owl at Mexicali."

"Not going to gamble, are you?" Bob asked.

Noah Ezekiel shook his head.  "No, I ain't goin' to gamble.  Goin' to
invest the five in my education.  I want to learn how many ways there
are for a fool and his money to part."

After supper, when Noah Ezekiel had ridden away to invest his five
dollars in the educational processes of the Red Owl, Bob brought a
stool out of the house and sat down to rest his tired muscles and watch
the coming night a little while before he turned in.  Bob and his
foreman occupied the same shack--the term "house," as Noah Ezekiel
said, being merely a flower of speech.  Although there were several
hundred thousand acres of very rich land under cultivation on the
Mexican side, with two or three exceptions there was not a house on any
of the ranches that two men could not have built in one day and still
observe union hours.  Four willow poles driven in the ground, a few
crosspieces, a thatch of arrowweed, three strips of plank nailed round
the bottom, some mosquito netting, and it was done.  A Chinaman would
take another day off and build a smoking adobe oven; but Bob and Noah
had a second-hand oil stove on which a Chinese boy did their cooking.

Bob sat and looked out over the level field in the dusk.  A quarter of
a mile away the light glimmered in the hut of his Chinese help, and
there came the good-natured jabber of their supper activities.  He felt
the expansive thrill of the planter, the employer--the man who
organizes an enterprise and makes it go.

The heat of the day was already gone, and pleasant coolness was on the
night wind that brought the smell of desert sage from beyond the
watered fields.  Bob stirred from the chair and got up.  His tiredness
was gone.  The desert night had him.  He went into the shack and took
from an old scarred trunk his fiddle, and started down the road that
passed his ranch to the south.  He had not yet called on the Chandlers.


The little house was dark.  Rogeen wondered if the Chandlers were
asleep.  But his heart took a quicker turn; he fancied he saw something
white in the yard--the girl was also feeling the spell of the desert
night.

Then suddenly, but softly, a guitar thrummed, and a voice with the
half-wailing cadence of the Spanish took up the melody.

Bob stood still, the blood crowding his veins until his face was hot
and his whole body prickled.  This was Madrigal, the Mexican Jew.

The song ended.  Faintly came the clapping of hands, and the ripple of
a girl's laughter.  Bob turned angrily and walked swiftly back up the
road, walked clear past his own ranch without noticing, and finally
turned aside by a clump of cottonwood trees along the levee of the main
irrigation canal.  The water, a little river here, ran swiftly,
muddily, black under the desert stars.  Bob lifted his fiddle and flung
it into the middle of the stream.

The heat of his anger was gone.  He felt instantly cold, and infinitely
lonesome.  There upon the muddy water floated away the thousand songs
of the hills--the melody, the ecstasy, the colour and light of his
early youth.

With sudden repentance he turned and dashed down the bank after the
hurrying current.  The fall is rapid here, and the fiddle was already
far down the stream.  He ran stumblingly, desperately, along the uneven
bank, dodging willows and arrowweed, stopping now and again to peer up
and down the stream.

It was nowhere in sight.  A sort of frenzy seized him.  He had a queer
fancy that in that moment of anger he had thrown away his soul--all of
him that was not bread and dollars.  He must get it back--he must!
Another dash, and again he stopped on the bank.  Something darker than
the current bobbed upon the muddy water.  Without a moment's hesitancy
he plunged into the stream and waded waist deep into the middle of the
current.

Yes, it was his violin.  Back on the bank, dripping wet, he hugged it
to him like a little girl with a doll that was lost and is found.




CHAPTER VIII

The next morning at breakfast Noah Ezekiel remarked:

"I wonder where that skunk got the money."

"What skunk and what money?"  Bob was pouring sirup on a pancake, a
product of much patience both on his part and the Chinese cook's.

"Jenkins."  Noah answered both questions in one word.  "Not long ago he
had to borrow a dime for a doughnut.  Last night he was at the Red Owl
gambling with both fists.  And I heard he's bought altogether ten
thousand acres in leases.  'Verily,' as dad used to say, 'the sinner
flourisheth like a thorn tree.'"

"Do you know if he has bought Chandler's?" Bob asked, casually, not
meeting Noah's eye.

"No, but I reckon he will.  He seems out for a clean-up."

"If you see the Chandlers," suggested Rogeen, "advise them not to sell."

Noah Ezekiel reached for the towel to wipe his mouth, and shook his
head.

"I ain't strong on giving advice.  I believe in doin' as you'd be done
by, and most all the advice I ever got was as hard to take as castor
oil.  Advice is like givin' a dog ipecac--it may break him of suckin'
eggs, but it sure is hard on the dog."

Bob laughed and got up and started to work.

The first Saturday in June Rogeen and Noah quit at noon, for the rush
was over.

"I reckon," Noah insinuated, suavely, "if you are feelin' right good I
might strike you for another five to-night."

"Certainly," said Bob.  "But look here, Noah, you ought not to gamble
away your wages."

Noah Ezekiel pulled a long face.

"You sound like my dad.  And I ain't fully persuaded you are enough of
a saint to preach."

"You are incorrigible, Zeke," Bob laughed.  "And I think I'll go with
you to-night to the Red Owl."

Noah shook his head.  "I wouldn't advise it.  Gamblin' ain't to be
recommended to employers.  It's liable to put wages in japordy."

"I am not going to gamble," said Bob.  "I am looking for a man--a
couple of them, in fact."


Reedy Jenkins had returned to his office about two o'clock after making
a complete circuit of his leases.  The crop looked fine--so everybody
told him.  He knew little about cotton, but Ah Sing was a wonderful
farmer--he knew how to handle the Chinese labourer.

Then he looked at his watch and frowned.  He wished that blankety-blank
Mexican would be more prompt in keeping his appointments.  He wanted to
get away.  He was to drive to El Centro for a visit with Mrs. Barnett
and then to-night he would return for a little recreation across the
line.

It was nearly four when Madrigal finally appeared, wearing an expensive
white summer suit and a jaunty straw hat.  "He is a handsome devil,"
thought Reedy, eying him with disfavour because of his lateness.  The
Mexican took off his straw hat attached to a buttonhole by a silk cord,
and pushed up his black pompadoured hair.

"Have you got the Chandler ranch yet?" Jenkins came directly to the
point.

"Not yet, senor."  Madrigal's bold, dark eyes smiled with supreme
confidence.  "Not yet--but soon."

The Mexican stood up and returned his hat to his head.  He put up his
hands as though strumming a guitar, turned up his eyes languishingly,
and hummed a flirting air.

"If this, senor," he said, breaking off, "does not win the senorita, we
will try--what you call hem--direct action.  You shall have your ranch,
never fear."

"And that damned Rogeen--what of him?"

The Mexican smiled sinisterly.  "He get news tonight that make heem
lose much sleep.

"Now may I trouble Senor Jenkins for fifty dollar?"

Reedy grumbled, but paid.  The Mexican lifted his hand, pressed it to
his heart, and bowed with mocking gallantry.

"Until to-night, senor."

[Illustration: Lolita tries her wiles on Percy.]




CHAPTER IX

Reedy Jenkins and Mrs. Barnett sat in a cool, shadowed corner of the
porch.  Reedy took a plump yellow cigar from his vest pocket, and with
a deferential bow:

"Will you permit me?"

"Certainly, Mr. Jenkins."  Mrs. Barnett spoke in a liberal-minded tone.
"I do not object at all to the fragrance of a good cigar--especially
out of doors."

"It is a vile habit," said Jenkins, deprecatingly, as he began to puff.
"But after a fellow has worked hard on some big deal, and is all strung
up, it seems to offer a sort of relaxation.  Of course, I think a man
ought to smoke in reason.  We are coarse brutes at the best--and need
all the refining influences we can get."

"I think it is bad for the throat," said Evelyn Barnett.  "That is what
I tell Uncle Crill.  He smokes entirely too much."

Uncle Crill was absent.  He usually was.  The old chap was willing for
Evy to save his digestion within reason--but not his soul.

"My dear friend," Reedy made a rather impetuous gesture with his right
hand toward the demure widow, "it was splendid of you to persuade your
uncle to lend me that money for the big deal.  It was the sort of thing
that one never forgets.  We have plenty of friends willing to help us
spend our money, but only a few, a very few loyal ones, willing to help
us make it.

"Depend upon it, my dear young lady, I'll not forget that
favour--never.  And as I promised before I shall give you personally
one fourth of the profits."

Mrs. Barnett gave her head a little depreciating twist and smoothed the
dress over her right knee.

"That will be very generous of you, Mr. Jenkins.  But of course one
does not do things for one's friends for money.  Not but I can use
it--to do good with," she hastened.

"My poor husband would have left me a comfortable fortune in my own
right if it had not been for the meddlesomeness of some one who had no
business to interfere.

"Mr. Barnett was a mine owner--and a most excellent business man.  He
had large interests in Colorado.  One mine he was going to sell.  An
old gentleman and his daughter were just ready to buy it.  The papers
were all drawn, and they were to pay over their money that evening.
But some horrid young man, a wandering fiddler or something, got to
meddling and persuaded them not to trade.

"It was an awful loss to poor Tom.  He was to have had $60,000 out of
the sale--and he never got one cent out of that mine, not a cent."

"What did they do to that fellow that broke up the trade?" asked Reedy,
puffing interestedly at his cigar.

"Oh, Mr. Barnett said they taught him a lesson that would keep him from
spoiling any more trades."  Mrs. Barnett laughed.  And then accusingly:
"Isn't it queer how mean some people are.  Now just that little
interference from that meddlesome stranger kept me from having a small
fortune."  A deep sigh.  "And one can do so much good with money.  Just
think if I had that money how many poor people around here I could
help.  I hear there are families living across the line in little
shacks--one or two rooms with dirt floors--and no bathroom.  Isn't it
awful?  And women, too!"

Reedy twisted his chair about so he looked squarely at the widow.  The
sun had gone down, and the quick twilight was graying the row of palm
trees that broke the skyline to the south.  Jenkins was in a hurry to
get away, but his visit was not quite rounded out.

"You must be very lonely," he said with a deep, sad voice--"since your
husband died.  Loneliness--ah loneliness! is the great ache of the
human heart."

"Y-e-s.  Oh, yes," Mrs. Barnett did not sound utterly desolate.  "But
of course, Mr. Barnett being away so much----"  There was a significant
pause.  "He was an excellent man--a good business man, but you know.
Well, some people are more congenial than others.  We never had a cross
word in our lives.  But--well--our tastes were different, you know."

Reedy smoked and nodded in appreciative silence.  The dusk came fast.
Mrs. Barnett rustled her starched skirts and sighed.

"You know, Mr. Jenkins," she began on a totally different subject, "it
has been such a pleasure to me to meet someone out here in this
God-forsaken country with fine feelings--one who loves the higher
things of life."

"Thank you, Mrs. Barnett."  Reedy bowed in all seriousness.

A moment later when he took his leave he held her hand a thought longer
than necessary, and pressed it as though in a sympathetic impulse for
her loneliness--or his--or maybe just because.

It was dark as Reedy threw the clutch into high and put his foot on the
accelerator.  He was out of town too quick to be in danger of arrest
for speeding.  He was late.  The three others who were to seek
recreation for the evening with him would be waiting.

And biting the end of his cigar he said fervently:

"Thank God for Jim Crill--and his niece."

Reedy's three friends were waiting--but dinner was ready.  They had
ordered a special dinner at the Pepper Tree Hotel, served out in a
little pergola in the back yard.

They were all hearty eaters, but not epicures; and anyway they did not
take time to taste much.  From where they sat they could look out
between the latticed sides of the pergola across the Mexican line, and
see above and beyond the squat darker buildings a high arch of winking
electric lights.

That was the Red Owl.

And while they talked jerkily and broadly of cotton and real
estate--and women, their thoughts were over there with those winking
lights.

Just across the line there was the old West again--the West of the
early Cripple Creek days, of Carson City and Globe.  Still wide open,
still raw, still unashamed.

Over there underneath these lights, in that great barnlike structure,
were scores of tables across which fortunes flowed every night.  There
men met in the primitive hunt for money--quick money, and won--and
lost, and lost, and lost.

There, too, the tinkle of a piano out of tune, the blare of a
five-piece orchestra, and the raucous singing of girls who had lost
their voices as significantly as other things.  And beyond that, along
shadowy corridors, were other girls standing or sitting in
doorways--lightly dressed.

"Well, are you fellows through?"  Reedy had pushed back his chair.
"Let's go."




CHAPTER X

It was perhaps an hour later that Bob Rogeen went down the main street
of the Mexican town, also headed for the Owl.  Off this main street
only a few lights served to reveal rather than dissipate the night.
But under the dimness Mexicali was alive--a moving, seething,
passionate sort of aliveness.  The sidewalks were full, the saloons
were busy.  In and out of the meat shops or the small groceries
occasionally a woman came and went.  But the crowd was nearly all
men--Mexicans, Chinamen, American ranchers and tourists, Germans,
Negroes from Jamaica, Filipinos, Hindus with turbans.  All were
gathered in this valley of intense heat--this ancient bed of the sea
now lower than the sea--not because of gold mines or oil gushers, but
for the wealth that grew from the soil: the fortunes in lettuce, in
melons, in alfalfa, and in cotton.

"Odd," thought Bob, "that the slowest and most conservative of all
industries should find a spot of the earth so rich that it started a
stampede almost like the rush to the Klondike, of men who sought sudden
riches in tilling the soil."

Across the way from a corner saloon came the twang of a mandolin; and
half a dozen Mexican labourers began singing a Spanish folk song.  In a
shop at his right a Jap girl sold soda water; in another open door an
old Chinaman mended shoes; and from another came the click of billiard
balls.  But most of the crowd was moving toward the Owl.

As Bob stepped inside the wide doors of the gambling hall the scene
amazed him.  There were forty tables running--roulette, blackjack,
craps, stud poker--and round them men crowded three to five deep.  Down
the full length of one side of the room ran a bar nearly a hundred and
fifty feet long, and in the rear end of the great barnlike structure
thirty or forty girls, most of them American, sang and danced and
smoked and drank with whosoever would buy.

Bob stood to one side of the surging crowd that milled round the gaming
tables, and watched.  There was no soft-fingered, velvet-footed glamour
about this place.  No thick carpets, rich hangings, or exotic perfumes.
Most of the men were direct from the fields with the soil of the day's
work upon their rough overalls--and often on their faces and grimy
hands.  The men who ran the games were in their shirt sleeves, alert,
sweatingly busy; some of them grim, a few predatory, but more of them
easily good-natured.  The whole thing was swift, direct, businesslike.
Men were trying to win money from the house; and the house was winning
money from them.  This was raw gambling, raw drinking, raw vice.  It
was the old Bret Harte days multiplied by ten.

And yet there was a fascination about it.  Bob felt it.  It is idiotic
to deny that gambling, which is the lure of quick money reduced to
minutes and seconds, has not a fascination for nearly all men.  As Bob
stood leaning with his back against the bar--there was no other place
to lean, not one place in that big hall to sit down--the scene filled
him with the tragedy of futile trust in luck.

All these men knew that a day's work, a bale of cotton, a crate of
melons, a cultivator--positive, useful things--brought money, positive,
useful returns.  And yet they staked that certainty on a vague belief
in luck--and always, and always lost the certainty in grabbing for the
shadow.

Most of these men were day labourers, clerks, small-salaried men.  It
cost a thousand dollars a day to run this house, and it made another
thousand dollars in profits.  Two thousand dollars--a thousand days'
hard work squandered every night by the poor devils who hoped to get
something easy.  And some of them squandered not merely one day's work
but a month's or six months' hard, sweaty toil flipped away with one
throw of the dice or one spin of the ball.

While Bob's eyes watched the ever-shifting crowd that moved from table
to table he saw Rodriguez, the man for whom he was searching.  He was
with Reedy Jenkins and three others coming from that end of the
building devoted to alleged musical comedy.  Besides the natty
Madrigal, the sad-looking Rodriguez and Reedy, there were a Mexican and
an American Bob did not know.  All of them except Rodriguez wore
expensive silk shirts and panama hats, and had had several drinks and
were headed for more.  Reedy, pink and expansive, chuckling and
oratorical, was evidently the host.  He was almost full enough and
hilarious enough to do something ridiculous if the occasion offered.

After two more rounds of drinks the party started for the gaming
tables.  The crowd was too thick for them to push their way in as a
body, so they scattered.  Reedy bought ten dollars' worth of chips at a
roulette table, played them in stacks of twenty, and lost in three
minutes.  As he turned away he caught sight of Bob Rogeen and came
across to him.

"Hello, Cotton-eyed Joe," he said with drunken jocularity, "let's have
a drink."

"Thanks," replied Bob, "my wildest dissipation is iced rain water."

Bob just then caught sight of Noah Ezekiel and moved away from Reedy
Jenkins.  He felt it safer--especially for Reedy, to stay out of reach
of him.

Noah Ezekiel's lank form was leaning against a roulette table, a stack
of yellow chips in front of him.

"Hello," said the hill billy as Bob edged his way up to his side.

"How is it going?" asked Bob.

"Fine," answered Noah, carefully laying five chips in the shape of a
star.  "I got a system and I'm going to clean 'em up."

Bob smiled and watched.  The wheel spun around.  The ball slowed and
dropped on 24.  Noah's magical star spread around 7.  The dealer
reached over and wiped in his five chips.

"You see," Noah explained, taking it for granted Bob knew nothing of
the games, "this is ruelay.  You play your money on one number and then
rue it."  The hill billy chuckled at his pun.  "There are 36 numbers on
the table," he pointed a long forefinger, "and there are 36 numbers on
the wheel.  You put your money or chip--the chips are five cents
apiece--on one number, and if the ball stops at that number on the
wheel, you win 35 times what you played."

"But if it doesn't stop on your number?" said Bob.

"Then you are out of luck."  Noah Ezekiel had again begun to place his
chips.

"Of course," he explained, "you play this thing dozens of ways; one to
two on the red or black, or you can play one to three on the first,
second or third twelve.  Or you can play on the line between two
numbers, and if either number wins you get 17 chips."

Noah won this time.  The number in the centre of his star came up and
he got 67 chips.

"Better quit now, hadn't you?" suggested Bob.

"Nope--just beginning to rake 'em in," replied Noah.

"Wish you would," said Bob, "and show me the rest of the games."

Noah reluctantly cashed in.  He had begun with a dollar and got back
$4.60.

"You see," said Noah, clinking the silver in his hands as they moved
away, "this is lots easier than work.  The only reason I work for you
is out of the kindness of my heart.  I made that $4.60 in twenty
minutes."

"Here is craps."  They had stopped at a table that looked like a gutted
piano, with sides a foot above the bottom.

"You take the dice"--Noah happened to be in line and got them as the
last man lost--"and put down say a half dollar."  He laid one on the
line.  "You throw the two dice.  If seven comes up---- Ah, there!" he
chuckled.  "I done it."  The face of the dice showed [3 and 4].  "You
see I win."  The dealer had thrown down a half dollar on top of Noah's.
"Now, come, seven."  Noah flung them again.

Sure enough seven came up again.  A dollar was pitched out to him.  He
left the two dollars lying.  This time he threw eleven and won again.
Four dollars!  Noah was in great glee.

"Let's go," urged Bob.

"One more throw," Noah brought up a 6 this time.

"Now," he explained, "I've got to throw until another 6 comes.  If I
get a seven before I do a six, they win."  His next throw was a seven,
and the dealer raked in the four dollars.

"Oh, well," sighed Noah, "only fifty cents of that was mine, anyway.
And the poor gamblers have to live.

"This," he explained, stopping at a table waist high around which a
circle of men stood with money and cards in front of them, "is Black
Jack.

"You put down the amount of money you want to bet.  The banker deals
everybody two cards, including himself.  But both your cards are face
down, while his second card is face up.

"The game is to see who can get closest to 21.  You look at your cards.
All face cards count for ten; ace counts for either 1 or 11 as you
prefer.

"If your cards don't add enough, you can get as many more as you ask
for.  But if you ask for a card and it makes you run over 21, you lose
and push your money over.  Say you get a king and a 9--that is 19, and
you stand on that, and push your cards under your money.

"When all the rest have all the cards they want, the dealer turns his
over.  Say he has a 10 and a 8.  He draws.  If he gets a card that puts
him over 21, he goes broke and pays everybody.  But if he gets say
18--then he pays all those who are nearer 21 than he; but all who have
less than 18 lose."

While Noah had been explaining, he had been playing, and lost a dollar
on each of two hands.

They moved on to a chuck-a-luck game.

"This, you see," said Noah, "is a sort of bird cage with three
overgrown dice.  You put your money on any one of these six numbers.
He whirls the cage and shakes up the fat dice.  They fall--and if one
of the three numbers which come up is yours, you win.
Otherwise--ouch!"  Noah had played a dollar on the 5; and a 1, 2 and a
6 came up.

As they moved away Noah was shaking his head disconsolately.

"Money is like a shadow that soon flees away--and you have to hoe
cotton in the morning."

"Don't you know," said Bob, earnestly, "that everyone of these games
give the house from 6 to 30 per cent., and that you are sure to lose in
the end?"

"Yeah," said Noah, wearily.  "You're sure to die in the end, too; but
that don't keep you from goin' on tryin' every day to make a livin' and
have a little fun.  It's all a game, and the old man with the mowin'
blade has the last call."

"But," persisted Bob, "when you earn a thing and get what you earn, it
is really yours, and has a value and gives a pleasure that you can't
get out of money that comes any other way."

"Don't you believe it," Noah shook his head lugubriously.  "The easier
money comes the more I enjoy it.  Only it don't never come.  It goes.
This here gamblin' business reminds me of an old dominecker hen we used
to have.  That hen produced an awful lot of cackle but mighty few eggs.
It is what my dad would have called the shadow without the substance.
But your blamed old tractor gives me a durned lot more substance than I
yearn for."

They were still pushing among the jostling crowd.  There were more than
a thousand men in the hall--and a few women.  Soiled Mexicans passed
through the jostle with trays on their heads selling sandwiches and
bananas.  Fragments of meat and bread and banana peelings were
scattered upon the sawdust floor.  It was a grimy scene.  And yet Bob
still acknowledged the tremendous pull of it--the raw, quick action of
the stuff that life and death are made of.

Noah nudged Bob and nodded significantly toward the bar, where Reedy
with his three friends and two or three Mexicans, including Madrigal,
were drinking.

"He's cookin' up something agin you," said Noah in a low tone.  "Better
go over and talk to him.  He's gettin' full enough to spill some of it."

Bob took the suggestion and sauntered over toward the bar.  As he
approached, Reedy turned around and nodded blinkingly at him.

"Say," Reedy leaned his elbows on the bar and spoke in a propitiatory
tone, "I'sh sorry you went off in such a huff.  Right good fello', I
understand.  If you'd asked me, I'd saved you lot of trouble and money
on that lease."  Reedy stopped to hiccough.  "Even now, take your lease
off your hands at half what it cost."

"So?"  Bob smiled sarcastically.

"Well, hell," Reedy was nettled at the lack of appreciation of his
generosity, "that's a good deal better than nothing."

"My lease is not on the market," Bob replied, dryly.

"Now look here!"  Reedy half closed his plump eyes and nodded
knowingly.  "'Course you are goin' to sell--I got to have four more
ranches to fill out my farm--and when I want 'em I get 'em, see?  As
Davy Crockett said to the coon, 'Better come on down before I shoot,
and save powder.'"

"Shoot," said Bob, contemptuously.

"Now look here," Reedy lurched still closer to Bob, and put his plump
fingers down on the bar as though holding something under his hand; "I
got unlimited capital back of me--million dollars--two million--all I
want.  That's on 'Merican side--on this side--I got pull.  See?  Fifty
ways I can squelch you--just like that."   He squeezed his plump, soft
hand together as though crushing a soft-shelled egg.

"You are drunk," Bob said, disgustedly, "and talking through a sieve."
He moved away from him and sauntered round the hall.  At one of the
tables he came upon Rodriguez, the man he was looking for.

He looked more Spanish than Mexican, had a moustache but did not curl
it, a thin face and soft brown eyes, and the pensive look of a poet who
is also a philosopher.

"Well?" Bob questioned in an undertone as they drifted outside of the
gambling hall and stood in the shadows beyond the light of the open
doors.  "Did you learn anything?"

Rodriguez nodded.  "They have two, three plans to make you get out.
Senor Madrigal is--what you call hem?--detec--detectave in Mexico.
Ver' bad man.  He work for Senor Jenkins on the side."

Bob left his Mexican friend.  He stood in the shadow of the great
gambling hall for a moment, pulled in opposite directions by two
desires.  He remembered a red spot on Reedy Jenkins' cheek just under
his left eye that he wanted to hit awfully bad.  He could go back and
smash him one that would knock him clear across the bar.  On the other
hand, he wanted to get on his horse and ride out into the silence and
darkness of the desert and think.  After all, smashing that red spot on
Reedy's cheek would not save his ranch.  He turned quickly down the
street to where his horse was hitched.




CHAPTER XI

One of the hardest layers of civilization for a woman to throw off is
the cook stove.  She can tear up her fashion plates, dodge women's
clubs, drop her books, forsake cosmetics and teas, and yet be fairly
happy.  But to the last extremity she clings to her cook stove.

Imogene Chandler had her stove out in the open at a safe distance from
the inflammable weed roof of the "house."  The three joints of
stovepipe were held up by being wired to two posts driven in the ground
beside it.

The girl alternately stuffed light, dry sticks into the stove box, and
then lifted the lid of a boiling kettle to jab a fork into the potatoes
to see if they were done.  The Chandler larder was reduced to the point
where Imogene in her cooking had to substitute things that would do for
things that tasted good.

Chandler, in from the field, filled a tin washbasin at the tank, set it
on a cracker box, and proceeded to clean up for supper.  He rolled his
sleeves up far above his elbows and scrubbed all the visible parts of
his body from the top of his bald head to the shoulder blade under the
loose collar of his open-necked shirt.  About the only two habits from
his old life that clung to the ex-professor were his use of big words
and soap.

Chandler sat down at the little board table, also out in the open.  It
was after sundown and the heat was beginning to abate.  As Imogene
poured coffee into the pint tin cup beside his plate she looked down at
him with protective admiration.

"Dad, I'm proud of you.  You've got a tan that would be the envy of an
African explorer; and you are building up a muscle, too; you are almost
as good a man in the field as a Chinese coolie--really better than a
Mexican."

"It has been my observation," said the ex-professor, tackling the
boiled potatoes with a visible appetite, "that when a man quits the
scholarly pursuits he instinctively becomes an agriculturist.  Business
is anathema to me; but I must confess that it gives me pleasure to
watch the germination of the seed, and to behold the flower and
fruitage of the soil."

Imogene laughed.  "It is the fruitage that I'm fond of--especially when
it is a bale to the acre.  And it is going to make that this year or
more; I never saw a finer field of cotton."

"It is doing very well," Chandler admitted with pride.  "Yet, ah,
perhaps there is one field better, certainly as good, and that is the
American's north of here; the person you referred to as a fiddler."

"Daddy," and under the tone of raillery was a trace of wistfulness,
"we've lived like Guinea Negroes here for three years, and yet I
believe you like it.  I don't believe you'd go back right now as
professor of Sanskrit at Zion College."

The little professor did not reply, but remarked as he held out the cup
for another pint of coffee:

"I notice I sleep quite soundly out here, even when the weather is
excessively hot."

The girl smiled and felt fully justified in the change she had forced
in his way of living.

"I think," remarked Chandler, reflectively, "at the end of the month
I'll let Chang Lee go.  I think I can some way manage the rest of the
season alone."

"Perhaps," assented Imogene, soberly, as she began to pick up the
knives and forks and plates.  She had not told him that when Chang
Lee's wages for June were paid it would leave them less than twenty
dollars to get through the summer on.  "I've been learning to irrigate
the cotton rows and I can help," she said.  "It will be a lot of fun."

The ex-professor was vaguely troubled.  He knew in a remote sort of way
that their finances were at a low ebb.  Imogene always attended to the
business.

"Do you suppose, daughter," he asked, troubled, "that it is practical
for us to continue in our present environment for another season?"

"Surest thing, you know," she laughed reassuringly.  "Run along now to
bed; you are tired."  He sighed with a delicious sense of relief and
sleepiness, and went.

But Imogene was not tired enough either to sit still or to sleep.  She
got up and walked restlessly round the camp.  Known problems and
unknown longings were stirring uneasily in her consciousness.

She stood at the edge of the field where the long rows of cotton
plants, freshly watered, grew rank and green in the first intense heat
of summer.  There was a full moon to-night--a hazy, sleepy full moon
with dust blown across its face creeping up over the eastern desert.

Just a little while ago and it was all desert.  Two years ago when they
first came this cotton field was uneven heaps of blown sand, desert
cactus, and mesquite--barren and forbidding as a nightmare of thirst
and want.  It had taken a year's work and nearly all their meagre
capital to level it and dig the water ditches.  And the next year--that
was last year--the crop was light and the price low.  They had barely
paid their debts and saved a few hundred for their next crop.  Now that
was gone, and with it six hundred, the last dollar she could borrow at
the bank.  Just how they were going to manage the rest of the summer
she did not know.  And worst of all were these vague but persistent
rumours and warnings that the ranchers were somehow to be robbed of
their crops.

She turned and walked back into the yard of the little shack and stood
bareheaded looking at the moon, the desert wind in her face.  Another
summer of heat was coming swiftly now.  She had lived through two
seasons of that terrific heat when the sun blazed all day, day after
day, and the thermometer climbed and climbed until it touched the 130
mark.  And all these two years had been spent here at this shack, with
its dirt yard and isolation.

The desert had bit deeply into her consciousness.  Even the heat, the
wind-driven sand, the stillness, the aloneness of it had entered into
her soul with a sort of fascination.

"I'm not sorry," she shut her hands hard and pressed her lips close
together, "even if we do lose--but we must not lose!  We can't go on in
poverty, either here or over there.  We must not lose--we must not!"

She turned her head sharply; something toward the road had moved; some
figure had appeared a moment and then disappeared.  A fear that was
never wholly absent made her move toward the door of her own shack.  A
revolver hung on a nail there.

And then out on the night stole the singing, quivering note of a
violin.  Instantly the fear was gone, the tension past, and the tears
for the first time in all the struggle slipped down her cheeks.  She
knew now that for weeks she had been hoping he would come again.

When the violin cords ceased to sing, Imogene clapped her hands warmly,
and the fiddler rose from beside a mesquite bush and came toward her.

"I'm glad you brought it this time," she said as he approached and sat
down on a box a few feet away.  "That was the best music I have heard
for years."

"The best?" he questioned.

She caught the meaning in his emphasis and smiled to herself as she
answered: "The best violin music."  Although her face was in the
shadow, the moonlight was on her hair and shoulders.  Something in her
figure affected him as it had that night when she stood in the
doorway--some heroic endurance, some fighting courage that held it
erect, and yet it was touched by a yearning as restless and unsatisfied
as the desert wind.  Bob knew her father was incapable of grappling
alone with the problems of life.  This project had all been hers; it
was her will, her brain, her courage that had wrought the change on the
face of this spot of desert.  Yet how softly girlish as she sat there
in the moonlight; and how alone in the heart of this sleeping desert in
an alien country.  He wished she had not qualified that praise of his
playing.  Bob knew very little about women.

"How do you like being a cotton planter?"  She was first to break the
silence.

"Oh, very well."  He turned his eyes from her for the first time,
looked down at his fiddle, and idly picked at one of the strings.  "But
of course I can't truthfully say I love manual labour.  I can do it
when there is something in it; but I much prefer a hammock and a shade
and a little nigger to fan me and bring me tall glasses full of iced
drinks."

She laughed, for she knew already he had the reputation of being one of
the best workers in the valley.

"But this country has me," he added.  "It fascinates me.  When I make a
fortune over here I'm going across on the American side and buy a big
ranch.

"You know"--he continued softly to strum on the violin strings--"this
Imperial Valley seems to me like a magic spot of the tropics, some land
of fable.  Richer than the valley of the Nile it has lain here beneath
the sea level for thousands of years, dead under the breath of the
desert, until a little trickle of water was turned in from the Colorado
River, and then it swiftly put forth such luxuriant wealth of food and
clothes and fruit and flowers that its story sounds like the demented
dreams of a bankrupt land promoter."

"I am glad you like it," she said, "and I hope you'll get your share of
the fabled wealth that it is supposed to grow--and, oh, yes, by the
way, do you happen to need another Chinaman?"

"No, I've got more than I can pay now."

"We are going to let Chang Lee go the last of the month.  He's a good
Chinaman, and I wanted him to have a job."

"Why let him go?"

"We won't need him."

"Won't need him!" Bob exclaimed.  "With a hundred and sixty acres of
cotton to irrigate and keep chopped out?"

"I can do a lot of the irrigating"--the girl spoke a little
evasively--"and daddy can manage the rest."

He knew this was another case of exhausted funds.

"Can't you borrow any more?"

She laughed a frank confession.

"You guessed it.  We haven't money to pay him.  I've borrowed six
hundred on the crop, and can't get another dollar."

He sat silent for several minutes looking off toward the cotton fields
that would cry for water to-morrow in their fight against the eternal
desert that brooded over this valley, thinking of her pluck.  It made
him ashamed of any wavering thought that ever scouted through his own
mind.

He stood up.  "And are you going to see it through?"

Alone beside the field as the moon rose she had wavered in doubt; but
the answer came now with perfect assurance.

"Most surely."

"So am I," he said.  "Good-night."

But before he turned she put out her hand to touch his violin--her
fingers touched his hand instead.

"Please--just once more," she asked.

He laughed whimsically as he sat down on the box and drew the bow.

"I'm proud of the human race," he said, "that fights for bread and
still looks at the stars."

He began to play: he did not know what.  It might have been something
he had heard; but anyway to-night it was his and hers, the song of the
rose that fought the desert all day for its life and then blossomed
with fragrance in the night.

At the sound of the violin a man sitting on the edge of the canal by
the cottonwood trees stirred sharply.  There was a guitar across his
knee.  He had been waiting for the sound of voices to cease; and now
the accursed fiddle was playing again.  He spat vindictively into the
stream.

"Damn the Americano!"




CHAPTER XII

Bob saw as he turned into the Bungalow Court at El Centro a youngish
woman in white sitting on the second porch.  In spite of the absence of
the weeds he recognized her as the widow who had come down the street
that other morning to meet Jim Crill.  This, then, was Crill's place.
Evidently the twelve months of bereavement had elapsed, and Mrs.
Barnett, having done her full duty, felt that the ghost of her departed
could no longer have any just complaints if she wore a little white of
her own.

Bob had come to see Crill.  Since that evening with Imogene Chandler he
had worried a good deal about their being without money.  He had tried
to get the ginning company that had advanced his own funds to make them
a loan.  But everybody had grown wary and quit lending across the line.
Bob as a last resort had come up to see if Crill could be induced to
help.

"Good morning."  Rogeen lifted his straw hat as he stood on the first
step of the porch, and smiled.  "Is Mr. Crill at home?"

"No."  Mrs. Barnett had nodded rather stiffly in response to his
greeting, and lifted her eyes questioningly.  She was waiting for
someone else, and hence felt no cordiality for this stranger, whom she
dimly seemed to remember.

"When will he be in?"  The young man was obviously disappointed, and he
really was good to look at.

"I don't know exactly."  Mrs. Barnett relented slightly, having glanced
down the road to be sure another machine was not coming.  "But as I
attend to much of his business, perhaps if you will tell me what it is
you want I can arrange it for you.  Won't you come up and have a chair?"

Bob accepted the invitation, not that he intended to mention his
business to her, but he had a notion that Jim Crill was due to arrive
about lunch time.

"Are you from the East?"  That was Mrs. Barnett's idea of tactful
flattery.  She asked it of all callers.

"Yes."

"What part, may I ask?"

"All parts," he smiled, "east of here and west of the Mississippi."

"It is so different here," Mrs. Barnett lifted her brows and raised her
eyes as though she were singing "The Lost Chord," "from what I am used
to."

"Yes," assented Bob, "it is different from what I am used to.  That is
why I like it."

"Oh, do you?"  Shocked disappointment in her tone implied that it was
too bad he was not a kindred spirit.  "I find everything so crude; and
such loose standards here."  A regretful shake of the head.  "The women
especially"--she thought of her tact again--"seem to have forgotten all
the formalities and nice conventions of good society--if they ever
knew.  I suppose most of them were hired girls and clerks before they
were married."

[Illustration: Reedy Jenkins makes a proposition to Imogene.]

Bob made no comment.  He did not know much about "nice formalities,"
but it had struck him that the women of Imperial Valley were uncommonly
good, friendly human beings, and he had seen a number of college
diplomas scattered round the valley.

"I heard of a woman recently," Mrs. Barnett went on, "who in the East
was in college circles; now she's living in a hut.  Think of it, a hut
over on the other side among the Chinese and Mexicans!  The only woman
there, and practically alone.  It seems perfectly incredible!  I don't
see how any decent woman could do a thing like that.  Why, I'd rather
work in somebody's kitchen.  There, at least, one could be respectable."

Bob got up.

"I guess I'll not wait longer for Mr. Crill," he said, and he went down
the steps, walking with rapid aversion.  If Jim Crill left his business
to this female, he didn't want any of his money for the Chandlers.

The ginning company had agreed to lend Bob up to $1,500 on the crop,
advancing it along as he needed it.  He was renting his teams, and had
bought very little machinery, so he had managed to use less than his
estimate.  On his way back to the ranch he stopped at the company's
office in Calexico, and drew two hundred dollars more on the loan.

A few days later Rogeen, watching his opportunity, saw Chandler riding
alone toward town, and went out to the road and stopped him.  After
some roundabout conversation Bob remarked:

"By the way, a friend of mine has a little money he wants to lend to
cotton growers at 10 per cent.  Do you suppose you would be able to use
a couple of hundreds of it?"

"Ahem!"  The ex-professor ran a bony hand over a lean chin.  "It is
extremely probable, young man, extremely probable.  I am very much
inclined to think that I can--that is, provided he would esteem my
personal signature to a promissory note sufficient guarantee for the
payment of the indebtedness."

"That will be entirely sufficient."  Bob smiled reassuringly, and
pretended to write out--it was already prepared--a note.  Chandler
signed, and Bob gave him two hundred dollars in currency.

The next evening when Bob returned from the field he found a sealed
envelope on the little board table in his shack.  It contained $100 in
currency and a note which read:


You can't afford this loan; but we need the money so darned bad I'm
going to split it with you.  I like the fiddle better than any musical
instrument that is made.

I. C.


Toward the last of June old cotton growers told Bob that his field was
sure to go a bale and a quarter an acre, and Chandler's was about as
good.

On the twenty-sixth of June a Mexican officer came to the ranch and
arrested Rogeen's Chinese cook and one of his field hands.  Bob offered
bail, but it was refused.  The day following the remaining Chinaman was
arrested.

Bob got other hands, but on July first all three of these were arrested.

"I see," Bob said to himself, thinking it over that evening, "this is
the first of Jenkins' schemes.  They are going to make Chinamen afraid
to work for me.  Well, Noah and I can manage until I can hire some
Americans."

At nine o'clock it was yet too hot to sleep, and Bob too restless to
sit still.  He got up and started out to walk.  Without any definite
intention he turned down the road south.  He had gone about half a mile
and thought of turning back when he saw something in the road
ahead--something white.  It was a woman, and she was running toward him.




CHAPTER XIII

Bob hastened to meet the figure in the road.  He knew it was Imogene
Chandler, and that her haste meant she was either desperately
frightened or in great trouble.

"Is that you, Mr. Rogeen?"  She checked up and called to him fifty
yards away.

"Yes.  What is the matter?"

"I've been frightened three times in the last week."  She caught her
breath.  "A man hid in the weeds near the house, and his movements gave
me a scare; but I didn't think so much about it until Saturday night,
when I went out after dark to gather sticks for the breakfast cooking,
a man slipped from the shadow of the trees and spoke to me and I ran
and he followed me nearly to the house.  I got my gun and shot at him.

"But to-night," she gasped for breath again, "just as I was going from
papa's tent to my own, a man jumped out and grabbed me.  I screamed and
he ran away."

Bob put his hand on her arm.  He felt it still quivering under his
fingers.

"I'll walk back with you," he said in a quiet, reassuring tone.

"Can you lend me a blanket?" he asked when they reached the Chandler
ranch.  "And let me have your gun, I'll sleep out here to one side of
your tent."

She protested, but without avail.

Next morning when Bob returned to his own ranch he spoke to Noah
Ezekiel Foster.

"Noah, this afternoon move your tent down to the Chandler ranch.  Put
it up on the north side of Miss Chandler's so she will be between yours
and her father's.  I'm going to town and I'll bring out a
double-barrelled riot shotgun that won't miss even in the dark.  You
and that gun are going to sleep side by side."

Noah Ezekiel grinned.

Bob went to the shack, put his own pistol in his pocket, and rode off
to Calexico.

Reedy Jenkins sat at his desk in shirt sleeves, his pink face a trifle
pasty as he sweated over a column of figures.  He looked up annoyedly
as someone entered through the open door; and the annoyance changed to
surprise when he saw that it was Bob Rogeen.

"I merely came in to tell you a story," said Bob as he dropped into a
chair and took a paper from the pocket of his shirt and held it in his
left hand.

"This," Bob flecked the paper and spoke reminiscently, "is quite a
curiosity.  I got it up near Blindon, Colorado.  A bunch of rascals
jumped me one night when my back was turned.

"Next day my friends hired an undertaker to take charge of my remains,
and made up money to pay him.  This paper is the undertaker's receipt
for my funeral.

"The rascals did not get either me or the cash they were after; but
they taught me a valuable lesson: never to have my back turned again."

He stopped.

"You see," went on Bob in a tone that did not suggest argument, "there
is a ranch over my way you happen to want--two of them, in fact.  The
last week the lessees have both been much annoyed; the one on the south
one especially.

"Now, of course, we can kill Madrigal and any other Mexican that keeps
up that annoyance.  But instead, I suggest that you call them off.  For
the Chandlers have fully made up their minds not to sell, and so have
I."

Bob rose.  "If anything further happens down there, I'm afraid there'll
be an accident on this side of the line.  It was merely that you might
be prepared in advance that I dropped in this morning to make you a
present of this."  He tossed the paper on Jenkins' desk and went out.

Reedy picked up the receipt.  The undertaker, after Rogeen's recovery,
had facetiously written on the back:


This receipt is still good for one first-class funeral--and it is
negotiable.


Reedy felt all the sneer go out of his lips and a sort of coldness
steal along his sweaty skin.  Underneath this writing was another line:


Transferred for value received to Reedy Jenkins.
    BOB ROGEEN.




CHAPTER XIV

It was five minutes after Bob Rogeen had gone out of the door before
Reedy Jenkins stirred in his chair.  Then he gave his head a vicious
jerk and swiped the angling wisp of hair back from his forehead.

"Oh, hell!  He can't bluff me."

He sat gritting his teeth, remembering the insulting retorts he might
have made, slapped his thigh a whack with his open hand in vexation
that he had not made them; got up and walked the floor.

No, he was not afraid of Rogeen, not by a damned sight.  Afraid of a
twenty-dollar hardware clerk?  _Not much!_  He would show him he had
struck the wrong town and the wrong man for his cheap bluffs.  And yet
Reedy kept remembering a certain expression in Rogeen's eye, a certain
taut look in his muscles.  Of course a man of Reedy's reputation did
not want to be mixed up in any brawls.  Whatever was done, should be
done smoothly--and safely.

He telephoned for Madrigal, the Mexican Jew.  Madrigal could manage it.

While waiting for his agent, Reedy lighted a cigar, but became so
busily engaged with his thoughts that he forgot to puff until it went
out.  Jenkins was taking stock of the situation.  He had boasted of his
influence with the Mexican authorities; but like most boasters he was
talking about the influence he was going to have rather than what he
had.  Just now he was not sure he had any pull across the line at all.
Of course as a great ranch owner and a very rich man--as he was going
to be inside of three years--he could have great influence.  And yet he
remembered that the present Mexican Governor of Baja California was an
exceedingly competent man.  He was shrewd and efficient, and deeply
interested in the development of his province.  Moreover, he was
friendly to Americans, and seemed to have more than an ordinary sense
of justice toward them.

Reedy shook his head.  He did not believe he could have much chance
with the Governor--not at present, anyway.  But perhaps some minor
official might help put over his schemes.  Anyway, Madrigal would know.

The Mexican Jew came directly, dressed in light flannels, a flower in
his buttonhole.  Debonairly he lifted his panama and bowed with
exaggerated politeness to Jenkins.

"What great good has Senor Reedy clabbering in his coco now?"  He
grinned impudently.

Jenkins frowned.  His dignity was not to be so trifled with.

"Sit down," he ordered.

Reedy relighted his cigar, put his thumbs in his vest holes, and began
slowly puffing smoke toward the ceiling.  He liked to keep his
subordinates waiting.

"Madrigal," he said, directly, "I want those two ranches--Chandler's
and Rogeen's."

"_Si, si._"  The Mexican nodded shrewdly.  "And Senor Jenkins shall
have them."

"We've got to get rid of Rogeen first.  Then the other will be easy."

"Et es so, senor," Madrigal said, warmly.  He abated Rogeen on his own
account, for Senor Madrigal had formed a violent attachment for the
Senorita Chandler.  And the damned Americano with his fiddle was in the
way.

"If," suggested Reedy, smoking slowly, "Rogeen should be induced to
leave the country within three weeks--or in case he happened to some
accident so he could not leave at all--we'd make four thousand out of
his ranch.  Half of that would be two thousand."

Madrigal's black eyes narrowed wickedly, and his thick lips rolled up
under his long nose.

"Mexico, senor, is the land of accidents."

"All right, Madrigal," Reedy waved dismissal and turned to his desk and
began to figure--or pretend to figure.

The Mexican turned in the door, looked back on the bulky form of
Jenkins, started to speak, grinned wickedly, and went down the outside
stairway.


On the evening of the third of August Bob came in from the fields and
prepared his own supper.  Since the arrest of his Chinamen a few weeks
before Rogeen had not employed any other help.  The cotton cultivation
was over, and he and Noah could manage the irrigation.  The hill billy
had gone to town early in the afternoon, and would return directly to
the Chandler ranch where he was still on guard at nights.  Bob believed
his warning to Jenkins had stopped all further molestation, but he was
not willing to take any chances--at least not with Imogene Chandler.

Bob had been irrigating all day and was dead tired.  After supper he
sat in front of his shack as usual to cool a little before turning in.
The day had been the hottest of the summer, and now at eight o'clock it
was still much over a hundred.

In that heat there is little life astir even in the most luxuriant
fields.  It was still to-night--scarcely the croak of a frog or the
note of a bird.  There was no moon, but in the deep, vast, clear spaces
of the sky the stars burned like torches held down from the heavens.  A
wind blew lightly, but hot off the fields.  The weeds beside the
ditches shook slitheringly, and the dry grass roof of the shack rustled.

To be the centre of stillness, to be alone in a vast space, either
crushes one with loneliness or gives him an unbounded exhilaration.
To-night Bob felt the latter sensation.  It seemed instead of being a
small, lost atom in a swirling world, he was a part of all this lambent
starlight; this whispering air of the desert.

He breathed slowly and deeply of the dry, clean wind, rose, and
stretched his tired muscles, and turned in.  So accustomed had he
become to the heat that scarcely had he stretched out on the cot before
he was asleep.  And Bob was a sound sleeper.  The sides of the shack
were open above a three-foot siding of boards, open save for a mosquito
netting.  An old screen door was set up at the front, but Bob had not
even latched that.  If one was in danger out here, he was simply in
danger, that was all, for there was no way to hide from it.

A little after midnight two Mexicans crept along on all-fours between
the cotton rows at the edge of Bob's field.  At the end of the rows,
fifty yards from the shack, they crouched on their haunches and
listened.  The wind shook the tall rank cotton and rustled the weeds
along the ditches.  But no other sound.  Nothing was stirring anywhere.

Bending low and walking swiftly they slipped toward the back of the
shack.  Their eyes peered ahead and they slipped with their hearts in
their throats, trusting the Americano was asleep.

He was.  As they crouched low behind the shelter of the three-foot wall
of boards they could hear his breathing.  He was sound asleep.

Slowly, on hands and knees, they crawled around the west side toward
the entrance.  In the right hand of the one in front was the dull glint
of a knife.  The other held a revolver.

Cautiously the one ahead tried the screen door--pushing it open an inch
or two.  It was unlatched.  Motioning for the other to stand by the
door, he arose, pushed the door back with his left hand very slowly so
as not to make a squeak.  In the right he held the knife.

Bob stirred in his sleep and turned on the cot.  The Mexican stood
motionless, ready to spring either way if he awoke.  But the steady
breathing of a sound sleeper began again.

The Mexican let the door to softly and took one quick step toward the
bed.

Then with a wild, blood-curdling yell he fell on the floor.  Something
from above had leaped on him, something that enveloped him, that
grappled with him.  He went down screaming and stabbing like a madman.
His companion at the door fired one shot in the air, dropped his gun,
and ran as if all the devils in hell were after him.

The commotion awoke Bob.  Instantly he sat up in bed, and as he rose he
reached for a gun with one hand and a flashlight with the other.  In an
instant the light was in the Mexican's face--and the gun also.

"Hold up your hands, Madrigal."  Bob's tone brought swift obedience.
Around the Mexican and on him were the ripped and torn fragments of a
dummy man--made of a sack of oats, with flapping arms and a tangle of
ropes.  Bob had not felt sure but some attempt might be made on his
life, and half in jest and half as a precaution, he and Noah had put
this dummy overhead with a trip rope just inside the door.  They knew
the fright of something unexpected falling on an intruder would be more
effective than a machine gun.

"Get up," Bob ordered, and the shaken Madrigal staggered to his feet,
with his hands held stiffly straight up.  "March out."  Rogeen's
decision had come quickly.  He followed with the gun in close proximity
to the Mexican's back.

Madrigal was ordered to pick up a hoe and a shovel, and then was
marched along the water ditch toward the back of the field.

"Here."  Bob ordered a stop.  They were half a mile from the road, at
the edge of the desert.  The Mexican had recovered enough from his
first fright to feel the cold clutch of another, surer danger.  "Dig,"
ordered Bob.  And the Mexican obeyed.  "About two feet that way."  Bob
sat down on the bank of the water ditch and kept the digger covered.
"Make it seven feet long," he ordered, coldly.

Slowly Madrigal dug and shovelled, and slowly but surely as the thing
took shape, he saw what it was--a grave.  His grave!

He glared wildly about as he paused for a breath.

"Hurry," came the insistent command.

Another shovelful, and he glanced up at the light.  But the muzzle of
the gun was level with the light!  A wrong move and he knew the thing
would be over even before the grave was done.

For an hour he worked.  Off there at the edge of the desert, this grave
levelled as a part of the cotton field--and no one would ever find it.
His very bones seemed to sweat with horror.  Was the American going to
bury him alive?  Or would he shoot him first?

All the stealth and cruelty he had ever felt toward others now turned
in on himself, and a horror that filled him with blind, wild terror of
that hollow grave shook him until he could no longer dig.  He stood
there in front of the flashlight blanched and shaking.

"That will do," said Rogeen.  "Madrigal," he put into that word all the
still terror of a cool courage, "that is your grave."

For a full moment he paused.  "You will stay out of it just as long as
you stay off my land--out of reach of my gun.  Don't ever even pass the
road by my place.

"Your boss has had his warning.  This is yours.  That grave will stay
open, day and night, waiting for you.

"Good-night, Senor Madrigal.  Go fast and don't look back."

The last injunction was entirely superfluous.

After the night had swallowed up the fleeing figure Bob rolled on the
bank and laughed until his ribs ached.

"No more oat sacks for Senor Madrigal!  I wonder who the other one
was--and what became of him?"




CHAPTER XV

It was October.  The bolls had opened beautifully.  The cotton was
ready to pick.  As Bob and Noah walked down the rows the stalks came up
to their shoulders.  It was the finest crop of cotton either of them
had ever seen.

"As dad used to say," remarked Noah Ezekiel, "the fields are white for
the harvest, but where are the reapers?"  There was no one in the
fields at work.

Bob shook his head gloomily.  "I have no money for the pickers.  I owe
you, Noah, for the last two months."

"Yes, I remember it," said the hill billy, plucking an extra large boll
of lint.  "I've tried to forget it, but somehow those things sort of
stick in a fellow's mind."

In August the great war had broke in Europe.

Ships were rushing with war supplies, blockades declared, factories
shut down.  The American stock exchanges had closed to save a panic.
Buying and selling almost ceased.  Money scuttled to the cover of
safety vaults, and the price of cotton had dropped and dropped until
finally it ceased to sell at all.

"It is going to bankrupt almost every grower in the valley," remarked
Bob.  "I'm certainly sorry for the Chandlers.  They're up against it
hard."

"As the poet says," Noah Ezekiel drew down the corners of his mouth,
pulling a long face, "ain't life real?"

Bob laughed in spite of troubles.  "Noah, I believe you'd joke at your
own funeral."

"Why shouldn't I?" said Noah.  "You joked with your undertaker's
receipt."  He grinned at the recollection of that event.  "You sure
broke that yellow dog Jenkins from suckin' eggs--temporarily."

"But ain't he stuck with his leases though.  If I had as much money as
he owes, I could fix these gamblers at the Red Owl so they wouldn't
have to work any for the rest of their natural lives."

"Noah," Bob turned to his faithful foreman, "I want you to stick until
we put this thing through.  I'll see you don't lose a dollar."

"Don't you worry about me sticking," said Noah Ezekiel.  "I never quit
a man as long as he owes me anything."

The loyalty of the hill billy touched Rogeen, but as is the way of men,
he covered it up with a brusque tone.

"You get the sacks ready.  I'm going in to town and raise the money
somehow to pick this cotton.  I'll pick it if I never get a dollar out
of it--can't bear to see a crop like that go to waste."

The cotton-gin people were in a desperate panic, but Bob went after
them hard:

"Now see here, that war in Europe is not going to end the world; and as
long as the world stands there will be a demand for cotton.  This
flurry will pass, and there's sure to be a big jump in the market for
cotton seed.  The war will increase the demand for oils of all kinds.

"That cotton has got to be picked, and you'll have to furnish the
money.  When it is ginned you can certainly borrow five cents a pound
on it.  That will pay for the water and the lease, the picking and the
ginning--and the duty, too.

"Now you get the money for me to pick my field and Chandler's field.
They owe only $600 on the crop; so you'll be even safer there than with
me.  We'll leave the cotton with you as security.  And then after you
have borrowed all you can on it, I'll give you my personal note for all
the balance I owe, and see you get every dollar of it, if I have to
work it out during the next three years at twenty dollars a week."

It was that promise that turned the scales.  No man of discernment
could look at Rogeen and doubt either his pluck or his honesty.

Two days later forty Chinamen, more eager for jobs now than ever, were
picking cotton at the Chandler and Rogeen ranches--twenty at each place.


Tom Barton went up the outside stairway thumping each iron step
viciously.  Six months of gloomy forebodings had terminated even more
disastrously than he had feared.  He found Reedy Jenkins rumpled and
unshaven, laboriously figuring at his desk.

Reedy looked up with a sly-dog sort of smile.  There were little rims
of red round his eyes, but it was plain he had something new to spring
on his creditor.

"I'm not figuring debts"--Jenkins reached in the drawer and got out a
cigar and lighted it--"but profits."

"Yes," said Barton, murderously, "that is what you are always figuring
on.  Debts don't mean anything to you, because you aren't worth a damn.
But debts count with me.  You owe me $40,000 on this bright idea of
yours, and your leases aren't worth a tadpole in Tahoe."

"Easy, easy!"  Reedy waved his hand as though getting ready to make a
speech.  "Perhaps I have temporarily lost my credit; but with a
requisite amount of cash, a man can always get it back--or do without
it.

"I admit this damn war has swamped me.  I admit on the face of the
returns I am snowed under--bankrupt to the tune of over $200,000.  But
nevertheless and notwithstanding I am going to get away with some coin."

"Well, I hope you don't get away with mine," growled Barton.

A laundry driver entered the door with a bill in his hand.  Reedy grew
a little redder and waved at the man angrily.

"Don't bother me with that now; don't you see I'm busy?"

"So am I," said the driver, aggressively, "and this is the third call."

"Leave it," said Jenkins, angrily, "and I'll have my secretary send you
a check for it."

The driver threw it on Reedy's desk and left sullenly.  Barton caught
the figures on the unpaid bill--seventy-eight cents.

"I admit," Barton spoke sarcastically as he started for the door, "that
your credit is gone.  But if you don't dig up that forty thousand,
you'll be as sorry you ever borrowed it as I am that I lent it."


The last of November Bob went down to the Chandler ranch to give an
account of the cotton picking.

"You have 150 bales at the compress.  I put up the compress receipts
for the debts," said Bob to Imogene.  "There is $3,123 against your
cotton.  I could not borrow another dollar on it."

"You have done so much for us already," the girl said, feelingly.  "And
we'll get along some way.  If cotton would only begin to sell, we would
have a little fortune."

"I have 180 bales," said Bob, "but I owe something over $4,000 on it.
I am going up to Calexico and get a job until spring."  He hesitated a
moment, looking at the girl thoughtfully.  The summer and hard work and
constant worry had left her thin and with a look of anxiety in her eyes.

"Hadn't you also better move to town?"

She laughed at that.  "Why, dear sir, what do you suppose we should
live on in town?  Out here we have no rent and can at least raise some
vegetables.  No, we'll stick it out until we see whether this war is
merely a flurry or a deluge."

For a week Bob hunted a job in Calexico.  His need for funds was acute.
He had managed to get enough on his cotton to pay all his labour bills
but had not kept a dollar for himself.

Tuesday evening he had gone up to his room at the hotel, a court room
with one window and broken plaster and a chipped water pitcher.  There
was no job in sight.  Everything was at a standstill, and the cotton
market looked absolutely hopeless.  His note for the $4,000 fell due
January first.  If he could not sell the cotton by that time, his
creditors would take it over; and besides, he was held for any amount
of the debt above what the cotton would bring at a forced sale.

He was bluer than he had been since he lost that first good job nine
years ago.  He went to the battered old trunk, opened the lid, and
lifted the fiddle; stood with it in his hands a moment, put it against
his shoulder and raised the bow.  He was thinking of her, the girl left
alone down there on the ranch--still fighting it out with the desert,
the Mexicans, and the trailing calamities of this World War.  He
dropped the bow, he could not play.  And just as he was returning the
fiddle to his trunk there was a knock followed by the opening of the
door.  A chambermaid's head pushed in.

"There's a man down in the office wants to see you," announced the girl.

"Who is it?" asked Bob.

"Dunno--old fellow with eyebrows like a hair brush--and a long linen
duster."

"I'll be right down," said Bob.


Jim Crill was sitting in a corner of the hotel office when Rogeen came
down; and he motioned to Bob to take the chair beside him.

"Notice a cotton gin being built across the line?" the old gentleman
asked, crossing his legs and thrusting his hands into his trousers
pockets.

"Yes," Bob nodded.  "I wondered if you had."

"Reckon I have," remarked Crill, dryly.  "I'm puttin' up the money for
it."

"You are?"  Bob was surprised.  This upset his suspicions in regard to
that gin.

"Yes; don't you think it's a good investment?"  The old gentleman's
keen blue eyes looked searchingly from under the shaggy brows at Rogeen.

"Lots of cotton raised over there," Bob answered, noncommittally.  "And
the Mexicans really ought to have a gin on their side of the line."

The old gentleman cleared his throat as though about to say something
else; and then changed his mind and sat frowning in silence so long Bob
wondered why he had sent for him.

"Lots of cotton raisers 'll go broke this fall."  Crill broke the
silence abruptly.

"Already are," replied Bob.

"Know what it means."  The old gentleman jerked his head up and down.
"Hauled my last bale of five-cent cotton to the store many a time, and
begged 'em to let the rest of my bill run another year.  That was
before I ran the store myself; and then struck oil on a patch of Texas
land.  Haven't got as much money as folks think but too much to let lie
around idle.  Think this valley is a good place to invest, don't you?"
Again the searching blue eyes peered at the young man.

"I certainly do," answered Bob with conviction.  "The soil is
bottomless; it will grow anything and grow it all the year."

"If it gets water," added the old gentleman.

"Of course--but we had plenty of water this year.  And," went on Bob,
"this war is not going to smash the cotton market forever.  It's going
to smash most of us who have no money to hold on with.  But next spring
or next summer or a year after, sooner or later, prices will begin to
climb.  The war will decrease production more than it will consumption.
The war demands will send the price of wool up, and when wool goes up
it pulls cotton along with it.  Cotton will go to twenty cents, maybe
more."

"That sounds like sense."  The old gentleman nodded slowly.  "And it is
the fellow that is a year ahead that gets rich on the rise; and the
fellow a year behind that gets busted on the drop in prices."

"There are going to be some fortunes made in raising cotton over
there," Bob nodded toward the Mexican line, "in the next four years
that will sound like an Arabian Nights' tale of farming.

"I figured it out this summer.  That land is all for lease; it is
level, it is rich.  They get water cheaper than we do on this side; and
I can get Chinese help, which is the best field labour in the world,
for sixty-five cents to a dollar a day.  I was planning before this
smash came to plant six hundred acres of cotton next year."

"That's what I wanted to see you about," said Crill.  "Want to lend
some money over there, and you are the fellow to do it.  Want to lend
it to fellows you can trust on their honour without any mortgages.
Guess mortgages over there aren't much account anyway.

"Want to keep the cotton industry up here in the valley.  May want to
start a cotton mill myself.  Anyway," he added, belligerently, "a lot
of 'em are about to lose their cotton crops; and this is a good time to
stick 'em for a stiff rate of interest.  Charge 'em 10 per cent--and
half the cotton seed.  I'm no philanthropist."

Bob smiled discreetly at the fierceness.  That was the usual rate for
loans on the Mexican side.  And it was very reasonable considering the
risk.

"Want to hire you," said the old man, "to lend money on cotton--and
collect it.  What you want a month?"

"I'll do it for $150 a month," answered Bob, "if it does not interfere
with my own cotton growing next spring."

"We can fix that," agreed the old man.

"I think," replied Bob, "the best loans and the greatest help would be
just now on the cotton already baled and at the compress.  Most of the
growers have debts for leases and water and supplies and borrowed money
against their cotton, and cannot sell it at any price.  Unless they do
sell or can borrow on it by January first, these debts will take the
cotton.  If you would lend them six cents a pound on their compress
receipts that would put most of them in the clear, and enable them to
hold on a few months for a possible rise in price."

"That's your business."  The old gentleman got up briskly.  "I'll put
$25,000 to your credit in the morning at the International Bank.  It's
your job to lend it.  When it's gone, let me know."

"Oh, by the way," Bob's heart had been beating excitedly through all
this arrangement, but he had hesitated to ask what was on his mind.
"Do you mind if--if I lend myself five cents a pound on 180 bales?"

The old man turned and glared at him fiercely.

"Do you reckon I'd trust you to lend to others if I didn't trust you
myself?  Make the loans, then explain the paper afterward."

Next morning Bob bought a second-hand automobile for two hundred and
fifty dollars and gave his note for it.  It was not much of an
automobile, but it was of the sort that always comes home.

Rogeen headed straight south, and in less than an hour stopped at the
Chandler ranch.

Imogene was under the shade of the arrow-weed roof, reading a magazine.
Rogeen felt a quick thrill as he saw her flush slightly as she came out
to meet him.

"What means the gasolene chariot?" she asked.  "Prosperity or mere
recklessness?"

"Merely hopefulness," he answered.  "I brought a paper for you.  Sign
on the dotted line."  He handed her a promissory note, due in six
months, for $4,500.

"What is this?"  She had been living so long on a few dollars at a time
that the figures sounded startling.

"I've got a loan on your cotton," replied Bob with huge satisfaction.
"And you can have it as soon as you and your father have signed the
note."

"Good heavens!"  The blood had left her face.  "You are not joking, are
you?  Why, man alive, that means that we live!  It will give us $1,400
above the debts."

Bob felt a choking in his throat.  The pluckiness of the girl!  And
that he could bring her relief!  "Yes, and I'm going to take you back
to town, where you can pay off the debts and get your money."

The exuberant gayety that broke over the girl's spirits as they
returned to town moved Bob deeply.  What a long, hard pull she and her
father had had; no wonder the unexpected relief sent her spirits on the
rebound.

"Thank the Lord," he said, fervently, to himself, "for that sharp old
man with bushy eyebrows!"

As they drove up to the International Bank where Bob had asked the
compress company to send all the bills against the Chandler cotton,
another machine was just driving away and a woman was entering the bank.

"By the great horn spoon," Bob exclaimed aloud, "that is Mrs. Barnett."

"Who is Mrs. Barnett?" Imogene Chandler asked archly.  "Some special
friend of yours?"

"Hardly," Bob replied, remembering that Miss Chandler knew neither Jim
Crill nor his niece.

"And the man who was driving away," said Imogene, "was Reedy Jenkins."

"It was?" Bob turned quickly.  "Are you sure?  I was watching the woman
and did not notice the machine."

[Illustration: A mutual discovery--they both cared.]

As they entered the bank Mrs. Barnett, dressed in a very girlish
travelling suit, was standing by the check counter as though waiting.
At sight of Bob she nodded and smiled reservedly.

"Oh, Mr. Rogeen," she arched her brows and called to him as he started
to the cashier's window with Imogene Chandler.

Bob excused himself and approached her, a little uneasy and decidedly
annoyed.  Her mouth was simpering, but her eyes had that sharp,
predatory look he had seen before.

"Mr. Rogeen," she began in a cool, ladylike voice, "my uncle told me of
the arrangement he had made with you and asked me to O. K. all the
loans before you make them."

"Is that so?"  Bob felt a mingling of wrath and despair.  "He did not
say anything to me about it."

"N-o?"--questioningly--"we talked it over last night, and he felt sure
this would be the better plan."

Bob hesitated for a moment.  Imogene had gone to the other note
counter, and was trying idly not to be aware of the conversation.  It
would be utterly too cruel to disappoint her now.  It went against the
grain, but Rogeen swallowed his resentment and distaste.

"All right," he nodded brightly.  "I've got one loan already for you."
He drew the papers from his pocket.  "It is six cents on 150 bales of
cotton now in the yards.  Here are the compress receipts."

"Whom is this for?"  Her eyes looked at him challengingly; her lips
shaped the words accusingly.

"To Miss Chandler and her father."  Bob felt himself idiotically
blushing.

Mrs. Barnett's face took on the frozen look of a thousand generations
of damning disapprobation.

"No!  Not one cent to that woman.  Uncle and I don't care to encourage
that sort."

For a moment Bob stood looking straight into the frigid face of Mrs.
Barnett.  It was the first time in his life he would have willingly
sacrificed his personal pride for money.  He would have done almost
anything to get that money for Imogene Chandler.  But it was useless to
try to persuade the widow that she was wrong.  Back of her own
narrowness was Reedy Jenkins.  This was Reedy's move; he was using the
widow's vanity and personal greed for his own ends; and his ends were
the destruction of Rogeen and the capitulation of Miss Chandler.

Mrs. Barnett's eyes met his defiantly, but her mouth quivered a little
nervously.  A doubt flashed through his mind.  Was she authorized to do
this?  Surely she would not dare take such authority without her
uncle's consent.  He might telephone, anyway, then a more direct
resolution followed swiftly.  He turned away from Mrs. Barnett and went
to the cashier's window.

"Did Jim Crill deposit $25,000 here subject to my check?" he asked.

"He did," replied the cashier.

"Are there any strings to it?"

"None," responded the cashier promptly.

Without so much as glancing toward the widow, who had watched this move
with a venomous suspicion, Bob went to Miss Chandler by the desk and
took the papers from his pocket, and laid them before her.

"Indorse the compress receipts over to Mr. Crill."

Then he wrote two checks--one to the bank for $3,123 to pay off all the
claims against the Chandler cotton and one to Imogene for $1,377.

"You don't know, Mr. Rogeen," she started to say in a low, tense voice
as she took the check, "how much----"

"I don't need to," he smilingly interrupted her gratitude, "for it
isn't my money.  I'll see you at lunch; and then take you back home in
my car."  He lifted his hat and turned back to the counter where Mrs.
Barnett stood loftily, disdainfully, yet furiously angry.

"Well," said Bob, casually, "I've made one loan, anyway."

"It will be your last."  Mrs. Barnett clutched her hands vindictively.
"You'll be discharged as quick as I get to Uncle Jim."

Bob really expected he would, but not for three jobs would he have
recalled that loan and the light of relief in Imogene Chandler's eyes.




CHAPTER XVI

Mrs. Barnett went direct from the bank to Reedy Jenkins' office.  As
she climbed the outside stairway she was so angry she forgot to watch
to see that her skirts did not lift above her shoe tops.  As she
entered the door her head was held as high and stiff as though she had
been insulted by a disobedient cook.  White showed around her mouth and
the base of her nose, and her nostrils were dilated.

"Why, Mrs. Barnett!"  Reedy arose with an oratorical gesture.  "What a
pleasant surprise.  Have a chair."

She took the chair he placed for her without a word and her right hand
clutched the wrist of the left.  She was breathing audibly.

"Did you see Rogeen?" Jenkins suggested suavely.

"Yes."  The tone indicated that total annihilation should be the end of
that unworthy creature.  But her revenge, like Reedy's expectations,
was in the future.  She hated to confess this.  She breathed hard
twice.  "And I'll show him whose word counts."

"You don't mean," Reedy swiped his left hand roughly at the wisp of
hair on his forehead, "that he disregarded your wishes?"

"He certainly did."  Indignation was getting the better of her voice.
"The low-lived--the contemptible--common person.  And he insulted me
with that--that creature."

"Well, of all the gall!"  Reedy was quite as indignant as Mrs. Barnett,
for very different if more substantial reasons.  He had seen more and
more that a fight with Rogeen was ahead, a fight to the finish; and the
further he went the larger that fight looked.  The easiest way to smash
a man, Reedy had found, was to deprive him of money.  A man can't carry
out many schemes unless he can get hold of money.  Jenkins had kept a
close eye on Jim Crill, and had grown continually more uneasy lest the
old chap become too favourably impressed with Rogeen.  He had early
sensed the old man's weak spot--one of them--Crill hated to be
pestered.  That was the vulnerable side at which Evelyn Barnett, the
niece, could jab.  And Reedy had planned all her attacks.  This last
move of Crill's--hiring Rogeen to lend money for him, had alarmed Reedy
more than anything that had happened.  For it would give Rogeen a big
influence on the Mexican side.  Most of the ranchers needed to borrow
money, and it would put the man on whose word the loans would be made
in mighty high favour.  To offset this, Reedy had engineered an attack
by Mrs. Barnett on the old gentleman's leisure.  She had worried him
and nagged him with the argument that he ought not to bother with a lot
of business details, but should turn them over to her.  She would see
to the little things for him.  He had reluctantly granted some sort of
consent to this, a consent which Evelyn had construed meant blanket
authority.

"He flatly refused," Mrs. Barnett was still thinking blisteringly of
Bob Rogeen, "to obey my wishes in the matter.  I told him plainly," she
bit her lips again, "that neither Uncle nor I would consent to money
being furnished women like that."

"I should say not."  Reedy agreed with unctuous righteousness in his
plump face.  "And to think of that scalawag, making a loan right in
your face, after you had vetoed it."

"He'll never make another."  Mrs. Barnett's lips would have almost bit
a thread in two.  "Just wait until I get to Uncle Jim!"

"I'll drive you up," said Reedy.  He reached to the top of the desk for
his hat.

"Of course," remarked Reedy on the way, "your uncle is very generous to
want to help these fellows across the line that are broke.  But they
are riff-raff.  He will lose every dollar of it.  I know them.  Good
Lord! haven't I befriended them, and helped them fifty ways?  And do
they appreciate it?  Well, I should say not!"

"The more you do for people the less they appreciate it," said Mrs.
Barnett still in a bitter mood.

"Some people," corrected Reedy.  "There are a few, a very few, who
never forget a favour."

"Yes, that is true," assented the widow, and began to relent in her
mind, seeing how kind was Mr. Jenkins.

"I'm very sorry," continued Reedy, frowning, "that your uncle has taken
up this fellow.  I've been looking up Rogeen's past--and he is no good,
absolutely no good.  Been a drifter all his life.  Never had a hundred
dollars of his own.

"By the way," Reedy suddenly remembered a coincidence in regard to that
undertaker's receipt, "where was it your husband lost the sale of that
mine?"

"At Blindon, Colorado."

"By George!"  Reedy released the wheel with the right hand and slapped
his leg.  "I thought so.  Do you know who that young man with the
fiddle was who ruined your fortune?"

"No."  Evelyn Barnett came around sharply.

"Bob Rogeen--that fellow who insulted you this morning."

"No?  Not really?"  Angry incredulity.

Reedy nodded.  "As I told you, I've been looking up his past.  And I
got the story straight."

"The vile scoundrel!" Mrs. Barnett said, bitterly.  "And to think Uncle
would trust him with his money."

"We must stop it," said Reedy.  "It isn't right that your uncle should
be fleeced by this rascal."

"He shan't be!" declared Mrs. Barnett, gritting her teeth.

"There are too many really worthy investments," added Reedy.

"I'll see that this is the last money that man gets," Mrs. Barnett
asseverated.

"Your uncle is a little bull headed, isn't he?" suggested Reedy,
cautiously.  "Better be careful how you approach him."

"Oh, I'll manage him, never fear," she said positively.

Jenkins set Mrs. Barnett down at the entrance to the bungalow court.
He preferred that Jim Crill should not see him with her.  It might lead
him to think Reedy was trying to influence her.

As Mrs. Barnett stalked up the steps, Jim Crill was sitting on the
porch in his shirt sleeves, smoking.

"How are you feeling, dear?" she asked, solicitously.

"Ain't feelin'," Crill grunted--"I'm comfortable."

Evelyn sank into a chair, held her hands, and sighed.

"Oh, dear, it is so lonely since poor Tom Barnett died."

Uncle Jim puffed on--he had some faint knowledge of the poor deceased
Tom.

"Do you know, Uncle Jim, I made a discovery to-day.  The man who kept
my poor husband from making a fortune was that person."

"What person?" growled the old chap looking straight ahead.

"That Rogeen person you are trusting your money to."

Jim Crill bit his pipe stem to hide a dry grin.  He had often heard the
story of the bursted mine sale.  He had some suspicions, knowing
Barnett, of what the mine really was.

"And, Uncle Jim, of course you won't keep him.  Besides, he insulted me
this morning."

"How?"  It was another grunt.

Evelyn went into the painful details of her humiliation at the bank.
"When she got through Uncle Jim turned sharply in his chair.

"Did you do that?"

"Do what?" gasped Evelyn.

"Try to interfere with his loans?"

"Why, why, yes."  She was aghast at the tone, ready to shed protective
tears.  "Didn't you tell me--wasn't I to have charge of the little
things?"

"Oh, hell!" Uncle Jim burst out.  "Little things, yes--about the house
I meant.  Not my business.  Dry up that sobbing now--and don't monkey
any more with my business."

Uncle Jim got up and stalked off downtown.




CHAPTER XVII

Early one morning in March Bob picked Noah Ezekiel Foster up at a lunch
counter where the hill billy was just finishing his fourth waffle.

"Want you to go out and look at two or three leases with me," said
Rogeen as they got into the small car.

Bob had not lost his job with Crill over the Chandler loan.  He was
still lending the old gentleman's money and doing it without Mrs.
Barnett's approval.  But the widow had, he felt sure, done the moist,
self-sacrificing, nagging stunt so persistently that her uncle had
compromised by advancing much more money to Reedy Jenkins than safety
justified.  Crill had never mentioned the matter, but Bob knew Jenkins
had got money from somewhere, and there certainly was no one else in
the valley that would have lent it to him.  For Reedy had managed to
pick his cotton and gin it at the new gin on the Mexican side, where
the bales were still stacked in the yards.

"Why do you suppose," asked Bob as they drove south past the Mexican
gin, "Jenkins has left his cotton over on this side all winter?"  Bob
had formulated his own suspicions but wanted to learn what Noah Ezekiel
thought, for Noah picked up a lot of shrewd information.

"Shucks," said Noah, "it's so plain that a way-farin' man though a
cotton grower can see.  He's kept it over there because he owes about
three hundred thousand dollars on the American side, and as quick as he
takes it across the line there'll be about as many fellows pullin' at
every bale as there are ahold of them overall pants you see advertised."

"But cotton is selling now; it was six cents yesterday," remarked Bob.
"At that he ought to have enough to pay his debts."

Noah Ezekiel snorted: "Reedy isn't livin' to pay his debts.  He ain't
hankerin' for receipts; what he wants is currency.  His creditors on
the American side are layin' low, because they can't do anything else.
Reedy put one over on 'em when he built this gin.  He can hold his
cotton over here for high prices, and let them that he owes on the
American side go somewhere and whistle in a rain barrel to keep from
gettin' dry.

"As my dad used to say, 'The children of this world can give the
children of light four aces and still take the jack pot with a pair of
deuces.'"

Bob knew Noah was right.  He had watched Jenkins pretty closely all
winter.  Reedy had endeavoured to convince all his creditors, and
succeeded in convincing some, that he had not brought the cotton across
the line because there was no market yet for it.  "It is costing us
nothing to leave it over there, so why bring it across and have to pay
storage and also lose the interest on the $25,000 Mexican export duty
which we must pay when it is removed?"

"Noah," remarked Bob, as the little car bumped across the bridge over
the irrigation ditch, "I'm taking you out to see a Chinaman's lease.
He has three hundred acres ready to plant and wants to borrow money to
raise the crop.  If you like the field and I like the Chinaman, I'm
going to make the loan."

"Accordin' to my observation," remarked Noah, "a heathen Chinese has
about all the virtues that a Christian ought to have, but ain't
regularly got.

"The other mornin' after I'd been to the Red Owl the night before, I
felt like I needed a cup of coffee.  I went round to a Chink that I'd
never met but two or three times, and says, 'John, I'm broke, will you
lend me a hundred dollars?'

"That blasted Chink never batted an eye, never asked me if I owned any
personal property subject to mortgage, nor if I could get three good
men to go on my note.  He just says, 'Surlee, Misty Foster,' and dived
down in a greasy old drawer and began to count out greenbacks.  'Here,'
I says, 'if you are that much of a Christian, I ain't an all-fired
heathen myself.  Give me a dime and keep the change.'"

Bob smiled appreciatively.  "I've seen things like that happen more
than once.  And it is not because they are simple and ignorant either."

"You know," pursued Noah Ezekiel, "if I's Karniggy, I'd send a lot of
'em out as missionaries."

They were at Ah Sing's ranch.  The three-hundred-acre field was level
as a table, broken deep, thoroughly disked, and listed ready to water.
The Chinaman, without any money or the slightest assurance he could get
any for his planting, had worked all winter preparing the fields.

Ah Sing stood in front of his weed-and-pole shack waiting with that
stoical anxiety which never betrays itself by hurry or nervousness.  If
the man of money came and saw fit to lend, "vellee well--if not, doee
best I can."

"You go out and take a look at the field," Bob directed Noah, "see if
there is any marsh grass or alfalfa roots, and look over his water
ditches while I talk to the Chinaman."

"Good morning, Ah Sing," he said, extending his hand.

"Good morning, Misty Rogee."  The Chinaman smiled and gave the visitor
a friendly handshake.  He was of medium height, had a well-shaped head
and dignified bearing, and eyes that met yours straight.  He looked
about forty, but one never knows the age of a Chinaman.

"Nice farm, Ah Sing," Bob nodded approvingly at the well-plowed fields.

"He do vellee well."  The Chinaman was pleased.

"And you have no money to make a crop?" Bob asked.

"No money," Ah Sing said, stoically.

"I heard last fall you had made a good deal of money raising cotton
over here," suggested Bob.

"Me make some," admitted Ah Sing.  "Workee vellee hard many year--make
maybe eighteen--twentee thousan'."

"What became of it, Ah Sing?  Don't gamble, do you?"

The Chinaman shook his head emphatically, "Me no gamble.
Gamble--nobody trust.  Me pick cotton for Misty Jenkins."

Bob was interested in that.  He knew that after raising Jenkins' crop
Ah Sing had taken the contract to pick it.  Bob had heard other things
but not from the Chinaman.  "Didn't you make some money on that, too?"

"No money."

"Why not?" Bob spoke quickly.  "Tell me about it, Ah Sing."

The Chinaman sighed again and the long, long look came into his patient
oriental eyes.

"Ah work in America ever since leetle boy--so high.  After while I save
leetle money.  Want go back China visit.  I have cer-tificate.  When I
come back, say it's no good.  Put me in jail.  Don't know why.  Stay
long time.  Send me back China.  Then I come Mexico.  Can't cross line;
say damn Mexican Chinaman.  I raise cotton--I raise lettuce--make
leetle money.  Maybee twent' thousan'.

"Misty Jenkins say 'Ah Sing, want pick my cotton?'  I say, 'Maybee.'
He say, 'Give you ten dollar bale.  You do all work--feed Chinamen.'  I
say, 'Vellee well.'  Lots Chinaboys need work.  I hire seven
hund'--eight hund'--maybee thousan.'  I feed 'em.  I pick cotton.  Pick
eight thousan' bale.  Take all my money feed 'em.  I owe Chinaboys
fifty thousan' dollar.

"No pay.  No see Misty Jenkins.  No cross line.  Misty Jenkins pay
sometime maybee--maybee not."  The old Chinaman shook his head
fatalistically.

"And you spent all you had earned and saved in forty years, and then
went in debt fifty thousand to other Chinamen to pick that cotton, and
he hasn't paid you a dollar?"

"No pay yet; maybee some time," he replied, stoically.

"What a damn shame!"  Bob seldom swore, but he felt justified for this
once.  "Can't you collect it under the Mexican laws?"

Ah Sing slowly, futilely, turned his hands palms outward.

"Mexican say Misty Jenkins big man.  Damn Chinaman no good no way."

Noah Ezekiel came in from the field.

"As my dad says," remarked the hill billy, "this Chink has held on to
the handle of the plow without ever looking back.  The field is O. K."

"How much will you need, Ah Sing?"  Bob turned to the Chinaman.

"Maybee get along with thousan' dollars--fifteen hund' maybee."

"All right," said Bob, "I'm going to let you have it.  You can get the
money three hundred at a time as you need it."

Bob stood thinking for a moment.

"Ah Sing," he said, decisively, "how would you like to have a partner?
Suppose I go in with you; furnish the money and look after the buying
and selling, tend to the business end; you raise the cotton.  Me pay
all the expenses, including wages, for you; and then divide the
profits?"

The Chinaman's face lost its stoic endurance and lighted with relief.

"I likee him vellee much!"  He put out his hand.  "Me and you partners,
heh?"

"Yes," Bob gripped the hand, "we are partners."




CHAPTER XVIII

Nothing Bob Rogeen had overheard about Reedy Jenkins and his schemes
had so intensified his anger as this treatment of the patient,
defenceless Ah Sing.

"A Chinaman has the system," remarked Noah Ezekiel as they drove away.
"He'll lease a ranch, then take in half a dozen partners and put a
partner in charge of each section of the field.  Raisin' cotton is
all-fired particular work, especially with borrowed water--there are as
many ways to ruin it as there are to spoil a pancake.  And a partner
isn't so apt to go to sleep at the ditch."

"That is why I went into partnership with Ah Sing," said Bob.  "I have
never seen much money made in farming anywhere unless a man who had an
interest in the crop was on the job."

"You bet you haven't," agreed Noah Ezekiel.  "Absent treatment may
remove warts and bad dispositions, but it sure won't work on cockleburs
and Bermuda grass."

For several miles Bob's mind was busy.

"Noah," he asked, abruptly, "how would you like to go into partnership
with me and take over the management of that hundred and sixty acres we
cultivated last year?"

"As my dad used to say," replied Noah Ezekiel, skeptically, "'Faith is
the substance of things hoped for'; and as I never hope for any
substance, I ain't got no faith--especially in profits.  Whenever I
come round, profits hide out like a bunch of quails on a rainy day.  I
prefer wages."

Bob laughed.  "Suppose we make it both.  I'll pay you wages, and
besides give you one fifth of the net profits."

"I reckon that'll be satisfactory," agreed Noah.  "But any Saturday
night you find yourself a little short on net profits, you can buy my
share for about twenty dollars in real money."

As they crossed the line Noah Ezekiel inquired:

"But if me and the Chinaman raise your cotton, what are you goin' to
do?"

"Raise more cotton," Bob answered.  "You know," he spoke what had been
in his mind all the time, "I never saw anything I wanted as much as
that Red Butte Ranch.  It is on that Dillenbeck System and its water
costs about twice as much as on the regular canals, but it is rich
enough to make up the difference."

"Well, why don't you get it?" asked Noah.  "Reedy Jenkins is goin' to
lose all his leases inside of a month if he doesn't sell 'em; and with
cotton at six cents, they ain't shovin' each other off of Reedy's
stairway tryin' to get to him first.  It's my idea that a fellow could
buy out the Red Butte for a song, and hire a parrot to sing it for a
cracker."

"But that is the smallest part of it," said Bob.  "To farm that five
thousand acres in cotton this season would take round a hundred
thousand dollars, and," he laughed, "I lack considerable over
ninety-nine thousand of having that much."

"Lend it to yourself out of money you are lending for old Crill,"
suggested Noah.

After Bob dropped Noah at the Greek restaurant--"Open Day and
Night--Waffles"--he drove down the street, stopped in front of an
office building, and went up to see a lawyer that he knew.

"T. J.," he began at once, "I want you to see what is the lowest dollar
that will buy the Red Butte Ranch and its equipment.  Reedy Jenkins
can't farm it, and he can't afford to pay $15,000 rent and let it lie
idle.  You ought to be able to get it cheap.  Get a rock-bottom offer,
but don't by any means let him know who wants it."

As Bob went down the stairs his head was fairly whizzing with plans.
This thing had taken strong hold of him.  He had longed for many months
to get possession of that ranch but had never seriously thought of it
as a possibility.  But if Jim Crill would risk the money, it would be
the great opportunity.  Five thousand acres of cotton might make a big
fortune in one year.

"Of course"--doubt had its inning as he drove north toward El
Centro--"if he failed it would mean, instead of a fortune, a lifetime
debt."  Yet he was so feverishly hopeful he let out the little machine
a few notches beyond the speed limit.  At El Centro he went direct to
the Crill bungalow.

Mrs. Barnett opened the door when he knocked, opened it about fourteen
inches, and stood looking at him as though he were a leper and had
eaten onions besides.

"Is Mr. Crill in?" Bob asked.

"Mr. Crill is not in."  She bit off each word with the finality of a
closed argument and shut the door with a whack so decisive it was
almost a slam.

Bob found Jim Crill in the lobby of the hotel, smoking; he sat down by
him, and concentrated for a moment on the line of argument he had
thought out.

"Mr. Crill, cotton is selling at six cents now.  It won't go any lower."

"It doesn't need to as far as I'm concerned."  The old gentleman puffed
his pipe vigorously.

"It will be at least ten cents this fall."  Bob was figuring on the
back of an old envelope.  "Much more next year."

Then he opened up on the Red Butte Ranch.  Bob never did such talking
in his life.  He knew every step of his plan, for he had thought out
fifty times just what he would do with that ranch if he had it.  He
outlined this plan clearly and definitely to Jim Crill.  He carefully
estimated every expense, and allowed liberally for incidentals.  He
figured the lowest probable price for cotton, and in addition discussed
the possibilities of failure.

"I feel sure," he concluded, definitely, "that I can put it through,
that I can make from fifty to a hundred and fifty thousand dollars in
profits on one crop.  If you want to risk it and stake me, I'll go
fifty-fifty on the profits."

"No partnership for me," Crill shook his head vigorously.  He had made
some figures on an envelope and sat scowling at them.  He had a good
deal of idle money.  It this crop paid out--and he felt reasonably sure
Bob would make it go--it would give him $10,000 interest on the
$100,000; and his half of the cotton seed would be worth at least
$10,000 more.  Twenty thousand returns against nothing was worth some
risk.

"Besides," added Bob, "the lease itself, if cotton goes up, will be
worth fifty thousand next year."

"That's what Reedy Jenkins said," remarked the old gentleman, dryly.
"Just left here an hour ago--wanted to borrow money to pay the rent
this year and let the land lie idle."

Bob's heart beat uneasily.  "Did you lend it to him?"

"No!"  The old man almost spat the word out.  "He owes me too much
already."

For two minutes, three, four, Jim Crill smoked and Bob waited, counting
the thump of his heartbeats in his temple.

"I'll let you have the hundred thousand," he said directly.  "I've
watched you; I know an honest man when I see one."

Bob's spirits went up like a rocket; but his mind quickly veered round
to Reedy Jenkins.

"This will make Reedy Jenkins about the maddest man in America," he
remarked.  He knew now that Reedy would fight him to the bitterest end.

Jim Crill grinned.  "So'll Evy be mad.  You fight Reedy, and I'll--run."




CHAPTER XIX

Imogene Chandler was washing the breakfast dishes out under the canopy
of arrow-weed roof, where they ate summer and winter.  The job was
quickly done, for the breakfast service was very abbreviated.  She took
a broad-brimmed straw hat from a nail on the corner post, and swinging
it in her hand, for the sun was yet scarcely over the rim of the Red
Buttes far to the east, went out across the field to where her father
was already at work.

March is the middle of spring in the Imperial Valley and already the
grass grew thick beside the water ditches, and leaves were full grown
on the cottonwood trees.  The sunlight, soft through the dewy early
morning, filled the whole valley with a yellow radiance.  And out along
the water course a meadowlark sang.

The girl threw up her arm swinging the hat over her head.  She wanted
to shout.  She felt the sweeping surge of spring, the call of the wind,
the glow of the sunlight, the boundless freedom of the desert.  She had
never felt so abounding in exuberant hope.  It had been hard work to
hold on to this lease, a fight for bread at times.  But wealth was here
in this soil and in this sun.  And more than wealth.  There was health
and liberty in it.  No heckling social restrictions, no vapid idle
piffle at dull teas; no lugubrious pretence of burdensome duties.  Here
one slept and ate and worked and watched the changing light, and
breathed the desert air and lived.  It was a good world.

The girl stopped and crumbled some of the newly plowed earth under the
toe of a trim shoe.  How queer that after all these hundreds and
thousands of years the stored chemicals of this land should be
released, and turned by those streams of water into streams of
wealth--fleecy cotton, luscious fruit and melons, food and clothes.
And what nice people lived out here.  The Chinamen who worked in the
field, quaint and friendly and faithful.  Even the Mexicans with their
less industrious and more tricky habits were warm hearted and
courteous.  That serenading Madrigal was very interesting--and
handsome.  He had fire in him; perhaps dangerous fire, but what a
contrast to the vapid white-collared clerks or professors in the prim
little eastern town she had known.

Of course Bob Rogeen did not like him.  Imogene instinctively put up
her hand and brushed the wind-blown hair from her forehead, and smiled.

Bob was jealous.

But what a man Rogeen was!  She had believed there were such men so
unobtrusively generous and chivalrous.  But no one she had ever known
before was quite like Bob Rogeen.  She remembered the black hair that
clustered thickly over his temples, and the whimsical twist of his
mouth, and the reticent but unafraid brown eyes.

She had thought many, many times of Rogeen, and always it seemed that
he filled in just what was wanting in this desert--warmth of human
fellowship.  Always she thought of him just north over there--out of
sight but very near.  True he came very rarely.  She wrinkled her
forehead and rubbed the end of her nose with a forefinger.  Why was
that?  Why didn't he come oftener?  Wasn't she interesting?  Didn't he
approve of her?

A reassuring warmth came up to her face and neck.  Yes, she believed he
did.  His eyes looked it when he thought she was not noticing.

[Illustration: Holy Joe shanghaies Imogene's ranchmen and discovers
Percy--a willing ally.]

She reached down and picked up a stick and threw it with a quick,
impulsive gesture into the water and watched it float on down the
ditch.  Yes, she was pretty sure Rogeen liked her--but how much?  Oh,
well--she took a dozen girlish skips along the path, her hair flying
about her face, and her heart dancing with the early sun on the green
fields before her and the brown desert beyond--oh, well, time would
tell.

"Daddy," she had come up to where the little bald-headed man was
plowing--throwing up the ridges, "don't you like spring?"

The ex-professor stopped the team, looked at her through his glasses,
then glanced around the field at the grass and weeds and early plants
that were up.

"I believe," he said, mildly, "that we are approaching the vernal
equinox.  But I had not observed before the gradual unfoldment of
vegetation which we have come to associate in our minds with spring."

"Oh, daddy, daddy," she laughed deliciously, and leaned over the handle
of the plow and pulled his ear.  "You funny, funny man.  Why, it's
spring, it's spring!  Don't you feel it in your bones?  Don't you love
the whole world and everybody?"

Professor Chandler seriously contemplated the skyline, where the
sunlight showed red on the distant buttes.  "I should say, daughter,
that it does give one a feeling of kinship with nature.  I fancy the
early Greeks felt it."

"I fancy they did," said Imogene, "especially if they were in love."

"In love?"  The professor brought his spectacles around to his daughter
questioningly.

"With everything," she said, laughing.  "Daddy, I'm awfully glad we are
back to the soil--instead of back to the Greeks."

"I am not discontent with our environment."  And the little professor
plowed on.  She smiled maternally at his back.  And then two swift
tears sprang to her eyes.  Tender tears.

"Dear old daddy.  It has been good for him.  He would have dried up and
blown away in that little old college."

Returning to the shack she was still bareheaded.  She loved the feel of
the sun, and the few freckles it brought only added a piquancy to her
face.

"I wonder if he"--she meant Rogeen--"will make it go this year.  I hope
he has a good crop.  It makes one feel that maybe after all things are
as they ought to be when a man like he succeeds.  Wonder what his plans
are?"

Then as she sat down in the shade and began a little very necessary
mending:

"I do wish he'd come over--and tell me some more about cotton
crops--and himself."




CHAPTER XX

It is a good thing the wind does not blow from the same direction all
the time.  Things would never grow straight if it did.  And if one
emotion persists too long the human mind becomes even worse twisted
than a tree.  For that reason, if we are normal, buoyance and
depression, ecstasy and pain follow each other as regularly as ripples
on a stream.  It is good they do, but it is hard to believe it when we
are down in the trough of the wave.

As Bob started away with the promise of Jim Crill to lend him the money
for the Red Butte Ranch, his blood was pumping faster than the running
engine of his car.  But directly enthusiasm began to slow down.

Suppose he lost--what an appalling debt for a man working at a hundred
and fifty a month!  It never figured in Bob's calculation to settle his
debts in red ink.  And there were chances to lose.  The lawyer was
waiting for him at the hotel when he returned.

"I saw Jenkins," he reported.  "Says they paid $20,000 for the Red
Butte lease last spring.  Half of it for bonus on the lease, and half
for the equipment.  He claims the mules and equipment are easily worth
$10,000; and he offers to sell lease and all for that, but won't
consider a dollar less.  I heard on the street this evening that a
Chinaman had offered them $7,500.  I have an option on it until eleven
o'clock in the morning at $10,000."

"Thanks, T. J."  Bob was figuring in his mind the basis of this price.
"I'll let you know before that time."  He went up to his room to think
it out.  He could hardly see any chance for loss, yet of course there
was.  If this was such a sure thing, why had not some of the more
experienced cotton growers in the valley jumped at it?  But Bob
dismissed that line of reasoning with a positive jerk of his head.
That was a weak man's reason--the excuse of failures, sheep philosophy.
Every day of the year some new man came into a community and picked up
a profitable opportunity that other people had stumbled over for years.

The lease was certainly a bargain; the land was in excellent condition,
and there would be no difficulty about labour with plenty of Chinese
and Mexicans.  The price of cotton could scarcely go lower.  Bob had no
fear of that.  Then what were the dangers?  The chance of a water
shortage was remote.  There had been little trouble about water.  Of
course bad farming could spoil a crop; but Lou Wing was an expert
cotton grower, and you could trust a Chinaman's vigilance.  With Lou as
a partner he could be sure the crop would receive proper attention.

"It seems good!"  Bob walked out of his room on to the balcony that ran
the length of the hotel and stood overlooking the twinkling lights of
the town.  Calexico was getting to be quite a little city, and the
string of lights were flung out for half a mile to the east and north.
Across the line the high-arched sign of the Red Owl already winked
alluringly.

He looked at his watch.  It was only a quarter past eight.  He turned
back to his room, took his violin from the battered trunk, went to the
garage, and in fifteen minutes was chugging south between the rows of
cottonwood and willows that stood dim guardians in the night against
the desert.

Imogene Chandler heard the machine coming.  She put on her new spring
coat and came out into the yard.  The night was a little cool, and that
new coat was the first article of wearing apparel she had bought for
herself in three years.

"I'm glad you brought your fiddle again," she said as Bob came into the
yard.  She was bare-headed, and her hair showed loose and wavy in the
starlight.  "I've felt rather lilty all day."  She snapped her fingers
and danced round in a circle.  "Just a little hippety-hoppety," she
laughed, dropping down upon the bench.  "Sit down and play to us--me
and this wonderful night."

"I want to talk first."  He laid the fiddle across his knees.  In spite
of the spell of the desert, figures were still running through his head.

"How like a man!" she said, mockingly.  "And is it about yourself?"

"Of course," he replied, soberly.  "You don't think I'd waste gasolene
to come down here to talk about any other man, do you?"

"Before you begin on that absorbing subject," she bantered, "tell me,
will our cotton now sell for enough to pay Mr. Crill that note?"

"Yes, but you are not going to sell it.  He has extended the note
another six months.  Cotton is going up this fall."

"Isn't that great!" she exclaimed.  "Here we have money enough for
another crop, and can speculate on last year's cotton by holding for
higher prices.  Why, man, if it should go to ten cents we'd clear
$3,000 on that cotton above what we already have."

"Yes, and if it goes to twelve, you'll have $4,500 to the good."

He sat still for a moment, gripping the neck of his fiddle with his
fingers as though choking it into waiting.

"Well?" she prompted.

"I've got a chance for something big."  He got up and walked, holding
the fiddle by the neck, swinging it back and forth.  "If I put it
through, it will be a fortune; but if I fail I'll be in debt world
without end--mortgaged all the rest of my life!"

Walking back and forth before her in the starlight he told Imogene
Chandler of the big opportunity--of the rare combination of
circumstances which made it possible for him, without property or
backing, to borrow one hundred thousand dollars for a crop; and
marshalled his reasons for belief in its success.  "The water might
fail," she suggested, when he had finished and sat down again with the
fiddle across his knee.

"Yes, it might," he admitted.

"The Chinamen might get into trouble among themselves or with the
Mexicans and leave you at a critical time."

"Possibly."

"The duty might be raised on cotton," she added.

"Yes," he confessed.

"But," she continued, "there is one thing much more likely than any of
these--a thing fairly certain.  Reedy Jenkins will fight you in every
way he can invent.  First he'll fight to get your money; and then he'll
fight you just for hate."

"I have thought of that," Bob again got up, moved by the agitation of
doubt.  If it were his own money to be risked he would not hesitate a
moment--but one hundred thousand dollars of another man's money and his
own reputation!

"For these reasons," continued Imogene Chandler, "I advise you to go
into it--and _you'll_ win.

"Now play to me."




CHAPTER XXI

Imogene Chandler had spoken most confidently to Bob of his success.
But after he was gone she began to be pestered by uneasy doubts--which
is the way of a woman.

She and her father had been compelled to operate on small capital.
They had figured, or rather Imogene had, dollar at a time.  This new
venture of Rogeen's rather appalled her.  A hundred thousand of
borrowed money!  It was almost unthinkable.  Anywhere else but in this
land of surprises such a proposition would seem entirely fantastic.

With so much involved any disastrous turn would leave him hopelessly in
debt.  And besides--her thoughts took a more uneasy turn--she felt it
was going to put him in danger.  Reedy Jenkins and his Mexican
associates would be very bitter over Bob's getting the Red Butte--and
they might do anything.

The next evening, when Noah Ezekiel came over, Imogene had not gone to
her shack.

"Sit down, Noah," she said, "I want to talk to you."

"That's what my maw used to say when I'd been swimmin' on Sunday,"
observed the hill billy as he let his lank form down on the bench.

Imogene laughed.  "Well, I'm not going to scold you for breaking the
Sabbath or getting your feet wet, or forgetting to shut the gate.  What
I want, Noah, is to get your opinion."

"It's funny about opinions," remarked Noah impersonally to the stars.
"Somebody is always gettin' your opinion just to see how big a fool you
are, and how smart they are."

"Noah Ezekiel Foster," the girl spoke reprovingly.  "You know better
than that.  You know I want your opinion because I think you know more
about cotton than I do."

"All right," said Noah, meekly.  "Lead on.  I got more opinions in my
head than Ben Davis' sheep used to have cockle burs in their wool."

"What do you think of the Red Butte Ranch?"

"It's a blamed fine ranch."

"Do you think Mr. Rogeen will make money on it?"  She tried to sound
disinterested.

"That reminds me," replied Noah, "of Sam Scott.  Sam went to Dixion and
started a pool hall under Ike Golberg's clothing store.  After Sam got
it all fixed up with nice green-topped tables and white balls, and
places to spit between shots, he got me down there to look it over.

"'How does she look?' says Sam.

"'She looks all right,' I said.

"'I'm going to get rich,' declares Sam.

"'That all depends' I says, 'on one thing.'

"'What's that?' says Sam.

"'On whuther there is more money comes down them stairs than goes up.'"

Noah twisted his shoulders and again looked up impersonally at the
stars.

"You see makin' money is mighty simple.  All you got to do is take in
more than you pay out.  But the dickens of it is, losin' it is just as
simple--and a durned sight easier."

Imogene was smiling into the dusk, but her thoughts were on serious
matters.

"Well, which do you think Mr. Rogeen will do?"

Noah twisted his shoulders again, and shuffled his feet on the ground.

"I always hate to give a plumb out opinion--because it nearly always
ruins your reputation as a prophet.  But Bob ain't nobody's fool.  And
he's white from his heels to his eyeballs--everything except his liver."

Imogene laughed, but felt a swelling in the throat.  That tribute from
the hill bill meant more than the verdict of a court.

"The only trouble is," Noah was speaking a little uneasily himself,
"Reedy Jenkins is a skunk and he's got some pizen rats gnawing for him.
There ain't nothin' they won't do--except what they are afraid to.
Bob's got 'em so they don't tie their goats around his shack any more.
But they are going to do him dirt, sure as a tadpole makes a toad.

"Reedy Jenkins has got hold of a lot of money somewhere again; and he's
set out to bush Bob, and get away with the pile.  I don't know just how
he's aimin' to do it; but Reedy don't never have any regrets over what
happens to the other fellow if it makes money for him."

The hill billy's words made Imogene more uneasy than before.  And yet
looking at the lank, droll fellow sitting there in the starlight, she
again smiled, and sighed.

"Well, I'm mighty glad Mr. Rogeen has you for a friend," she said aloud.

"A friend," observed Noah, "is sorter like a gun--expensive in town but
comfortin' in the country.

"But really I ain't no good, Miss Chandler.  As I used to say to my
dad, 'if the Lord made me, he must have done it sort of absent
mindedly, for he ain't never found no place for me.'"

Imogene arose.  She knew this big-hearted, rough hill billy must be
tired.  She went over and laid her hand lightly on his shoulder and
said with a solemn tightening of the throat--"Noah, you are the salt of
the earth--and I'd rather have you for a friend than a diamond king."

Noah arose, emotion always made him uncomfortable, and shuffled off to
his tent without a word.

But he turned at the entrance to the tent, and looked back.  The girl
sat quite still, her face turned up toward the stars.

"Well," said Noah to himself, "she's got me all right."

On the fourteenth of June Bob Rogeen and Noah Ezekiel Foster rode
through the Red Butte Ranch.

The fields lay before them checkered off into squares by the irrigation
ditches, level as a table.  The long rows of cotton were five to ten
inches high, and of a dark green colour.  The stand on most of the
fields was almost perfect.  One Chinaman with a span of mules
cultivated fifty acres.

"Lou Wing is a great farmer," continued Bob, enthusiastically.  "He is
doing the work for 45 per cent. of the crop.  I pay the water and the
rent; and of course I have to advance him the money to feed and pay his
hands.  He has twenty partners with a separate camp for each; and each
partner has four Chinamen working for him.  That is system, Noah.  It
certainly looks like riches, doesn't it?"

"All flesh is grass," Noah sighed lugubriously, "except some that's
weeds."

"Cotton is going up every day," said Bob.  "It was nine cents and a
fraction yesterday."

"That means," remarked Noah Ezekiel, "Reedy Jenkins could sell them
eight thousand bales he's got stacked up on this side and pay all his
debts and have twenty thousand over."

"But Reedy is not paying his debts."

"Not yet," said Noah; "he is borrowin' more money."

"Is that so?"  Bob was sharply interested.  He had not feared Reedy
much while he was out of funds.  "When did you hear that?"

"Saturday night," replied Noah.  "You can gather a whole lot more
information round the Red Owl than you can moss."

"I wonder what he is going to do with it?"  Bob's mind was still on
Reedy Jenkins.

"He's done done with it," answered Noah.  "He's bought the Dillenbeck
irrigation system."

Instantly all exuberant desire to shout went from Bob's throat and a
chill ran along his veins.  In a twinkling the heat of the friendly sun
upon those wide green fields with their fingered network of a hundred
water ditches became a threat and a menace.  After all, by what a
narrow thread does security hang!

Bob walked as one on a precipice during the following weeks.  Never was
a man more torn between hope and fear.  On the one hand, the cotton
grew amazingly.  Fed by the nourishment stored in that soil which had
lain dormant for thousands of years, watered by the full sluices from
the Colorado River and warmed like a hotbed by the floods of sunshine
day after day, the stalks climbed and climbed and branched until they
looked more like green bushes than frail plants.  Bob rode the fields
all day long, even when the thermometer crept up to 127 in the shade,
and a skillet left in the sun would fry bacon and eggs perfectly done
in seven minutes.  Often he continued to ride until far into the night,
watching the chopping of the weeds, watching the men in the fields, and
most of all watching the watering.  Yes, the crop was advancing with a
promise almost staggering in its richness.  It looked now as though
some of these fields would go to a bale and a half an acre.  And slowly
but surely the price of cotton had climbed since March, a quarter of a
cent one day, a half the next, a jump of a whole cent one Friday; and
now on the second day of August it touched 10.37.  With a bale to the
acre at that price Bob could add $30,000 to his estimated expense and
still clear a hundred thousand dollars on this crop.  When he thought
of it as he rode along the water ditches in the early evening, he grew
fairly dizzy with hope.  But then on the other side: the unformed
menace--Reedy Jenkins owned the water system!

The fear had taken tangible shape when he got his water bill for June.
But there was no raise in price.  Again yesterday, the bill for July
came, and still no raise in price.

It was ten o'clock that night when he got into Calexico and went to the
hotel.

As the clerk gave him the key to his room, he also handed him a letter,
saying:

"A special delivery that came for you an hour ago; I signed for it."

Bob's fingers shook slightly as he took it.  Glancing swiftly at the
corner of the envelope he read:

  DILLENBECK WATER CO.




CHAPTER XXII

Reedy Jenkins, the first night of August, sat in his office, the
windows open, the door open, the neck of his soft shirt open, and his
low shoes kicked off.  But his plump, pink face was freshly shaven and
massaged and he wore two-dollar silk socks.  Even in dishabille Reedy
had an air of ready money.

There had been dark days last fall when he had been so closely cornered
by his creditors that it took many a writhe and a wriggle to get
through.  Nobody but himself, unless it was the dour Tom Barton, knew
how overwhelmingly he was bankrupt.

But Reedy had kept up an affable front to all his creditors and a ready
explanation.  "We are all broke, everybody in same boat.  Why sweat
over it?  Of course I've got some cotton across the line; we'll just
leave it there and save the duty until it'll sell.  Then I'll pay out."

He kept up this reassurance until cotton began to sell, and then he
postponed:

"Wait; we are all easier now.  Got enough so I can cash in any day and
have plenty to pay all bills.  But just wait until it goes a little
higher."

And when it had gone to eight cents, eight and a half, and at last
nine, his creditors had ceased to worry him.  Now that Reedy could sell
out any day and liquidate, and still be worth a hundred thousand or
more, there was no hurry to collect.  Nobody wants to push a man who
can pay his debts any hour.  Some of them even began to lend him more
money.  He had borrowed $25,000 as a first payment on the $200,000 for
the Dillenbeck water system.

To-night Reedy had a list of figures before him again.  Cotton had
touched 9.76 to-day.  Things were coming to a head.  It was time to act.

Reedy had one set of figures in which 8,000 bales were multiplied by
fifty and a fraction.  It added $474,000.  There was a column of
smaller sums, the largest of which was, Revenue $28,000.  These smaller
sums were totalled and subtracted from $474,000, leaving $365,000--a
sum over which Reedy moistened his lips.  Then he multiplied 15,000
acres by something and set that sum also under the $365,000 and added
again.  The total made him roll his pencil between his two plump hands.

Madrigal, the Mexican Jew, entered with a jaunty gesture, and took a
chair and lighted a cigarette.

"When did you get back from Guaymas?"  Reedy leaned back, lighted a
match on the bottom of his chair and touched it to a plump cigar.

"Yesterday, Senor Reedy."  There was always a mixture of aggressiveness
and mocking freshness in Madrigal's tone and air.

"See Bondeberg?"

The Mexican nodded.

"Everything all right?"

"_Si, si._"  Madrigal sometimes was American and sometimes Mexican.

"I've had a dickens of a time getting trucks," said Reedy, speaking in
a low, casual tone.  "But I got 'em--twenty.  Be unloaded to-morrow or
the next day.  I've arranged to take care of the duty.  They are to be
sold, you understand, with an actual bill of sale to each of the twenty
Mexican chauffeurs you have employed."

Madrigal nodded lightly as though all of this was primer work for him.

"Have everything ready by the tenth.  I think I can close up this water
deal by that time."

As the Mexican left, Reedy reached for his telephone and called El
Centro.

"Mrs. Barnett?"  Soft oiliness oozed from his voice.  "This is Reedy.
What are you doing this evening?  Nothing?  How would you like a little
spin out to the foot of the mountains to get a cool breath and watch
the moon rise?--All right.  I'll be along in about thirty minutes.  By,
by."  The words sounded almost like kisses.

"Mrs. Barnett"--Reedy slowed down the machine as they drove off across
the desert toward the foothills--"I owe everything to you."

The widow, all in white now--very light, cool white--felt a little
shivery thrill of pride go over her.  She half simpered and tried to
sound deprecating.

"Oh, you merely flatter me."  She was rolling a small dainty
handkerchief in her palms.

"No, indeed!" responded Reedy, roundly.  "No one can estimate the
influence of a good woman on a man's life."

"I'm so glad"--the shivery thrill got to her throat--"if I've really
helped you--Reedy."  It was the first time she had used his given name,
although he had often urged it.

"You know," he continued, "in spite of the great opportunities for
wealth here, I do not believe that I could have endured this valley if
it had not been for you.  You can't imagine what it means to a man,
after the disagreeable hurly-burly of the day's business, to know there
is a pure, sweet, womanly woman waiting for him on the porch."

Mrs. Barnett gulped, filled with emotion.  "I do believe," she almost
gushed, "men like the shy, womanly woman who keeps her place best after
all."

"They certainly do!"

"I don't see," mused Mrs. Barnett, "how a man really _could_ care for a
woman who becomes so--so--well, rough and sunburned, and coarsened by
sordid work--like that Chandler woman, for instance.  I mean, I don't
see how any _good_ man could care for that sort."

"Nor I," said Reedy, emphatically.  He steered with one hand, and got
both of her hands in the other.

"This year is going to be a great one for me.  Cotton is already over
ten cents.  I'll need only $25,000 more, and then I can clean up a
fortune for all of us."

Mrs. Barnett, still thrilling to that hand pressure, moved a little
uneasily.

"Uncle Jim has been right hard to manage for the last two times.  He
was real ugly about that last $40,000.  I had to remind him how much my
poor mother did for him and how little he had done for us before he
would listen to me."

No wonder the widow quaked within her at the honour of being elected to
do it all over again.  It was not because she hesitated to attempt it
for so noble a man; but for the moment she was desperate for a way to
go at it.  She had used in the last effort every "womanly" device known
to conservative tradition for separating a man from his money.  But she
hesitated only a moment.  A watery heart and a dry eye never won a fat
loan.  Undoubtedly her womanly intuition--or Providence--would show her
a way.

"I'll do my best, Mr. Jenkins"--she lapsed into the formal again--"to
get the loan for you.  But Uncle is getting right obstinate."

"That's all right, little girl," he patted her hands.  "I trust you to
do it, you could move the heart of Gibraltar.  And as I've promised you
all the time, when I close up these deals I'm going to give you
personally $25,000 of the profits in appreciation of your assistance.
And that is not all"--he squeezed both the widow's hands a moment, then
released them as if by terrific resolution--"but more of that later.
We must close up this prosaic business first."

The next morning at ten o'clock Jim Crill stamped up the outside
stairway, stamped through the open door and threw a check for $25,000
on Reedy's desk.

"That's the last," the old gentleman snapped with finality.  "And I
want to begin to see some payments mighty quick."

Reedy smiled as the old gentleman stamped back down the stairs, proud
of his own ability as a "worker."  And he was not without admiration
for Mrs. Barnett's ability in that line.  It would be interesting to
know how she had done it so quickly.

"If the old man knew," Reedy picked up the check and grinned at the
crabbed signature, "what this is going for, he'd drop dead with
apoplexy at the foot of the stairs."

He reached for the telephone and called the freight agent:

"Are those motor trucks in yet?  Good!  We'll have them unloaded at
once."

There are two ways to make a lot of money perfectly honestly: One is to
produce much at a time when the product legitimately has such a high
value that it shows a good profit.  The other is to plan, invent, or
organize so as to help a great many men save a little more, or earn a
little more, and share the little with each of the many benefited.  And
there are two ways to get money wrongfully: One is by criminal
dishonesty--taking under some of the multiple forms of theft what does
not at all belong to one.  The other is by moral dishonesty--forcing or
aggravating acute needs, and taking an unfair advantage of them,
blackmailing a man by his critical wants.

Reedy Jenkins had merely intended to be the latter.  He had not planned
to produce anything, nor yet to help other men produce, but to farm
other men's needs--get hold of something so necessary for their success
that it would force tribute from them.  He planned to hold a hammer
over the weakest link in others' financial deals and threaten to break
it unless they paid him double for the hammer.

Reedy indorsed Jim Crill's check, and stuck it in his vest pocket.  He
liked to go into a bank and carelessly pull $25,000 checks out of his
vest pocket.  Then he took from a drawer twenty letters already typed,
signed them, and put them into envelopes addressed to the ranchers who
bought water of the Dillenbeck Water Co.

"Now"--Reedy moistened his lips and nodded his head--"we are all set."




CHAPTER XXIII

Bob tore the letter open with one rip, and read it with his back to the
desk:


DEAR SIR:

We regret to say that dredging and other immediate repairs on our canal
make a rather heavy assessment imperative.  The work must be done at
once, and the company's funds are entirely exhausted.  Your assessment
is $10 an acre; and this must be paid before we can serve you with any
more water.

Very truly,
  DILLENBECK WATER Co.,
    Per R. Jenkins, Pres. & Mgr.


Ten dollars an acre!  Fifty thousand dollars!  Bob walked slowly out of
the hotel.  There was no use to go up to his room.  No sleep to-night.

Jenkins' plot was clear now.  He had merely been waiting for the most
critical time.  The next two waterings were the most vital of the whole
season.  The little squares that form the boll were taking shape.  If
the cotton did not get water at this time the bolls would fall off
instead of setting.

Bob walked down the street, on through to the Mexican section of town,
thinking.  He must do something, but what?

It was a sweltering night and people were mostly outdoors.  Under the
vines in front of a small Mexican house a man played a guitar and a
woman hummed an accompaniment.  Across the street a little Holiness
Mission was holding prayer meeting, and through the open windows an
organ and twenty voices wailed out a religious tune.

Bob turned and walked back rapidly, and crossed the Mexican line.  At
the Red Owl he might hear something.

It was so hot that even the gamblers were listless to-night.  The only
stir of excitement was round one roulette wheel.  Bob started toward
the group, and saw the centre of it was Reedy Jenkins with his hat
tipped back, shirt open at the throat, sleeves rolled to elbows,
playing stacks of silver dollars on the "thirty."

Bob leaned against one of the idle tables and talked with the game
keeper, a pleasant, friendly young chap.

"Wonder what the Mexicans are going to do with so many motor trucks?"
the gamester asked casually.

"Motor trucks?" Bob repeated.

"Yes, they unloaded a whole string of them over here to-day.  One of
the boys said he counted twenty."

As Bob left the gambling hall Reedy was still playing the roulette
wheel at twenty dollars a throw.

Rogeen got his car and started south.  He would see for himself if
there was any basis for Jenkins' claim that immediate work must be done
on the water system.  It was late and there were no lights at any of
the little ranch shacks over the fields.

Chandler's place was dark like the rest.  They were sleeping.  Their
notice would not come until to-morrow or next day.  He would not wake
them.  Anyway to-night he had forgotten his fiddle, but he grimly
remembered his gun.

He drove through the Red Butte Ranch without stopping.  He could
scarcely bear even to look to the right or left at those long rich rows
of dark green cotton.

Turning off the main road south toward the Dillenbeck canal, something
unusual stirred in Bob's consciousness.  At first he could not think
what was the matter; but directly he got it--the car was running
differently.  This road across a patch of the desert was usually so
bumpy one had to hold himself down.  To-night the car ran smoothly.
The road had been worked--was being worked now--for a quarter of a mile
ahead he heard an engine and made out some sort of road-dragging outfit.

The simplest way in the world to make a road across a sandy desert, or
to work one that has been used, is to take two telephone poles, fasten
them the same distance apart as automobile wheels, hitch on an engine,
and drag them lengthwise along the road.  This not only grinds down the
uneven bumps but packs the sand into a smooth, firm bed for the
machine's wheels.

That was what they were doing here.  Bob stayed back and watched.  He
did not want to overtake them.  The road-breaking outfit crossed the
canal directly and headed south by east off into the desert.  Bob
stopped his machine on the plank bridge, and watched them pull away
into the night.  Then he gave a long, speculative whistle.

"I wonder," he said, "what philanthropist is abroad in the land at one
o'clock in the morning?"

Rogeen left his machine and followed on foot along the bank of the
canal for two miles.  The water was flowing freely.  There was no sign
of immediate need for dredging.  Some of the small ranches were getting
water to-night.  He was glad of that.  The Red Butte had finished
watering its five-thousand-acre crop a week ago.  It would be three
days before they would need to begin again.

He went back to his machine and drove clear up to the intake from the
Valley Irrigation Company's canal.  The water was running smoothly all
the way.  The ditches seemed open, and in fair shape.  Some work was
needed of course every day; but there was no call for any quick,
expensive repairs.

[Illustration: "Make it plain to the Chandler girl that this is her
last chance to sell before I ruin her crop."]

No, Jenkins' call for money was purely for himself and not the water
system.  The whole thing was robbery.  But how could it be prevented?
Injunctions by American courts did not extend over here, and Reedy
undoubtedly had an understanding with the Mexican authorities.

There was nothing for it, thought Bob, but to choose one of two evils:
Be robbed of $50,000, or lose five thousand acres of cotton.  He set
his teeth and started the little car plugging back across the sand
toward the American line.




CHAPTER XXIV

A little after daylight Bob was in El Centro.  Jim Crill, always an
early riser, was on the porch reading the morning paper.

"Come and have breakfast with me," Bob called from the machine.  "Got
some things to talk over."

He handed Crill the letter from the water company.  Not a muscle in the
old gentleman's face changed as he read, but two spots of red showed at
the points of his sharp cheekbones.

"If it was your own money in that crop, what would you do?" asked Jim
Crill, shortly.

"I'd fight him to hell and back."  Bob's eyes smoldered.

"Then fight him to hell and back," said the old man, shortly.  "And if
you don't get back, I'll put up a tombstone for you.

"I've believed all along," said Jim Crill, "that Reedy Jenkins is a
rascal.  But," he lifted his left eyebrow significantly, "womenfolks
don't always see things as we do.  Anyway, my trust was in cotton--it
is honest--and sooner or later I'll get his cotton.  He's got to bring
it across the line to sell it.

"I've taken up all the other liens on that cotton," Crill continued,
"so there'll be no conflicting claims.  I've got $215,000 against those
eight thousand bales."

He took a bill book from his hip pocket, and removed some papers.

"I was coming over to see you this morning.  Been called away.  Trouble
in our Texas oil field.  Main gusher stopped.  May be a pauper instead
of a millionaire.  Would have got out of this damned heat before now if
I hadn't wanted to keep an eye on Jenkins.

"Now I'm going to turn these bills over to you for collection.  Get
$215,000 with 10 per cent. interest, and half his cotton seed."

Bob's eyes were straight ahead on the road as he drove back to
Calexico; his hands held the wheel with a steady grip, but his mind was
neither on the road nor on the machine.

"Well," he smiled to himself, grimly, "at any rate, I'm accumulating a
good deal of business to transact with Reedy Jenkins.  I suppose first
move is a personal interview with him."

Bob stopped the machine in the side street and went up the outside
stairway of the red brick building, with purpose in his steps.  But the
door of the office was closed, a notice tacked on it.  Bob stepped
forward and read it eagerly:


"Mr. Jenkins' office is temporarily removed to the main building of the
Mexican Cotton Ginning Co."


"And so," said Bob as he went down the stairs, "Reedy has moved across
the line."  That was puzzling, and not at all reassuring.

Rogeen did not go to the cotton gin to see Reedy.  He wanted first to
find out what the move meant.  For two days he was on the road eighteen
hours a day, most of the time on the Mexican side, gathering up the
threads of Jenkins' plot.  The other ranchers by this time had all
received their notices, and there was murder in some of their eyes.
But most of them were Americans, the rest Chinamen, and neither wanted
any trouble on that side.

"Jenkins has a stand-in, damn him," said Black Ben, one of the
ranchers.  "I'd like to plug him, but I don't want to get into a
Mexican jail."

The second evening he met Noah Ezekiel at the entrance of the Red Owl.
Bob had instructed Noah and Lou Wing to continue the work in the cotton
fields exactly as though nothing impended.

"I was just lookin' for you," said Noah a little sheepishly.

"All right," responded Bob.  "You've found me.  What is on your mind?"

"Let us go a little apart from these sons of Belial," said Noah,
sauntering past the Owl into the shadows.

"I picked up a fellow down by the Red Butte today," began Noah, "that
had been on one of these here walkin' tours--the kind you take when
your money gives out.  After he'd stuffed himself with pottage and
Chinese greens, and fried bacon, and a few other things round the camp,
he got right talkative.  He says they've broke a good road through the
sand straight from Red Butte to the head of the Gulf of California.
And that there is a little ship down there from Guaymas lying round
waiting for something to happen."

"Noah"--Bob gripped Ezekiel's arm--"I've been working on that very
theory.  Your news clinches it.  Reedy is never going to take that
cotton across the American line.  He is planning to shoot it down
across that eighty-five miles of desert to the Gulf on motor trucks,
ship it to Guaymas, and sell it there to an exporter.  He is not even
going to pay poor old Ah Sing for picking it; and as a final get-away
stake he is trying to hold us up for $150,000 on the water.  He has
moved across the line for safety, and never intends to move back."

"He won't need to," said Noah Ezekiel.  "He is due to get away with
about half a million.  But what do we care?"  Noah shook his head
solemnly.  "As my dad used to say, 'Virtue is its own reward.'  That
ought to comfort you, Brother Rogeen, when you are working out that
$78,000 of debts at forty dollars a month."




CHAPTER XXV

Early next morning Bob went to the executive offices, and waited two
hours for the arrival of the governor.  Rogeen knew of course that
Madrigal, the Mexican Jew, was engineering the Mexican end of the
conspiracy; but he wanted to discover who the Mexican official was from
whom they were securing protection.

Bob stated his business briefly, forcibly.  He was one of the ranchers
who got water from the Dillenbeck canal.  The company was endeavouring
to rob them.  The ranchers wanted protection, and wanted water at once.
The official was very courteous, solicitous, sympathetic.  He would
look into it immediately.  Would Senor Rogeen call again tomorrow?

Senor Rogeen would most certainly call again tomorrow.  When he left
the office he went direct to Ah Sing's ranch.

"Ah Sing," said Bob, "I want you to turn over to me your $80,000 claim
against Reedy Jenkins for picking his eight thousand bales of cotton,
and give me power of attorney to collect it."

"Allee light, I give him."

The next morning when the Mexican official came down to the office at
ten o'clock he assured Bob most regretfully that although impetuous and
violent efforts had been made to right his wrongs, unfortunately so far
they had found no law governing the case.  The Dillenbeck Company was a
private water company, owned by American citizens; the Mexican
officials had no power to fix the rate.

Bob went direct to the Mexican cotton gin.

"Jenkins"--Bob sat down on the edge of the offered chair, his feet on
the floor, his knees bent as though ready to spring up--"I need to
begin watering the Red Butte to-day, but your man tells me he has
orders to keep the gates shut."

Reedy nodded, his plump lips shut tight, an amused leer in the tail of
his eye.  "You got my notice, didn't you?  No cash, no water.  Either
ten dollars an acre spot cash or no spot cotton."

"Jenkins"--Bob's fingers were clutching his own knees as though holding
themselves off the rascal's throat--"that is the dirtiest steal I ever
knew."

"That is not near what the water is really worth to you," said Reedy,
nonchalantly.  "It is only about 20 per cent. of what your crop will
make--if it does not burn up."

The knots in Bob's arms flattened out, and his tone took on casualness
again.

"Jenkins, I've got a couple of little bills against you that I'm
authorized to collect.  One on the American side is a trifle of
$215,000 which you owe Mr. Crill; the other on this side is for $80,000
that you owe Ah Sing.  Do you wish to take care of them now?  Or shall
I attach your cotton?"

Reedy's pink face and wide mouth took on a grin that fairly oozed
amusement.  "Attach my cotton, by all means."

Bob got up, hesitated a second, sat down again, and took out his check
book.  As his pen scratched for a moment, the grin on Reedy's face
changed to one of victorious greed.  Rogeen tore out the check and
handed it to Reedy.

"There is $1,600.  Turn water on the Chandler ranch.  As for mine, you
can be damned."

Reedy toyed idly with the check a moment, slowly tore it up, and threw
it in the wastebasket.

"I'm sorry, but I can't get water to the Chandler ranch without the
rest order it, too.  Perhaps"--he again took on a leer--"if Miss
Chandler should come in and see me personally, something might be
arranged."

"Jenkins"--the coolest, most concentrated anger of his life was in
Bob's tone--"I know your whole plot.  You can't get away with it.  You
may ruin my cotton, probably will, but I'm going to smash you and sell
the pieces to pay your debts."

Reedy got to his feet, and flushed hotly.  The threat had gone home.

"There are six hundred Mexican soldiers and policemen that will answer
my call.  You won't make a move they don't see.

"Don't bank on any threat about the United States Government.  Mexicans
have been picking off Americans whenever they got ready for the last
three years; and nothing ever happens.  They aren't one bit scared of
the American Government.

"Don't fool yourself, Rogeen; you are outclassed this time.  I know
what I'm doing, and I'm going to do it.  If you don't want to rot in a
Mexican jail or bleach on the sands somewhere, you'll walk softly and
stay on the other side."




CHAPTER XXVI

When Bob left the Mexican cotton gin after the interview with Reedy
Jenkins he had the feeling of furious futility which many a brave man
has felt under similar circumstances.  Yonder, two hundred yards away,
he could see American soldiers patrolling the border; yet so little
influence and so little fear did that big benign government wield over
here that he knew that scoundrel and his villainous Mexican
confederates could ruin his fields, throw him in jail and, even as
Reedy threatened, bleach his bones on the sand, and no help come from
over there--not in time to save him.

And yet there must be ways.  There were other Mexican officials than
the thieving one that Reedy had bribed to protect his movements and
robberies.  There were some fair Mexicans; and there were others, even
if unfair, on whom the pressure of self-interest could surely be
brought to bear.

It was unfortunate, Bob reflected, that Jim Crill had bought up all the
debts against Jenkins' cotton.  If these debts had been left scattered
among the banks and stores and implement dealers, there would have been
some influential cooperation in his effort to get action from the
Mexican officials.

Bob went across the line and filed a long telegram to the State
Department at Washington outlining the situation and asking for
assistance.  Then he caught the train for Los Angeles, where he had
learned the American consul at the nearest Mexican port, whom he knew,
was on a vacation.

The consul was very indignant at the treatment Rogeen was receiving and
promised to investigate.

"Investigate!"  Bob ran his fingers through his thick, sweaty hair, and
unconsciously gave it a jerk.  "But, man, I need water right now!  It's
the most critical time of the whole crop.  Every day of delay means a
loss of ten, fifteen, twenty thousand dollars."

"I know," said the consul; "but don't you see no officer can act merely
on the word of one man.  We have to get evidence and forward it to the
department.  If only I had the authority to act on my own initiative, I
could bring them to time in twenty-four hours."

"If you wired to the department for authority," suggested Bob,
"couldn't you get it?"

The consul shook his head doubtfully.  He really was impressed by Bob's
desperate situation.  "I'll try it, and I'll be down to-morrow to see
what I can do."

Bob returned to Calexico with a little hope--not much but a little.
Anyway, he was anxious to see the department's reply to his own appeal.
But it had not replied.  The Western Union operator was almost insulted
that Bob should imagine there was a message there for him.

Bob wrote another appeal, a little longer, and if possible more urgent,
and fired that into Washington.

The consul came the following day.  He interviewed the other ranchers
and verified Bob's statements.  He took affidavits, and made up quite a
bulky report and dispatched it by mail to Washington.  In the meantime
he wired, briefly outlining the substance of his letter, and asked for
temporary authority to take measures that would force the Mexican
officials to act.

Bob was fairly hopeful over this.  He waited anxiously for twenty-four
hours for some answer.  None came.  This was the third day since his
cotton began to need water.  The thermometer went to 131 at two
o'clock.  No green plant could survive long without water.

He rode all day enlisting the cooperation of influential men in the
valley on the American side, and got several of them to send wires to
Washington.  Every night when he returned to Calexico he went eagerly
to the telegraph office; but each time the operator emphatically shook
his head.  Then Bob laboured over another long telegram, begging for
haste; he paid nine dollars and forty cents toll and urged that the
message be rushed.

By the fifth day Rogeen was getting desperate.  He returned to Calexico
at seven o'clock, jumped out of his car, and hurried into the telegraph
office.

A message!  A telegram for him at last!  He had got action.  Maybe even
yet he could save most of his crop.  The message was collect--$1.62.
He dropped two silver dollars on the counter and without noticing the
change tore open the message.  It was from the department at Washington
and was brief:


DEAR SIR:

If you file your complaints in writing, they will be referred to the
proper department for consideration.

R. P. M., _Ass't to Sec. of State._


Then Bob gave up, turned about gloomily, and went out to his machine,
and started south toward the Chandler ranch.




CHAPTER XXVII

As the sun, like a burnished lid to some hotter caldron, slid down
behind the yellow sandhills that rimmed the desert, Imogene Chandler
felt as though she must scream.  She would have made some wild outcry
of relief if it had not been for her father, who still sat in the
doorway of the shack, as he had all day, gray and bent like a dusty,
wilted mullein stalk.

It had been a terrible day--the hottest of the summer.  And for a week
now the irrigation ditches had been dry.  To-day the cotton leaves had
wilted; and the girl had looked away from the fields all afternoon.  It
tortured her to see those rich green plants choking for water.

The sun gone, and a little relief from the heat, she began to prepare
supper.

[Illustration: "Shut off the water?  Why all the cotton in the valley
will be withered in a day."]

As she stirred flour for biscuits, Imogene was blaming herself for ever
bringing her father here.  But it had looked so like the great
opportunity to escape from the fetters of dry rot and poverty.  So near
were they to success, with the rising prices this crop would make them
a small fortune--five thousand, perhaps seven or eight thousand dollars
clear--if only it had water.  But to see it burn day by day, and all
because of the greed of Reedy Jenkins!  She had sent her father with
the tribute of sixteen hundred dollars to Jenkins, but he had refused
it.  He could not turn on the water for so small a ranch.  She knew he
was trying to force Bob Rogeen through her to submit to the robbery.


Imogene and her father were dully eating their supper when Bob's
machine stopped at the ranch.  But the moment the light from the
swinging lantern over the table fell on his face, she knew it was
hopeless, and her mind leaped from her own trouble to his.

"It all comes down to this"--they had not discussed the fight until the
little professor had gone to bed--"my backing must mean more to the
Mexican officials than Reedy Jenkins'.  If I could only get Washington
to give the consul power to act, then we could apply pressure.
But"--he shrugged his shoulders fatalistically and looked moodily up at
the glittering stars--"you see how hopeless that is."

She gave a jump that almost scared him, and grabbed his arm.  Her face
was so close to his he could see the excitement in her eyes even
through the dusk.

"I can help; it can be done!"

She was electrically alive now.  "Daddy was a classmate of the
President's and was an instructor under him before we came West.  He
thinks a lot of daddy, but daddy would never use his friendship with
the President to get a job.  He's got to use it now--for you--for all
of us!  Write a personal telegram to the President--the sort that will
get immediate action--and I'll make daddy sign it."

Bob was fairly white with excitement, and his hand shook as they sat
down at the board table under the lantern and carefully composed that
telegram.  This was their one last hope, and it must get action.

"There, that will do it," Imogene nodded sagely.  They were sitting
side by side, their heads close together, studying the final draft of
the appeal.  The night wind blew a strand of her hair against his face,
and for a moment he forgot the desert, forgot the fight, forgot the
telegram, and saw only her.  Then he shook himself free from the spell.
He must save the girl and himself before he dared speak.

Imogene roused up her father, and had him sign the message.  And an
hour later by a combination of bribes, threats, and pleadings Bob got a
sleepy operator to reopen the telegraph office and speed the message to
Washington.

At five o'clock the next day the reply came.  Bob signed for it, and
his fingers shook as he tore it open.


DEAR THEO:

State Department instructing consul by wire to take any action
necessary to protect American ranchers.

W.


By eleven o'clock that night he got a message from the consul; and
thirty minutes later Bob was speeding toward Tia Juana, a hundred and
fifty miles west, to see the Mexican governor.




CHAPTER XXVIII

Early next morning Rogeen got an interview with the executive of the
Mexican province, whom he had never met.  The governor received him
most courteously and manifested both alert intelligence and a spirit of
fairness.  During that long night ride Bob had thought out most
carefully his exact line of appeal.

"Your Excellency," he said, earnestly, "wishes, of course, for the
fullest development of the Imperial Valley in Mexico.  To that end the
ranchers must know they have full protection, not alone for their lives
as they now have, but also for their crops.  They must know it is
profitable to farm in Mexico.  I, myself, have five thousand acres of
cotton, which will pay in export duties alone perhaps $25,000.  Next
year I wish to grow much more.  Besides, I'm the agent for a very rich
man who lends hundreds of thousands of dollars to other ranchers in
your province.

"But this can continue only if those who do business on your side of
the line obey the laws and pay their debts.  Such men as Reedy Jenkins
must be compelled to deal honestly or get out."

The governor agreed to what Rogeen said, and promised to take prompt
action.

"But," insisted Bob, "to save us, it must be done quickly.  Jenkins'
cotton must be seized and held for his debts, and the water turned into
the canals at once."

This was also promised as soon as legal papers could be prepared.  In
leaving the office Bob dropped the telegram from the consul,
accidentally.

"It apparently will not be needed," he said to himself as he left the
office, "but it won't hurt to lose it."

The telegram left in the office read:


Present your situation to the governor, and if immediate relief is not
given I'll close the border within twenty-four hours so tight that not
a man, a mule, nor a machine can cross it either way.

LANIER, _Consul._


Two hours later a secretary who spoke good English and a Mexican
captain appeared at the Chinese hotel where Bob was waiting.

"We have here," the secretary presented Bob with two papers, "an
attachment for Senor Jenkins' cotton and an order that the water must
be turned into the canals at once, and at the old rate.  El Capitan and
I will accompany you in the governor's own machine to see these orders
are obeyed."

Rogeen requested that no message be sent to Mexicali regarding these
attachments, as that would give Reedy a chance to dodge.

"Can we go back over the Mexican road, and come into the valley round
the Laguna Salada?" Bob asked.  Reedy might already be rushing his
cotton on those trucks down to the waiting boat on the Gulf, and by
going this route they would intercept them.

The road over the mountains was not completed, said the secretary, but
they could have another machine from the valley to meet them, and in
that machine make the circuit as proposed.

At ten o'clock that night Rogeen, the captain, and the secretary left
the machine and the chauffeur at the top of the mountain grade, and
began the two-mile descent to the ancient bed of the sea--the desert
round the Laguna Salada.

Bob's satisfaction at winning the governor was more than overbalanced
by the torturing fear that it would all be too late.  He believed they
would be in time to stop Reedy from getting away with his four hundred
thousand dollars' worth of cotton.  Jenkins would not start until he
had lost hope of getting that $150,000 from the ranchers for water.
But Bob feared he was already too late to save his own cotton and
Chandler's.

The point on the mountain where they left the machine was almost a mile
high.  The descent to the valley was by a steep and precarious trail.
The captain who was familiar with it took the lead.

It was twelve-thirty when they reached the road at the bottom which led
to Mexicali.  The machine was not there.

"What do you suppose is the matter?"  Bob's voice sounded surprisingly
cool but a little flat, even to himself.  Although the hot winds struck
them here, his skin felt clammily cold.

"He'll be here by and by."  The secretary lighted a cigarette.  He did
not share Bob's anxiety and felt no undue fret over a little delay.  "I
telegraphed the _comandante_ to send driver and car here about
midnight.  He'll be here before long," he reassured.  For an hour Bob
walked back and forth peering at every turn far into the desert,
listening until his ears ached.  But no sight of car, no sound of
puffing engine.  Another hour passed, and another.  His anxiety
increased until the delay seemed unbearable.

They waited nine hours.  At last they saw the black bug of a machine
crawling snortingly across the twenty-mile strip of sand between them
and the pass through the Cocopa Mountains.

At nine-thirty the car arrived, a powerful machine of expensive make.
The chauffeur was a slender, yellowish young Mexican who delighted in
taking dangerous curves at fifty miles an hour and who savagely
thrilled at the terrific punishment his car could take and still go.

Through the secretary Bob told him of the plan to skirt the Laguna
Salada and go south round the Cocopas instead of going through the
pass.  This way they would follow the ancient bed of the Gulf of
California and forty miles south turn across the desert of the Lower
Colorado, thence northeastward until they struck the trail along the
river.  By this route they could reach the Red Butte, the head of the
Dillenbeck canal, almost as quickly as through the pass and by
Mexicali, while at the same time they would follow for thirty miles up
the river trail down which Jenkins' trucks must pass on the way to the
head of the Gulf.

"Do you think we can do it?" Bob asked the chauffeur.

The chap lighted a cigarette, shrugged, and replied they could do any
damn thing.

"Let's be doing it then," urged Bob, jumping into the luxurious car.

The Laguna Salada is a dead lake made from the overflow of the Colorado
River and salted by the ancient bed of the sea.  There is no vegetation
round it, no life upon it.  Along the salty, sandy shore that glitters
in the sun there is no road, no broken trail.  But the reckless
chauffeur hit the sand with the exultant fierceness of a bull fighter.
And at every lunge Bob clung to the iron bar overhead and devoutly
prayed that the machine would live through it.

It did.  At one o'clock they swung round the headlands into the main
desert--the worst of its size on the continent, the desert of the Lower
Colorado.

As far as the eye could see stretched the dead waste, so dead that not
a mesquite bush, not a cactus, not a living thing grew or crawled or
flew.  And upon it smote the sun so hot it seemed a flame, and over it
boiled a wind like the breath of a volcano.

It staggered even the four men, used as they were to the heat of the
valley.  But it was only forty miles to the river.

"Pretty damn bad," the chauffeur muttered in Spanish, and shrugged.
Then he turned the nose of his machine northeast, and straight across
the hard-packed sand shot into the blistering desert.

"Two miles, four miles, six----"  Bob counted off, watching the
speedometer.  Every mile took him nearer the road, the water gates--and
Reedy Jenkins.

"Eight--nine----" he continued.  Then a terrific roar; the machine
staggered; the chauffeur swore and applied the brakes.

They all jumped out.  It was the right hind tire--a hole blown through
it ten inches long.  The chauffeur kicked it two or three times,
lighted a cigarette, and stood looking at the burst tire.  Finally he
shrugged and glanced across the desert.  The wind was blowing hard;
there was sand in it.  He shrugged and sauntered round to the front of
the car, got out his jack and wrenches, took the wheel off, prowled
round a quarter of an hour, then lighted another cigarette, again stood
looking at the burst tire, and kicked it a few times as though trying
to make it wake up and mend itself.

"What is the matter?" asked Bob.  He had been afraid to ask.

"He says," interpreted the secretary, "he has no inner tube.  Forgot to
bring any."

"Then he'll have to run on the rim," said Bob, desperately; "we've got
to get out of this."

But the secretary nodded toward the radiator which roared as though
about to blow up.

"Where is his water?"  Rogeen felt more than the heat surging through
his head.

The chauffeur sauntered round the car twice as though looking for it.

"Says," explained the secretary, "he had a can but must have lost it."

They tried running on the rim, without water and with the hot wind
blowing the same direction they were going.  The machine lasted four
miles, and then quit in the middle of a sand drift, with the most
infernal finality in its death surge.

Bob got out and looked at the stalled car hopelessly.  The boiling wind
surged over the hot dust and smote him witheringly.  The driven sand
almost suffocated him.  It was twenty-five miles at least to the river,
twenty more to possible assistance.  He looked at his watch--it was
five minutes after one.  Six hours before the sun would set, and until
then walking would be suicide.

He climbed back into the machine, and sank limply into the shaded
corner of the seat.  Six hours of this--it would be torture; and there
would be one long night of walking to reach water; another day of
waiting for night--without food--and again a long, staggering walk
before they reached a human habitation.

Two days and nights of delay--then it would be too late!




CHAPTER XXIX

There are times when torture of the body heals the suffering of the
mind, and times when mental agony blots out physical pain.  But there
are other times when the two run together.  It was so with Bob as they
toiled doggedly through that long night across the desert toward the
river.  He kept his course by the North Star, and lost little distance
by getting off the compass.  It was just daylight when they reached the
river.  The stream was bank full--midsummer is high water for the
Colorado--and was very muddy.  But its water was more beautiful than
jasper seas to those four men.

After they had drunk and cooled themselves in it, they crawled under a
clump of willows beside the road to rest through the day.  Bob had just
stretched out on his back and covered his face with a handkerchief,
ready to sleep, when a chuck-chuck and a grinding noise came down the
road.  He was up instantly, and so were the three Mexicans.

"A machine!" they exclaimed.  Relief!  They would not have to walk that
other twenty miles.

The deep chug of the engine indicated a powerful machine pulling
heavily.  It was coming rather slowly.  The road was hidden by miles of
rank wild hemp; but directly the machine came round a curve.

It was a motor truck loaded high with cotton bales!

Bob's heart beat quick.  They were in time to save at least part of it,
after all.

The captain bristled.  Here was work to do, authority to display.  He
stepped into the middle of the road, put his hand on his gun, and gave
a ringing call to halt.

The Mexican driver came to a sudden stop.  He knew _el capitan_.  And
whatever faults may be attributed to the governor of Baja California,
all admits he is a governor.  When he speaks in person or by messenger
there is never any hesitancy about obedience.

The captain read his orders to the chauffeur and commanded him to turn
round.  The four climbed on, and the truck started back.

The driver told them that only two trucks had gone on ahead; sixteen
were behind, with Senor Jenkins on the last, and each truck carried
twenty bales of cotton.

They stopped the next truck when they met it, and then waited until all
seventeen were backed up the road.

Reedy Jenkins leaped from the rear one, nervous and violent of temper,
swore, and hurried forward to see what was the trouble.  To his
unutterable wrath he saw the end truck headed about.

"What the hell! you damned greasers."  But then he quit.  Something was
wrong here.  He strode forward angrily.

"Rogeen, get off that truck and do it damn quick."

"I'm getting off," said Bob.  With a quick leap he landed in the road
and went straight for Reedy.  The secretary and the captain followed.

"I have a writ of attachment here," said Bob, bringing out the paper
issued by the governor, "for your cotton in favour of Ah Sing.  I have
further orders from the governor to deliver the cotton to the compress
on the American side and sell it in the open market.

"Captain," Bob turned to the officer, "order the drivers to turn back.
You ride on the front one with the driver, and I'll ride on the back
one with my kind friend Senor Jenkins."


That night after Bob Rogeen had left her with the telegram Imogene
Chandler was too wrought up to sleep.  And the longer she thought of
it, the more determined she became to take action herself.  She had
some faith that the telegram would bring results, but not much faith
that those results would come in time to save their crop.  While Bob
was riding through the days and nights, fighting for them, she and the
other ranchers were doing nothing but watch their cotton burn for water.

About eleven o'clock Imogene went to the corral and bridled and saddled
a horse.  With the bridle reins in her left hand and her revolver in
her right, she galloped off north toward Rogeen's ranch to consult Noah
Ezekiel.

A mile up the road she met Noah riding south.

"What's the matter?  Your dad not sick?"  He was much astonished to see
her riding out at this time of night.

"No," replied the girl, "it is our cotton that is sick.  And I'm going
after a doctor.  Noah, I want you to go with me and show me where those
water gates are.  I'm going to have water or fight.  They wouldn't
shoot a woman."

"Oh, wouldn't they?" said Noah.  "That shows how naturally scarce of
information you are.

"No," said the hill billy determinedly but with a current of tenderness
in his tone, "you ain't goin' to the water gates; you are goin' back to
your ranch.  You are just naturally sweet enough to gentle a horse, but
you ain't cut out to fight Mexicans."

She had turned her horse round and was riding beside him back toward
her ranch.

"Now, listen here," said Noah as he saw signs of rebellion in the swing
of her body and the grip on her revolver, "you go home and get your dad
and your Chinaman ready.  There's goin' to be water in them ditches
before daylight or there will be one less hill billy in this vale of
tears."

During these fervid days Noah Ezekiel had not been asleep, although
much of the time he looked as though he were on the verge of it.  He
had had his eye on both ranches--the Chandlers' and the Red Butte.
Twice he had cautiously reconnoitred the full length of the water
ditches.

At a point on the Valley Irrigation Company's big canal, about seven
miles below the intake from the Colorado River, two diverting ditches
branched off; the larger of these furnished the main water supply of
the Mexican side of the valley, the smaller was the Dillenbeck system.

At these gates the Valley Company kept water keepers and guards day and
night.  As the Dillenbeck Company were merely private consumers, water
was turned into this canal only on their orders, and charged for by the
thousand feet.

Four miles below where this canal began to branch to the various
ranches it supplied was the Dillenbeck water station.  It was the
keeper in charge here who ordered water from the main canal and who
opened the sluice gates and apportioned it to the various ranches.

Noah Ezekiel on his reconnoitring discovered two things: The night
water keeper had been reenforced by a Mexican guard; and besides
Madrigal, the Mexican Jew, usually spent the night with these two.
Expecting trouble, a company of twenty Mexican special guards was
camped a quarter of a mile down the canal, in easy calling distance.
These guards, while authorized by the comandante, were hired and paid
by Reedy Jenkins.  It was their duty to patrol the canal above and
below by the main water gates and be ready at all times to repulse any
threatened attack.

Noah Ezekiel had been approached several times by infuriated ranchers
with suggestions that they organize a mob.  But American ranchers were
too few and unpopular to make mobs highly hopeful.  An attack on these
guards would bring on a conflict with the whole Mexican garrison at
Mexicali, consisting of several hundred well-trained troops.  Noah
Ezekiel advised strongly against this.  Noah was opposed to strife of
any kind.  But he had been doing a little plotting of his own.

He knew the Red Owl employed a number of boosters for the games--men
who went from table to table and gambled with the house's money.  The
psychology of gambling is like the psychology of anything else--the
livelier the game the more there are who want to get into it.  The job
of the booster is to stimulate business by gambling freely himself.
These boosters are paid four dollars a day; and the ordinary Mexican,
if given his choice between being secretary of state and a booster at
the Red Owl, would pick the Owl every time.

After a reasonable wait to see if water was coming in by the due
process of law and growing doubtful about it, Noah Ezekiel had begun
carefully laying plans.

That morning he had gone to the Red Owl and had a secret session with
Jack the Ace of Diamonds, one of the game keepers.  Jack and the hill
billy had become good friends, and Jack was more than willing to
accommodate a friend.

"Now, Ace," said Noah, "the idea is like this: This afternoon you send
a Mexican out to that camp on the Dillenbeck canal with the information
that the Owl wants to hire about eleven good boosters to begin work at
twelve o'clock to-night; and have the messenger casually but secretly
give each of them a slip of paper that is dead sure to get him one of
the jobs.

"And," Noah grinned, "you give every one of 'em that applies a job for
two days--as a treat on me.  You can fix it with the boss."

"Sure," grinned Jack, "I'll fix it."  And a Mexican messenger had been
dispatched on the spot.

Noah sat at the ranch shack as dark came on and counted them as they
went by down the road.  As he guessed, the officer would get away
first, and the rest begin to drop away from camp one or two at a time
soon after dark.  By eleven o'clock he had counted seventeen: and then
Noah saddled his horse.  When he had met Imogene, he had thought she
was another Mexican, but he was not alarmed at one or even three.

A little before one o'clock Noah tied his horse to a cottonwood tree a
half mile below the Dillenbeck water gates.

He skirted through the fields round the deserted guard camp.  His
caution was not necessary, not a Mexican soldier was left.  He grinned
to think of the boosters about now in the Red Owl.  Two hundred yards
from the little open shack that served as office and home for the water
keeper Noah took off his shoes and left his hat, and slipped toward the
light.  In his hands, muzzle forward, was the double-barrelled
shotgun--the riot gun sure to hit its mark at close range that Bob had
got for him with which to guard the Chandler ranch.




CHAPTER XXX

Noah, bent low, slipped forward in utter silence--more silence than
necessary.  The American water keeper, Madrigal, and the Mexican guard
were too profoundly busy with a crap game on the floor under the
lantern to be disturbed by the mere breaking of a twig.

But all at once from out the night came a drawling voice:

"Brethren, let's raise our hands."  Three pairs of eyes leaped up from
the dice and looked into the muzzle of the most vicious shotgun they
had ever seen--not ten feet away.  Six hands went up without a word.

"Stand up," was the next drawling command.  "Turn your backs."  Noah
flung two small ropes at their feet.

"You," he ordered Madrigal, "tie the Mex's hands behind him--and stand
him over by the wall."

"Whitey," he ordered the water keeper when that was done, "tie the
Hebrew's hands and feet and set him down over by the wall, facing this
way.

"Now," Noah again commanded the water keeper, "go to the telephone and
order the water turned in.  Tell 'em we are dry--that all the trouble
is settled, and to shoot the water down banks full, right away, quick."

The water keeper was shaking as though with the ague.  He knew danger
when he saw it and he was perfectly sure he saw it.

He went to the telephone and called the keeper at the Valley Irrigation
Company's office.  As he started to speak Madrigal stirred on the floor
as though trying to get up.

Still keeping the water keeper covered with the shotgun, Noah looked
round at Madrigal and drawled:

"If I was you, Hebrew, I'd keep sayin' over that parable which reads:
'Once there was a Mexican who was shot in the stomach with half a pint
of buckshot; and in hell he lifted up his eyes and said, "Father
Abraham, send me a drop of water."  And Father Abraham says, "Not a
drop.  Ain't you the man that helped burn up the Imperial Valley?
Hell's too good for you, but it's all we've got."'"

The telephone message was given.

"It sounded all right," said Noah to the water keeper.  "Sit down over
there and be comfortable, while we wait and see; and keep your eye on
the muzzle of the gun.  It is the only way to keep it from smokin'."

Forty minutes passed.  Noah's eyes were on his prisoners, but his ears
kept listening.  Fifty minutes, then he heard a loud woosh--almost a
roar.  The water was coming!

"Now let's go out and open up all gates," ordered Noah.  The water
keeper obeyed.

"For the time being," drawled Noah, "you can lie down out there in the
open beside the canal and take a nap.  Shootin' craps has been sort of
hard on your nerves.  I'll look after the water for a spell."


About nine o'clock at night Imogene Chandler came in from the cotton
field.

Out there in the dim starlight stretched the long rows of cotton,
erect, green, luxuriant.  The water had come in time.  It had flowed
into their ditches at four o'clock the morning after Noah Ezekiel
passed.  They had been ready for it.  For three days it had flowed
abundantly, and all their fields were watered.

Imogene lifted her face to the wind.  She loved the desert again.  And
yet there was restlessness in her movements; even in the stillness her
ears strained to catch some other sound than the soft rustle of the
wind.

Nothing had happened to him of course or she would have heard.  But she
had watched for him that first night after the water was turned in; the
next night she was expecting him, and last night she felt sure he would
come.  If he did not come tonight----  Maybe something had happened,
maybe he had been shot by some of Jenkins' hired assassins?  Fear,
which really had been hovering about for three days, but put off by her
faith in Bob's utter competence to take care of himself, swooped down
on her suddenly.  Her throat grew dry, her heart beat like a frightened
bird's, she whirled and started to run for the house.  She would start
in search at once.

Then came the sound that her ears had been straining for--the chuck,
chuck of his little machine.

She dropped down on the bench under the arrowwood shelter and let
herself go.  But the sobs were over, her eyes dry, her lips smiling, as
he came across the yard in the dusk with a dark bulk under his arms.

He had brought his fiddle.  She did not stir from the bench.  She felt
utterly, blissfully relaxed.  Her arm lay loosely along the back of the
bench, her head dropped slightly forward, the wind still stirring her
hair.

"Hello."  That was her only greeting.  But the tone of it went through
him like a soft breath of wind in the woods following a lull in the
storm.

"Hello," and that was his only reply as he sat down on the bench beside
her, the fiddle across his knees.

Her arm lying lazily along the back of the bench was almost touching
him; but he had not noticed it, and she left it there.

"I don't hardly know where to begin," Bob said directly, and laughed to
try to cover up his emotions.  He knew that no matter where he began he
never could put in words the horror of the night when the ghost of
utter defeat and failure walked with him over that terrible desert; nor
yet the great upsweep of triumph that engulfed him when he reached the
water gates the next day and learned that Noah Ezekiel and a
double-barrelled shotgun had saved the crops three days before--his and
all the rest.

To feel one moment that he was in debt for life, beaten and wrecked,
and the next to know he would be worth in three months at least a
hundred thousand dollars!  No, he could not put that in words; so he
merely twanged softly the violin strings with his thumb, and remarked
casually:

"Well, I got the money."

"What money?"  Still the girl did not stir.  She was so blissfully
lethargic, and she was not thinking at all of money or cotton.

"For poor old Ah Sing, and for Jim Crill.  I seized Reedy's cotton this
morning and sold it this afternoon.  Got $410,000 for the cotton and
the seed.  But Jenkins was in deeper than we knew.  He's gambled away
fifty thousand or so.  After I'd paid up all his debts, including the
duty, there was only $25,000 left for Reedy.  And Mrs. Barnett came
down on me like a squawking hen, demanding that.  Said Reedy had
promised it to her for getting the loans from her uncle.  But Reedy
denied it."

"What did you do?" asked Imogene as he paused.  "I compromised--told
Reedy I was entitled to that much for commission and damages, but that
I'd give it to him provided he and Mrs. Barnett married.  They did."

Imogene laughed, a rich warm laugh in which there was no sting of
revenge, only humour for human faults.  This was such a good world, and
such a beautiful desert!

Bob did not think of anything more to tell of his exploits.  Somehow
his mind would not stay on them.  Instead, he looked up at the stars
and sighed with deep content, then put the fiddle to his shoulder and
raised the bow.

When he finished he turned to look down at her, and in that moment felt
the touch of her arm at his back.  She was very still; he was not sure
whether she was crying or smiling.

"Do you know what it said?" he asked, huskily.

"Y-e-s," she answered, softly, "but I want to hear it in words, too."

He slipped his arm round her and drew her to him.  "You wonderful
darling," he said, kissing her, "you'll hear it a million times in
words."




THE END











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Desert Fiddler, by William H. Hamby

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESERT FIDDLER ***

***** This file should be named 25960.txt or 25960.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/9/6/25960/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
