The Project Gutenberg EBook of Armour's Monthly Cook Book, Volume 2, No.
12, October 1913, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Armour's Monthly Cook Book, Volume 2, No. 12, October 1913
       A Monthly Magazine of Household Interest

Author: Various

Editor: Mary Jane McClure

Release Date: July 8, 2008 [EBook #26005]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARMOUR'S COOK BOOK, OCT. 1913 ***




Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.









_Armour's
Monthly CookBook_

[Illustration]

A Monthly Magazine Of Household Interest--.

VOL. II NO. 12

OCTOBER 1913.




[Illustration]

CONTENTS


A Necessity in the Pantry                  6

Answers to Correspondents                 22

Baked Beans--A National Dish              21

Baking Day                                13

Everyday Uses of Armour's Grape Juice      4

From the Pantry Shelf                      8

Halloween                                 11

Halloween Hints                            6

Hints for October                         23

Home Dressmaking                          11

Informal Porch Suppers                     5

Little Stories by Our Readers             18

Making Money for the Church               19

Prize Contest Story                        9

Sauteing and Frying                        7

Small Pieces from the Whole Ham           12

Supplying the Meat Flavor                 10

The Daily Menu                14, 15, 16, 17

The Subject of Desserts                    4

Where Does Your Housekeeping Money Go?    20

Why Eat Fruit?                            20


The Garden in October

October is a fine time to plant every kind of "bulb, root and tuber,"
also all deciduous plants and shrubs, except those with thin bark or
thick, fleshy roots (e.g., birch magnolia).

       *       *       *       *       *

Clean up and burn diseased plants, manure the garden, plow it and leave
it all winter.

       *       *       *       *       *

Burn asparagus tops and manure the bed. Also make new asparagus and
rhubarb beds and plant sets of extra early pearl onions for use next
March. Put some parsley plants in a box and place it in a light cellar
or in a shed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Put some frozen rhubarb roots in a barrel of earth in the cellar where
they will produce "pie-plant," for winter use. Dig chickory for salad
and store in sand in a dry cellar. Blanch endive by tying lightly at the
tips.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pull up cabbages, leaving roots on, and stand upside down on shelf in
cellar. Pick cranberries this month. Then cover the bog with a foot of
water to drown bugs and to protect from frost. Rake up the fallen leaves
and use as a mulch for flowers and shrubs. Hardwood leaves like oak and
chestnut contain more plant food than those from soft wooded
trees.--_Garden and Farm Almanac. Doubleday, Page and Company._


Every Morning

A Little Crystal of Thought for Every Day in the Week


     SUNDAY.

     Most of us could manage to be fairly happy if we really
     tried to make the best of things.


     MONDAY.

     _Don't get depressed even if things do seem to be going
     wrong at the moment. Depression will make matters worse
     rather than better. If you do your duty faithfully, the sun
     is sure to shine again sometime._


     TUESDAY.

     Many people pride themselves on their plain speaking. An
     ability to put things pleasantly is really far more
     valuable. Even fault-finding can be pleasantly done.


     WEDNESDAY.

     _It always seems to me that God is probably less anxious
     that we should fulfil our tasks in life than that we should
     do our best._


     THURSDAY.

     Of the people who complain most bitterly that they have "no
     chance" probably a very small proportion would do great
     things if great opportunities came. "No chance" is a very
     old excuse.


     FRIDAY.

     _Don't give way to selfishness--that detestable vice that we
     all find it so difficult to forgive in others._


     SATURDAY.

     Even if you don't like your work, try to do it well. It may
     lead on to your true vocation.


For the Automobile Visitor

It is the frequent experience of the housewife living in the country or
suburbs these days to receive unexpected visits from friends who are
touring in automobiles, and she finds she must have something
attractive, dainty and nourishing ready at a moment's notice to
supplement the cup of tea or coffee so welcome after a hot, dusty trip.
It is a wise plan to keep a variety of Summer Sausage on hand, as in a
very few minutes delicious sandwiches may be prepared with this, these
sandwiches having the charm of novelty. It is impossible to deal in a
short article with the many varieties of Summer Sausage, but there are
three or four which can be touched upon. To have a thorough
understanding of their goodness one must not only read about them but
taste them. They are the staple diet in many foreign countries and in
the Armour brand the native flavoring has been done with remarkable
faithfulness--so much so that large quantities are shipped from this
country every week to the countries where they originated.

CERVELAT: This sausage is made of finest pork chopped fine, smoked and
air dried. It is highly spiced. A very delicious way to serve this is to
cut thin slices of white bread in rounds just the size of the sausage.
Put the meat, cut very thin, between the slices of bread and toast for a
minute with a very hot fire. This keeps the exposed sides absolutely dry
and the sandwich can be eaten without a fork.

GERMAN SALAMI: This sausage will be much appreciated by people who like
the smoky flavor of ham and bacon. In it the meat is chopped a little
coarser than in the Cervelat, and the spicing is the same as that used
in Germany. Serve cut very thin, with rye or bran bread.

LACKSCHINKEN: This is a very delicately flavored German titbit. It is
made of boneless pork loins cured in mild sweet pickle before smoking.
It makes delicious sandwiches with white or brown bread sliced thin and
lightly buttered.

MORTADELLA, a favorite Italian sausage, is made from lean pork ham meat
chopped very fine. The flavoring is delicious, the careful blending of
spices giving a distinctly foreign touch.

In many restaurants throughout the country they serve, as in foreign
countries, a slice or two of Summer Sausage as an appetizer before
beginning the meal. This custom is rapidly spreading into the home, and
Summer Sausage now has an established place in the daily bill of fare.




Armour's Monthly Cook Book


     Copyright, 1913, by Armour and Company

_A Magazine Devoted to the Interests of Women_

Vol. II

OCTOBER, 1913

No. 12

[Illustration: _All true work is sacred; in all work, were it but true
hand labour, there is something of divineness._--CARLYLE.]




Editorial


[Illustration]

In Germany the government maintains a system of education in what is
called intensive farming. Through instructors who go about the country,
the farmers are taught how to get a bigger yield from the same area of
soil. The work of these wonderful teachers is supplemented by women
domestic science teachers who in the same manner visit the homes in
their districts and instruct the good _Haus Frau_ on how to improve,
economize, and systematize in kitchen and household work.

The manner in which these women instruct is, I am sure, of especial
interest to the Cook Book readers, inasmuch as the method is in a way
practically the same as what the Cook Book is doing. Where they teach by
hand and mouth the Cook Book has taught through its exchange of ideas,
contest stories, and recipe contests, the object being the same in both
cases that of instruction, education and economy in the kitchen and
saving of steps in the housework.

It is truly said of Germans that they are the most frugal and economical
of all people. In the past the usual method has been to exert this
frugality with what is already on hand in the larder left-overs, so to
speak. One point of the modern instruction of these wandering domestic
science teachers, as they go from home to home, is to show the economy
of systematic buying of groceries, meats and vegetables. Where the
practice in the past has been to buy a little, so there is not much
expenditure of money, German housewives are now taught the economy of
buying in bulk, because it is cheaper, and there is never any waste of
food in a German home, no matter how much of it there may be on hand.

Neither is there any good reason why there should be any waste of food
in an American home. Economy or frugality comes from knowing how, and
not from any stingy purpose, as some ill-advised people think.

The methods of these teachers show that this wonderful nation is alive
to the fact that the high cost of living is in our own waste and
carelessness, that oftentimes we do not make the most of what we have or
what we are given to do with.

[Illustration: Mary Jane McClure]




The Sweet Places

    _I want to go back to the sweet mysterious places,
      The crook in the creek-bed nobody knew but me,
    Where the roots in the bank thrust out strange knotty faces,
      Scaring the squirrels who stole there timidly._

    _I want to lie under the corn and hear it rustle,
      Cool and green in a long, straight, soldierly row,
    I am tired of white-faced women and men of iron.
      I want to go back where the country grasses grow._

    _To the well-remembered pasture's shadiest corner,
      Where under the trees the wild ferns wove their laces;
    Hearing the whip-poor-will's voice in its strange, rich sadness--
      I want to go back to the old beloved places._

       *       *       *       *       *

Unafraid

    Sleep lifts the flower-soul with gentle hand,
      And breathes upon it till the petals close
      Softly and drowsily; and, faint, there grows
    A melody from some far shining strand.
    The waking vision's holden to, till, fanned
      By vagrant winds from distant ports, it blows
      The singing lips of dreams into the rose.
    The white Night leans to kiss the nodding land.
    Thus, in a kindred way, will Brother Death
    At the appointed hour let fall his breath
    Upon my soul, which such kind dreamlessness
    Of pillowing, after Life's storm and stress.
    I shall lie unafraid, my petals furled,
    To bloom anew within some fairer world.

    --EXCHANGE

       *       *       *       *       *

To Bleach White Silk

When either white silk fabric or embroidery has become yellowed from
careless washing, it may be bleached in the following manner:

Dissolve two ounces each of salt and oxalic acid in six quarts of cold
water.

Soak the silk in this until the yellow tinge disappears. This will take
about an hour in ordinary cases.

Rinse immediately in several clear waters.




The Subject of Desserts


[Illustration]

Although a meal satisfies your hunger you should have dessert, because
the educated palate craves that particular spice as a proper finish.
Scientists tell us that a dinner digests better because of a tasty
dessert, which, they say, gives the final stimulus necessary to dispose
of the food previously received.

The simple desserts are the best desserts, and none is more pleasing to
the eye and the palate or so easily made or so frequently served in an
imperfect manner, than custards.

With a supply of good eggs in the pantry the housewife need never be at
a loss for a tasty custard, and if she is wise enough to buy Armour's
Fancy Selects when she orders eggs from her market man their goodness
will be reflected in her desserts. Aside from their goodness their extra
large size will always recommend their use to the wise housewife. They
come packed in an extra large carton.


Custard Puddings

These being the more easily made may be considered first. They may
either be steamed or baked but the mixture is the same in either case.
Allow two eggs and a teaspoonful of sugar to each half pint of milk.
Beat the eggs with sugar thoroughly, but do not froth them, as the
custard must be as smooth and free from holes as possible. Add the milk
slowly, also a few drops of flavoring essence--vanilla, almonds or
lemon. Pour into a buttered mould (or into individual moulds), set in a
pan of hot water and bake until firm. Chill thoroughly and turn out on
serving dish. Serve with sugar and cream. A pleasing addition to the
above is made by garnishing the sides of the mould with strips of Canton
ginger before pouring in the custard.


Coffee Custard

Make an infusion of coffee by pouring half a pint of boiling milk on a
heaping tablespoonful of powdered coffee. Put it aside to settle, and
when cold strain off the milk and use with the eggs as in previous
recipe.

Boiled Custard

This is also made from milk and eggs and is usually served instead of
cream with stewed or preserved fruit. "Boiled" custard is rather a
misnomer as on no account must the boiling point be reached in cooking,
for if the custard bubbles it curdles. As soon as the custard begins to
thicken the saucepan must be taken from the fire and the stirring
continued for a second or two longer. If the cooking is done in a double
boiler the risk of boiling is very much lessened.




Everyday Uses of Armour's Grape Juice

Give your family Armour's Grape Juice as an everyday beverage and their
bodies will be kept healthy without drugs.

Instead of serving fruit in the morning serve a wineglassful of Armour's
Grape Juice undiluted. If taken at the beginning of breakfast do not add
ice. For children, water may be added if desired.

In moistening mincemeat use Armour's Grape Juice instead of jelly or
wine. In making "Brown Betty" use Armour's Grape Juice instead of water
and molasses and you will find it richer and more delicious.

In making sauce for all kinds of fruit puddings, use Armour's Grape
Juice, hot or cold, thickened when necessary with a little cornstarch.

When making fruit salad to be served as a dessert, pour over the mixed
fruits, immediately before serving, a cup of Armour's Grape Juice.

In serving grape fruit, after carefully removing the white pith, pour
over each portion a wineglassful of Armour's Grape Juice.

Many people find it difficult to take raw eggs when recommended by their
doctor. This difficulty is removed by breaking the egg into a glass of
Armour's Grape Juice. The egg is swallowed easily and in addition to the
nourishment obtained there is the tonic value of the rich fruit from
which the grape juice is taken.

_VERIBEST CANNED MEATS--save work and worry_




Informal Porch Suppers

[Illustration]


If you are fortunate enough to possess a wide porch or a stretch of lawn
do not forget your less fortunate friends, and give an occasional
informal party there while the weather is still fine. Food always tastes
so much better in the fresh air and when friends are present it makes
the affair nothing more than a kind of glorified picnic. There are few
more pleasant ways of entertaining than by giving a porch party. It is
very little trouble to arrange an affair of this kind--less than the
average picnic indeed--and grown people usually enjoy it more as it is
much more comfortable to sit in a chair before a real table than to
perch on a log or rock while eating. A porch party is an ideal way of
entertaining for the woman who has to do her own work. Most of the
dishes can be prepared the day before, making the serving easier.

If not convenient to have a large table a number of small card tables
placed close together will answer the purpose. Charming table sets of
white crepe paper can be bought for very little and save very materially
in the doing up of the linen.

Prepare as much as possible early in the day. If you have sandwiches
wrap them in a damp napkin; if cold drinks are wanted have them well
chilled, your glasses and straws handy, have your silver and china ready
at hand so that when your guests arrive you may devote your time and
attention to them. The following menus are not hard to prepare and the
dishes will be found most palatable and suited to every purse: Veribest
Canned Meats, the standby of the housewife who combines economy of time
with excellence of quality, are used in many of them. There is a wide
range of these meats delicious and many ways of using them. Every pantry
should have at least one shelf devoted to them so that the housewife
need never be at a loss for the basis of a good meal.

    FRUIT COCKTAIL

    HAM MOUSSE, POTATO CHIPS
    or
    CREAMED CHICKEN, served in roll,
    or
    TONGUE TOAST, CREAM SAUCE
    or
    CHICKEN IN ASPIC IN INDIVIDUAL MOULDS

    POTATOES AU GRATIN

    TOMATO WAFFLES

    SALAD ROLLS

    CHILLED CUCUMBERS

    MARSHMALLOW PUDDING
    or
    FIG CUSTARD

    COFFEE FRAPPE ICED COCOA
    GRAPE JUICE.


Ham Mousse

One tablespoonful granulated gelatine, one half cup hot water, one can
Veribest Deviled Ham, teaspoonful mustard (mixed), one half cup rich
cream.

Dissolve the gelatine in the hot water, and add to the ham; season with
the mustard, add the cream beaten stiff and pour into a mould which has
been previously wet with cold water. Chill. Turn out to serve and
garnish with parsley.


Creamed Chicken

Make a plain white sauce of one tablespoonful butter, one tablespoonful
flour and one cup of milk with seasoning of salt and pepper. When this
is ready add the contents of a can of Veribest Boned Chicken, gently
pulling apart the flakes of meat with a fork. When thoroughly heated
serve in a roll which has been hollowed out for the purpose, with a
garnish of cooked asparagus stalks.


Tongue Toast

Remove the contents of a can of Veribest Lunch Tongue and cut in dice.
Add a little cream and the beaten yolk of one egg. Simmer for a few
minutes and serve on squares of toast.


Potatoes au Gratin

Dice enough cold boiled potatoes to measure one pint. Put one
tablespoonful of butter and the same amount of flour in a saucepan with
a little salt and pepper. Cook till well mixed, then add one cupful of
milk and stir until smooth and thick. Add the potatoes and simmer five
minutes, then pour into a buttered, shallow baking dish. Mix one scant
cupful of fine, dry bread crumbs with one tablespoonful of melted
butter, spread over the potatoes and place in a hot oven until the
crumbs are a golden brown, then serve hot.


Marshmallow Pudding

Make a plain lemon jelly, adding a little sherry wine if desired. Put a
layer of sliced marshmallows in the bottom of the mold, and when the
jelly has begun to set spread a little of it over them. Continue with
jelly and marshmallows till the mold is full, then put away to harden.
Serve with whipped cream.


A Dainty Dessert

Lemon and grape juice frappe is another cool dessert that is also light.
To make it, boil a pint of water with two cupfuls of granulated sugar
for ten minutes and cool it. Then add a little cinnamon and half a
cupful of lemon juice, and lastly a quart of Armour's grape juice.
Freeze and serve in cups, with a little of the grape juice.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shelving Responsibility

"I'll ask my husband."

"I don't think my husband would allow me to do that."

"I'm sure Jack would say 'No.'"

Do you know the wife who, whenever she does not want to do anything,
always places the responsibility on her husband's shoulders?

She knows quite well that she can do almost anything she likes with her
husband, and that there are really precious few things that he _would_
say "No" to her doing, but she finds that to say her husband would never
allow her to do this, or that, is a very easy way of saying "No" to
people without offending them.

But it's not quite fair on the husband really, because, after a time,
people begin to think that he really must be rather a bear to be so
strict with his wife.

And he gets disliked, very often, accordingly.

If you don't want to do a thing, _say_ so; don't make your husband the
scapegoat.

Of course the wife who does this kind of thing never dreams that people
will blame her husband: it's just a convenient fiction to her.

But people are apt to think less of her husband because of it.

So you'll be wise to find some other excuse when excuses are
necessary.--_Exchange._




A Necessity in the Pantry


"How can you get along without a ham in the house?" asked one housewife
of another; "to me it is as necessary as anything we ever have in our
pantry."

This housewife, in saying the above, echoed the sentiments of many
others. There is no meat more "necessary" in the house than good ham.
Not only is the meat there in all its nutriment but it is
preserved--that is, cured and smoked--in such a way that there is given
to it a piquancy which whets the appetite and gives a stimulus to the
gastric juices, thus aiding--so the doctors tell us--the process of
digestion.

In so many cases of convalescence where the appetite is flagging and the
digestion weak, ham and bacon are prescribed, both for their tonic and
nutritive value.

On the crisp snappy mornings of autumn when a hearty breakfast is
necessary and the appetite has not yet recovered from the jading effects
of the hot weather what could be more tempting and more nourishing than
a slice of broiled ham--broiled just enough to be thoroughly cooked and
yet not enough to discolor the delicious appetising pink color of the
meat. Even the aroma thrown out in the process of cooking sends a
tempting appeal to the stomach that is impossible to resist.

Buying a whole ham at a time is the best and most economical way of
buying ham, as experience will prove. It can be boiled or baked whole
and sliced for whatever purpose intended. When baked ham is broiled for
breakfast it requires to be cooked just long enough to get hot all the
way through.

It is many years since the curing of ham was first tried and in those
years much has been accomplished. Today Armour's Star Hams represent
perfection in cured ham. In them the highest quality is allied to
skillful curing and careful smoking.

From many thousand hams those intended for the Star brand are chosen;
the process of curing is a specialty of Armour and Company, and careful
smoking over green hickory logs gives the final necessary touch.

They say "the proof of the pudding is the tasting of it" and this
applies to Armour's Star Hams as well.

[Many ways of using this, to most people, necessary meat, will be found
on page 12.]

[Illustration: _Built in Cupboards and Shelves Economize on Space and
are Especially Nice for Linens_]




Halloween Hints


Witch Apples

Bake large apples from which the core has been removed until soft, but
not long enough to burst the skin. When cooked, insert a marshmallow
into the core space, put a teaspoonful of sugar on top and a few
maraschino cherries. When ready to serve turn over each a scant
teaspoonful of brandy and light just as the table is reached. The brandy
will burn with a ghastly flame and melt the sugar and marshmallows.
Whipped cream served in a bowl is a delicious addition.


Witch Cake

Cream one half cupful of butter with one and one half cupfuls of sugar;
add three eggs and beat five minutes; add one cupful of milk. Sift
together one third cupful of cornstarch, and two cupfuls of flour, one
and one half teaspoonfuls of ground mixed spices, and three teaspoonfuls
of baking powder; then add to the mixture. Now add one cupful of seeded
floured raisins, also one cupful of chopped nuts. Turn into a well
greased loaf cake pan and bake in a moderate oven about forty-five
minutes. Frost with a white boiled icing. Melt sweet chocolate to equal
one third cupful, flavor with a teaspoonful of lemon juice, add one
cupful of boiled chestnuts which have been run through the meat grinder,
and enough confectionery sugar to make a paste easily handled. Roll and
cut (by pasteboard pattern) black cats or any other Halloween figure,
press them into the icing on the sides of the cake.




Sauteing and Frying

[Illustration]


"What is the difference between sauteing potatoes and frying them?" asks
a young housekeeper from South Dakota in the Day's Work, and as the
subject is of much importance and deserving of more space than may be
given to it in the correspondence columns it is answered here.

In a word, to saute--pronounced sotay--anything, is to cook it in a
shallow frying pan with a little fat, turning as one side is browned to
let the other color. Cooked potatoes are often warmed over this way. To
"fry" potatoes, croquettes, etc., is to cook them in deep boiling fat,
immersing the object to be fried while the fat is boiling hot.

That is the difference between sauteing and frying but there are one or
two points about frying--this much abused way of cooking--that must be
borne in mind if one would have the best results. In frying, a deep
kettle must be used and it is wise to keep one for this purpose only.
The one called a Scotch bowl is especially made for this purpose and is
most satisfactory.

Use only the best fat for frying--an absolutely pure leaf lard which
contains neither water nor salt and have your kettle two thirds full,
that is, deep enough to quite cover the article to be fried. Once
started, this quantity must be kept up, as it reduces slightly with each
frying, but the same fat may be used again and again if care be taken to
keep it clean and of a good color. After each frying let the fat cool a
little and strain to remove crumbs, etc., which would otherwise burn and
spoil the fat. If strained when very hot it is apt to unsolder the
strainer. Wipe the kettle clean, return the strained lard and set aside
until wanted again.

French Fried Potatoes are sliced thin or cut lengthwise in strips laid
in ice water for half an hour; then dried thoroughly between two towels
and plunged into boiling deep fat. As soon as they are delicately
browned they are fished out with a split spoon and laid in a hot
colander to drain off every drop of fat. Serve at once.

German Fried Potatoes are as a rule cooked and cold before they are
sauteed. Some prefer them to the French. To many minds they never get
quite rid of the stale taste that clings to the cold potato. The same
may be said of stewed cold, cooked potatoes. The least objectionable way
of serving them as left-overs is to saute them.

[Illustration: Simple Furniture of Quaint Shape and Design]

"_To have bread excite thankfulness, and a drink of water send the heart
to God, is better than sighs for the unattainable. To plough a straight
furrow on Monday, or dust a room well on Tuesday, or kiss a bumped
forehead on Wednesday, is worth more than the most ecstatic thrill under
Sunday eloquence. Spirituality is seeing God in common things and
showing God in common tasks._"--MALTBIE D. BACOCK.




The School Child's Sleep


The mother who has a child at school may not be able to help him with
his lessons, but there is one thing she can do for him which will
benefit him even more, and that is to see that he gets enough sleep.

Insufficient sleep affects the nerves, the temper, the digestion, the
mental quickness, and even the morals of children. The child who gets
enough sleep is the one who is bright and quick mentally, who grows
normally and well, who eats properly and who is not peevish and
irritable.

An early supper and an early bedtime are the things for the school
child. Then put him in a well-ventilated bedroom and let him have ten or
eleven full hours of slumber and he'll wake up bright and healthy and
good, too.

Many of the little whining nervous children we see are simply suffering
from lack of sleep. Many small naughtinesses simply come from tired
nerves and weariness of mind and body. So many mothers notice such a
difference in the behavior of children once they have started to school
and are at a loss to understand the reason. It is because the daily nap
which the child took before he went to school has been given up, but the
bedtime hour has not been changed. Consequently the nerves of the child
suffer.

Try giving the school child supper at half past five, a nourishing and
easily digested supper, too. Then at eight, promptly pack him off to
bed. If he doesn't sleep let him sip a cup of hot milk, and sit beside
him until he drowses off. Sleep is largely a habit and will be easily
acquired in a few evenings. And oh, the difference it will make to the
child in every way.--_Exchange._

       *       *       *       *       *

Hints on Picture Hanging

Hang the pictures from the ceiling or picture rail by means of a thin
cord as nearly as possible the color of the walls. When this is done you
may, if you like, fill up the spaces left above the smaller pictures by
placing therein a miniature, or an old blue plate, or a little plaster
relief. This arrangement gives all the space, above or below, upon which
to rest your eyes, and is infinitely preferable to the usual way of
hanging pictures one over the other or all up and down the walls.
Fishing line makes an excellent substitute for picture wire and is much
less conspicuous.




From the Pantry Shelf

     Keeping the pantry shelf supplied with foods that are easily
     prepared and served is one of the things which mark the
     careful housewife. The Veribest list of prepared foods
     embraces soups, meats, baked beans and many varieties of
     potted ham, veal, chicken, etc., all of which are perfect.
     Their use means a saving of time, fuel and energy--with
     satisfaction for the whole family.


CHICKEN MOUSSE

One cup of chicken stock (made from Armour's Chicken Bouillon Cubes),
one half teaspoon of salt, a pinch of celery salt, one cup of Armour's
Veribest Boned Chicken, two teaspoons of granulated gelatine, two
tablespoons of cold water, one cup of beaten cream, one tablespoon of
chopped olives, and whites of two eggs. Heat the stock, seasoning and
gelatine which has been soaked in cold water. When dissolved, add the
chicken finely minced with fork, and the cream. Beat well and fold in
the well-beaten whites of eggs. Pour into buttered molds and chill for
two or three hours. Serve as salad with mayonnaise.--MRS. A. E.
RICHESON, 830 CANAL ST., MT. VERNON, IND.


CHICKEN AND MACARONI

Put one half package of macaroni in boiling salted water and boil until
tender. Drain off all but a very little water and add grated cheese.
Stir well, cover and keep hot until the cheese is melted. Have ready a
cream sauce made from milk, flour and butter, and when hot add one can
of Armour's Veribest Boned Chicken. Mix the macaroni and creamed chicken
lightly, and serve on buttered hot toast.--MRS. H. B. HILL, SARVER, PA.


CASSEROLE OF RICE AND BEEF

One can of Armour's Veribest Roast Beef, one half teaspoon of salt, one
fourth teaspoon of pepper, one egg, one tablespoon of chopped parsley,
one fourth cup of fine bread crumbs and three cups of cooked rice.
Season the meat and mix with crumbs and egg. Add just enough stock to
bind. Make stock of one fourth teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef and
one half cup of hot water. Line a mold with half the rice. Fill with the
seasoned meat and cover with the remainder of the rice. Cover tightly
and steam thirty minutes. Serve with tomato sauce.--MRS. FRANK
GROUNDWATER, ELMA, WASH.


JELLIED VEAL

Make a rich gravy by browning one tablespoon of flour in one tablespoon
of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard, and add one large onion cut fine, one
fresh tomato or tomato pulp, and one teaspoon of Armour's Extract of
Beef. Season with salt and pepper and let the gravy simmer until it
thickens, then add one can of Veribest Veal Loaf, and mix it thoroughly
in the gravy. Dissolve a package of gelatine in boiling water and mix it
thoroughly with the veal and gravy. Put aside to cool and then set it in
refrigerator for a few hours. Slice and garnish with parsley and a few
slices of lemon.--MRS. VIOLA MICHEL BODE, 2865 FORTIN STREET, NEW
ORLEANS, LA.


MACARONI MILANAISE

Cook one half package of macaroni in three quarts of salted water
(boiling) until tender. Drain well and cover with cold water for ten
minutes or more. Cook one can of tomatoes for fifteen minutes with a bay
leaf, a bit of mace, onion, cloves, parsley, salt and pepper. Strain and
thicken with one fourth cup each of butter and flour blended together.
Drain macaroni again and mix with the sauce. Add one cup of chopped
green peppers parboiled, and one can of Veribest Tongue chopped, and put
in baking dish. Sprinkle top with grated cheese or buttered cracker
crumbs and bake one half hour.--MRS. C. F. FRANKLIN, 214 NORTH UNION
AVENUE, SHAWNEE, OKLA.


CREAMED CHIPPED BEEF ON TOAST

One half can of Armour's Veribest Chipped Beef, two tablespoons of
cornstarch, a little paprika, one and one half cups of milk, and three
fourths cup of tomato catsup. Heat the milk and add the cornstarch which
has previously been moistened with cold water, add the paprika, and stir
until thickened. Then add catsup, stir in the beef and let it become
thoroughly heated. Serve on hot buttered toast.--EDITH EVELYN RUNGE,
15TH AVE. AND RAY ST., SPOKANE, WASH.


ITALIAN TONGUE

Slice one Veribest Canned Tongue and pour over it the following sauce:
Put one half cup of olive oil in a sauce pan and when hot add one pint
of tomatoes, a teaspoon of salt, twelve olives pitted and cut in two,
one bayleaf, two cloves, one fourth cup of chopped raisins. Let boil,
then simmer forty-five minutes. Pour over the tongue and serve.--MRS. L.
R. FINK, NEW ULM, TEXAS.


SCALLOPED TONGUE

One cup of brown sauce, made with Armour's Extract of Beef, one can of
Veribest Ox Tongue, split, one half cup of buttered crumbs, one
tablespoon of catsup, one teaspoon of Worcestershire Sauce. Sprinkle
baking dish with crumbs, and arrange the split tongues in dish. Pour
over them the sauce to which catsup and Worcestershire Sauce have been
added. Cover with the remainder of the crumbs and bake in hot oven until
the crumbs are brown.--MRS. C. B. COLPITTS, KANSAS CITY, MO.


LUNCHEON DISH

Split and broil Veribest Vienna Style Sausage and place between hot
buttered toast. Add a crisp, dry lettuce leaf and a thin spread of
mayonnaise. Serve in folded napkin with olives and sweet pickles.--MRS.
R. F. THURSTON, 2717 26TH AVENUE, FRUITVALE, CAL.


BEEF BALLS

Two cans of Armour's Veribest Potted Meat, one onion minced very fine,
three cups of mashed potato, salt and pepper to season, and one egg.
Beat well and form into balls. Roll them in flour and fry in deep hot
Simon Pure Leaf Lard. Garnish with parsley or lettuce leaves and serve
hot.--MRS. M. E. BESSEY, 133 MAIN ST., BILOXI, MISS.


HASH WITH SPANISH SAUCE

With one can of Armour's Veribest Corn Beef Hash mix one cup of boiled
potatoes chopped fine. Season to taste and saute in hot Simon Pure Lard
until brown, and pour over the following sauce: Boil together for ten
minutes one can of Armour's Veribest Tomato Soup, one half can of
shredded pimentoes, one half can of button mushrooms; season with salt,
paprika, butter and a small amount of onion juice.--MRS. J. M. AINGELL,
2704 NUECES, AUSTIN, TEXAS.


CALGARIAN SALAD

Chop one tin of Armour's Veribest Boned Chicken. To this add one
cucumber pared and cubed, one cup of chopped walnuts, one half cup of
French peas, one cup of celery washed, scraped and cut into small
pieces. Moisten with mayonnaise, mold in bowl, mask with dressing.
Garnish with strips of canned red peppers and celery tips.--MRS. G. B.
CONTTS, CALGARY, ALBERTA, CANADA.

"_Kissing don't last; Cookery do._"--GEORGE MEREDITH.




[Illustration: Prize Story]

Saving Steps in the Kitchen


The kitchen should be characterized by cleanliness, system and order.
Two maxims that will help save steps are: "A place for everything, and
everything in its place;" and "Plan your work, then work your plan."

1. Arrange kitchen as conveniently and systematically as possible. Walls
and floors should be easily cleaned. No superfluous furnishings or
worn-out utensils should be tolerated. Arrange stove, sink, shelves,
table or kitchen cabinet near together and in logical order, so that in
preparing a dish one can move from raw material at table or cabinet
around to the washed dish at sink. Have shelves and hooks within easy
reach. Have drain-board and shelves for dishes convenient to sink. Keep
stove lifters and cloths for managing hot dishes upon hooks near stove.
Arrange those utensils and raw materials in constant use close at hand,
placing utensils used in same kind of work together. In storeroom and
pantry arrange shelves in certain order, with things seldom used on
highest shelves and those used oftener on lower shelves. Place together
ingredients used for salad-making, as vinegar, mustard, etc.; things
used in laundry together, etc. Other groups will suggest themselves.
Keep all groceries possible in air-tight labelled cans or glass jars.

2. Stock your kitchen with as many labor-saving devices as you can
afford, making sure they are suited to your needs. Keep all utensils and
tools in good repair. Glass oven-doors, small tables upon rollers which
can be wheeled into dining room, indexed cook books and clipping-files
are step-savers.

3. Plan each day's work ahead and have materials and utensils for that
day's work handy.

4. Do all kitchen work in a certain order, using that routine which
experience has proved best.

5. Think before you step. When in storeroom or pantry bring as many
needed articles as possible at one time. Baskets and waiters are great
helps here. In preparing a certain dish first gather together all
necessary ingredients and utensils. Do not begin work until everything
is ready. When possible prepare several things for the stove at once.

6. Clean and straighten as you go, replacing disarranged utensils, etc.
Have plenty of hot water handy, placing in soak those articles which
cannot be washed immediately. While preparing one meal do as much as
possible toward getting the next ready. If meals are planned ahead, many
things for supper can be cooked with the noon-day meal, also the
breakfast cereal. After each meal leave everything ship-shape for the
next.

     MRS. L. H. MCRAVEN, MERIDIAN, MISS.

    "_Nobody knows the work it takes
      To keep the home together;
    Nobody knows the steps it takes,
      Nobody knows but Mother._"

       *       *       *       *       *

_Keep a small market basket handy. In it place the things to be taken
upstairs when you are going up and when you are making the beds and
dusting, the things which are to be brought down._

       *       *       *       *       *

_"Make your head save your heels." Think, in making trips to pantry,
cellar or icebox if you cannot both take things and bring others on the
same trip._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Keep a chair or revolving stool in the kitchen and whenever possible
sit down to work. Vegetable paring, cake beating and even washing and
ironing may be done sitting._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Have a method in your work. Occasionally take time to sit down and
think over the day's work, and remember how many unnecessary steps you
took yesterday._

       *       *       *       *       *

_Have your kitchen shelves arranged to suit your own height, so that
there is no unnecessary straining to reach up or bending over to reach
one set too low._




Supplying the Meat Flavor

     There are many meat dishes very nourishing and wholesome
     which are total failures because of their lack of flavor.
     This lack of flavor seriously impairs their value in
     nutriment. A little Armour's Extract of Beef will in every
     case provide that touch of flavor which appeals to the
     palate and finds ready response from the digestive juices of
     the stomach. This extract is very highly concentrated, so
     that only a little is required.


RICE SOUP

Dissolve one teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef in one quart of water,
add one half cup of cooked rice, and a tablespoon of onion juice. Add
one teaspoon of celery seed and cover closely. Simmer ten minutes and
just before serving add one fourth cup of sweet cream or a tablespoon of
butter. If too thick, add a little boiling water or milk.---MRS. W. V.
COPELAND, 227 N. LAKE STREET, TOPEKA, KANS.


SPINACH AND SAUCE

After spinach has boiled for twenty minutes in salt water, drain it and
serve with this sauce: Dissolve one half teaspoon of Armour's Extract of
Beef in a cup of hot water, add two tablespoons of butter, break in two
eggs and use half teaspoon of lemon juice. Stir constantly and cook for
a few minutes.--MRS. W. I. COLE, PUNTA GORDA, FLA.


TOMATO ASPIC JELLY

One fourth teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef, one can of Veribest
Tomato Soup, one half package of gelatine, three hard-boiled eggs, and
chopped olives. Heat the soup with an equal amount of water. Soak the
gelatine in half cup of cold water and dissolve in the soup. Add Extract
of Beef dissolved in a little water. Let cool. Add chopped hard boiled
eggs and olives. If there is cold chicken at hand, a half cup of chicken
chopped will improve the jelly. Pour into mold and put on ice. Serve
with mayonnaise on lettuce leaves.--MRS. R. M. BRUMBY, ANONA, FLA.


STUFFED TOMATOES

Remove seeds and centers from six tomatoes. Chop three green peppers and
one onion and fry in butter until the onions begin to brown. Add a small
lump of butter, some chopped nuts and dried bread crumbs, salt and
pepper to season, and one third cup of hot water in which one half
teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef has been dissolved. Put the
tomatoes in baking pan and fill with this mixture. Sprinkle crumbs over
tops and bake fifteen minutes.--MRS. L. C. STUMP, 444 N. DENVER AVE.,
KANSAS CITY, MO.


BREAD OMELET

Cut one cup of stale bread into tiny bits, beat the yolks of two eggs,
add a pint of milk and the crumbs. Season with a pinch of salt and
pepper and one half teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef. Let stand ten
minutes, and then saute in Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard until a nice
brown. Add the whites whipped just a moment before taking from the
fire.--ELLA R. STAHL, ROUNDUP, MONT.


FRIED ONIONS

Into a small amount of hot butter slice six good-sized green onions,
tops and all. Cook until wilted, add a little water and boil until it
has evaporated. Scramble in a spoonful of Armour's Beef Extract, three
eggs, pepper and salt to taste. Cook until creamy and serve hot.--MRS.
OLLIE H. THOMAS, MANSFIELD, ARK.


MUSHROOM SAUCE

Use the liquor from one can of mushrooms and enough water to make one
cupful. Chop the mushrooms, add one teaspoon of Armour's Extract of
Beef, and slightly thicken with flour blended with water. Cook six
minutes and serve with broiled steak.--GRACE M. SEARS.


PEA SOUP

One can of peas, one half teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef, two
tablespoons of butter, one tablespoon of flour, one teaspoon of salt and
a dash of pepper, one half teaspoon of sugar, one quart of milk or half
milk and half cream. Rinse the peas, add some water and boil until soft,
then rub through a colander. Add Armour's Extract of Beef to hot water
and peas, making one quart in all. Melt the butter and add the flour,
then gradually the hot soup. Cook until smooth, add the seasoning, and
the milk and cream last.--KATHERINE SORLIE, BUXTON, N. DAK.


CORN SOUP

Cook in two tablespoons of butter one onion and one sprig of parsley
(cut fine) for five minutes. Add one cup of chopped corn and a cup of
hot water in which has been dissolved one half teaspoon of Armour's
Extract of Beef. Cook fifteen minutes. Add salt, pepper, one cup of
milk, and bind with two tablespoons of flour and butter blended. Serve
with toasted croutons.--MISS AMANDA STEVENS, SOUTH LEE, N. H.


JELLIED BOUILLON SALAD

Make a clear bouillon, using one teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef to
one pint of hot water. Dissolve one spoon of powdered gelatine and stir
into the hot liquid. Stir in a few button mushrooms sliced, or some cold
veal. Add the pulp of one orange, having it peeled, sliced and torn in
sections. When cool turn into cups or molds moistened with cold water.
Stir and divide the material about equal in each cup. Set on ice to
harden. Slice firm tomatoes and lay one each on lettuce leaf. Turn the
bouillon molds onto these and place a large spoon of dressing over
each.--MRS. SADETTE HARRINGTON, ELKHORN, WIS.


EGG SANDWICHES

Mash six hard-boiled eggs very fine, adding pepper, salt and a small
lump of butter. Mix with one half teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef
dissolved in a tablespoon of hot water, and one third cup of mayonnaise
dressing. Add one cup of finely chopped pecans or peanuts. Mix well and
serve between fresh crackers and thin slices of bread.--NELLIE TONEY,
215 WEST CHURCH ST., GREENWOOD, MISS.


POTATO PUFFS

Bake four large potatoes and put them through potato ricer. Season with
butter, salt and white pepper and add one half teaspoon of Armour's
Extract of Beef. Beat into this the stiffly beaten white of one egg.
Mold this well and roll out on molding board. Cut into cakes and place
on buttered sheet. Bake in hot oven until a golden brown. Serve on
platter with meat, garnished with cress or parsley. MISS S. MAY KIMBALL,
7 TAHANTO ST., CONCORD, N. H.


WILTED LETTUCE SALAD

Wash two heads of lettuce and lay them on ice until wanted, then cut in
small bits and lay in salad dish, adding salt. Heat two tablespoons of
olive oil and pour over the lettuce. To one half cup of white wine
vinegar add one teaspoon of sugar, one half teaspoon of Armour's Extract
of Beef, one tablespoon of mayonnaise dressing. Pour over the lettuce
and garnish with slices of hard-boiled eggs.--LOUISE MALLOY, 464 BAYOU
ST., BATESVILLE, ARK.


_Armour's Star Ham--for half a century the best_




Home Dressmaking

[Illustration]


This is an age of good ready made clothes and it is also an age of
clever amateur dressmaking. With excellent patterns which may be easily
handled there is no reason why the woman who can sew should not make her
own clothes, and have smart clothes at a reasonable price--that is,
provided she has the time to give to sewing.

Before starting a dress--even before buying--make a tour of the shops
and see for yourself what is being worn with a keen eye for the little
details which lift a gown from the home made to the professional class.
If you live far from town and can not go to the shops look through the
magazines which make a feature of dress and study what is best suited to
your particular style and requirements. Study materials and buy
economically, which means paying a little more if necessary rather than
have shoddy goods.

Good patterns are essential and these usually have full directions as to
the manner of using. It is a very good plan to have a pattern drafted to
your own measure but if you have not this take some finished garment
which is satisfactory (unless there is someone at hand to take the
measures that a person cannot very well take for herself) and measure
the lengths in different places such as front, back and under lengths on
a blouse and the width across both back and front where it is broadest.
Write these down and proceed to take the same measures on the pattern to
be used. In taking measures be sure to take a correct position or it
will be impossible to get correct measures and you cannot hope for
success if this--the initial step--is taken wrongly. For instance, stand
erect with the chest raised and the abdomen held in and you will find in
taking the width measures across to where the arms and body join the
armhole will be straight and even looking instead of pointing in and out
in places.

Make sure of your measures before starting to apply your pattern to the
cloth. A careful study of this will save many irreparable mistakes
later.




Halloween


The date of this oldtime celebration is always October 31st, the crucial
moment 12 o'clock. To be sure, the original observance of All Hallows
Eve has been considerably distorted during the course of years but the
fun it affords the young folks in its present manner of keeping cannot
be gainsaid and needs no changing. Halloween is the night when a magic
spell enthrals the earth. Witches, bogies, brownies and elves are all
abroad to use their power. Superstition proves true, witchery is
recognized and the future may be read in a hundred and one ways.

No occasion gives more opportunity of enjoyment and no party is gayer
than a Halloween party.

It is not necessary to spend a great deal of money in giving a Halloween
party. With a little time, some suitable paper and a pair of sharp
scissors the witches, pumpkin faces, cats and bats, which are the
distinctive features of this decoration, may be easily made at home.
Yellow, red and black are the colors and the most fascinating crepe
paper can be had for a few cents. This is the best material to use, as
it lends itself so well to all sorts of schemes.

Not only is it made in plain colors which may be decorated at will but
for every festival and occasion there are special designs which make the
work of decoration very easy indeed.

For Halloween there is a design of witches with brooms, or cats and bats
in black on a yellow ground. This is ready to be laid on the table as a
cover or around the room in the effect of a frieze. There are napkins to
match and a crepe paper rope to finish the edge.

A weird effect of lighting is obtained by making lantern boxes from any
discarded boxes which may be in the house. Cover them with crepe paper,
cut eyes, nose, ears and mouth, paste colored tissue paper behind the
features and set a lighted candle inside.

The wise owl must not be forgotten in the Halloween decorations. Grey
paper is best for him. Paste the edges of a square piece of grey crepe
paper together lengthwise of the grain and gather in at the bottom.
Stuff this bag with soft paper or cotton and gather again some distance
from the top. Shape the top into ears and make two rosettes with black
centers for eyes. A beak of black stiff paper protrudes between the
eyes. Mount the owl on a branch by sewing with heavy black thread in a
way to resemble claws.

Make witches' brooms by tying slashed paper tied on any old sticks or
brooms to give the effect.

       *       *       *       *       *

How to Clean It


Brass Ornaments

Any brass which is exposed to the air is likely to tarnish very quickly.
To obviate this, after I have cleaned and polished my brass vases etc.,
in the usual way I take a rag, and with this smear just a tiny scrap of
vaseline over the brass. This keeps it bright and prevents it from
tarnishing.


Wicker Tables or Chairs

To take stains out of white wicker-work, I get some oxalic acid, and
with an old toothbrush dipped in this I brush the stained parts well.
Then I rinse the article thoroughly, first in clear, warm water, and
then in cold. The brush should be destroyed after use, as oxalic acid is
poisonous.


To Wash Chiffon

To wash chiffon, wind the material round a bottle. Make a good lather of
soap and water. Immerse the bottle, and move backwards and forwards in
the lather for about five minutes. Rinse in clear, lukewarm water in
which has been dissolved a small piece of gum arabic. Then unwind the
chiffon, spread on the ironing board, lay a clean, thin cloth over it,
and iron with a very hot iron.


A Black Hat

The very best way to clean a black hat, whether it be chip, mohair, or
tagel, real or imitation, is to make some rather strong tea, and, after
brushing all dust from the hat, apply this with a small brush. Saturate
the hat thoroughly, and when dry it will be as perfect in colour and
appearance as when first bought.

If you want the hat to be stiff, add half a teaspoonful of liquid gum to
the tea, and mix well before applying. The hat will then keep its
stiffness, but will not have a glossy appearance.


Real Lace

Real lace should never be washed, but can be cleaned in the following
way. Put it between layers of tissue paper well sprinkled with calcined
magnesia, place between the leaves of a book, and under a heavy weight
for three days. Then shake the powder out and the lace will be perfectly
clean.




Small Pieces from the Whole Ham

     The economy of buying a whole ham at once instead of a pound
     or a slice is apparent to every housewife who studies her
     weekly bills. The initial cost is less--many trips to the
     store are saved and the housewife has the chance of using
     all of the ham--trimmings, skin, bone, etc., etc.


HAM TOAST

Grind or chop enough Armour's Star Ham to make a cupful, using a little
of the fat. Melt one tablespoon of butter in a sauce pan and add one
tablespoon of flour. As soon as blended add one and one third cups of
milk. When slightly thickened add the ham and the whites of two
hard-boiled eggs which have been mashed with fork. Season with salt,
pepper, and pour over round slices of toast which have been placed on
hot platter. Grate the yolks of eggs and sprinkle over the top. Garnish
with parsley.--MRS. G. F. JONES, 79 WASHINGTON ST., PORTLAND, MAINE.


HAM DUMPLINGS

Cut from a boiled Star Ham fat and lean in equal proportions and chop
fine. Season with pepper and minced sage. Make a crust of one half pound
of Armour's Butterine and one pound of flour. Roll it out thick and
divide it into equal portions. Put some ham into each and close up the
crust. Have ready a pot of boiling water and put in the dumplings. Boil
about forty-five minutes.--MISS M. C. GREEN, 319 LOCUST ST., HUNTSVILLE,
ALA.


HAM RELISH

One cup of Armour's Star Ham boiled and chopped fine, one half cup of
cream, three hard-boiled eggs, salt and pepper to taste. Scald the
cream. Rub the yolks smooth with a little of the cream and add to the
cream in the farina boiler with the ham. Press the whites of the two
eggs through a sieve, add to the mixture and when thoroughly heated put
on a hot dish. Slice the remaining eggs over the ham and serve.--MRS. R.
SCHROEDER, 1923 AVENUE D, BIRMINGHAM, ALA.


ESCALLOPED HAM

Boil six eggs ten minutes. Make a thickening of two tablespoons of flour
cooked in two tablespoons of melted butter, and boil it in a pint of
milk until thick. Season with salt and pepper. Cut a cup of Armour's
Star Ham (cold boiled) into dice and moisten half a cup of cracker
crumbs in melted butter. Chop the whites of the eggs fine, sprinkle some
crumbs in a buttered dish, then some of the ham, the chopped whites,
thickened milk and sifted yolks. Then add the remainder of the ham,
whites of eggs and milk, cover with buttered crumbs and bake until
brown.---ALMA E. EDDY, COLLEGE CITY, CAL.


BAKED LEFT-OVERS

One cup of Armour's Star Ham chopped fine, one half cup of bread crumbs
and one half cup of chopped hard-boiled eggs. Season and stir into a
thick gravy flavored with Armour's Extract of Beef. Bake and serve hot
in pepper shells.--MRS. R. P. GARIG, PORT ARTHUR, TEXAS.


HAM MOLD

Three pounds of Armour's Star Ham, one cup of sweet milk, fifteen drops
of lemon, salt and pepper to taste. Cut the meat in small pieces, cover
the mold with a layer of slices of hard-boiled egg, then a layer of
meat. Repeat until the mold is filled, then add cup of milk, one
teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef, lemon, salt and pepper. Stir well
and pour over the top. Bake a nice brown.--MRS. P. W. PINNELL, 131
WINDER STREET, HENDERSON, N. C.


HAM SOUFFLE

Beat three eggs until very light, add one cup of Armour's Star Ham
(cooked and chopped), one half cup of bread crumbs, one pint of milk,
pepper and salt. Mix thoroughly and bake thirty minutes.--MRS. LOUISE
MCCONNELL, 1115 CARLOS AVE., WICHITA, KANS.


HAM LOAF

Two cups of ground boiled Star Ham, one teaspoon of Armour's Extract of
Beef, half a package of gelatine, one pint of water, salt and pepper to
taste. Dissolve Beef Extract in one half pint of boiling water, season.
Dissolve the gelatine in one half pint of cold water. Stand the vessel
in hot water to dissolve it. Mix together with beef extract, set aside
to cool. When this begins to harden, beat in the ground boiled ham, set
mold in refrigerator. Serve in slices with bread and butter, sweet
pickle or lettuce salad.--MRS. R. H. WEST, ALAMOGORDO, N. MEX.


HAM POTPIE

Take the bone of an Armour's Star Ham after the meat is partly used, and
boil slowly until meat is tender. Slice three potatoes, take out the
bone and put in potatoes while cooking. Make dumplings of three pints of
flour, a pinch of salt and a big tablespoon of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf
Lard. Mix with water, roll thin as pie crust and drop into broth.--MRS.
NETTIE GARGAN, 715 SHERMAN ST., DENVER, COLO.


HASH WITH EGGS

One cup of Armour's Star Ham boiled and chopped fine, one cup of potato
mashed, one cup of cracker or bread crumbs. Season well and mix all
together with water and one fourth teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef.
Pour into a deep plate, smooth it over and make indentations in the top
large enough to hold an egg. Put into the oven until thoroughly heated,
and break an egg into each of the places. Return to oven until the eggs
are cooked.--E. R. MOTT, PASCOAG, R. I.


HAM CROQUETTES

One cup of finely chopped Armour's Star Ham (cooked), one cup of bread
crumbs, two of hot mashed potatoes, one large tablespoon of butter,
three eggs, a dash of cayenne. Beat the ham, seasoning and two of the
eggs into the potatoes. Let the mixture cool slightly and shape into
croquettes. Roll in bread crumbs, dip in beaten egg and again in crumbs.
Put into frying basket and plunge into boiling Simon Pure Leaf Lard.
Cook two minutes, drain and serve.--MRS. E. A. BERENDSEN, GREEN BAY,
WIS.


STUFFED CABBAGE

One medium cabbage, two ounces of Armour's Star Ham, two tablespoons of
Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard, two egg yolks, one teaspoon each of salt,
chopped parsley, and chopped onions, one cup of stale bread crumbs, a
dash of cayenne, one pimento pepper chopped. Parboil cabbage, drain and
let cool. Open the leaves and scoop out the center. Beat the eggs, add
bread moistened with melted Simon Pure Leaf Lard, add the ham and
seasoning and all other ingredients. Fill the center, tie cabbage in
cheese cloth and boil until tender.--MRS. S. M. FUEICH, JR., 1524
BURDETTE, NEW ORLEANS.


VEAL AND HAM PIE

Cut one and one half pounds of veal into thin slices, also one pound of
Armour's Star Ham. Season the veal highly with pepper and salt, with
which cover the bottom of roaster. Lay upon this a few slices of ham,
then the remainder of the veal and finish with the ham. Add one pint of
water in which one teaspoon of Armour's Extract of Beef has been
dissolved. Bake one hour. Thirty minutes before serving cover with good
paste and bake.--MRS. WARREN YOUNG, LOVELADY, TEXAS.


HAM SALAD

One cup of Armour's Star Ham, one third cup of French peas drained from
their liquor, one third cup of celery, one third cup of English walnuts
or hickory nuts, one pimento, two small sweet pickles, one hard boiled
egg. Chop all ingredients separately and just before serving, mix with a
good mayonnaise dressing.--MRS. A. E. RICE, RUSSELLVILLE, KY.




Baking Day

     "Baking the way into a man's heart" is a way which has
     proved successful more than once. But a girl who tried it
     would be badly handicapped if she did not use the best of
     materials for the work. Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard is the
     perfect shortening for all kinds of baking.


TEA BISCUITS

Five heaping kitchenspoonfuls of flour and two of sugar, two heaping
teaspoonfuls of baking powder. Sift these three times. Add one level
tablespoon of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard, rub in well and mix with
one egg well beaten, and enough cream or milk to make three fourths of a
teacup. Roll out and bake in quick oven.--B. B. BENNETT, 106 WEST NORTH
AVE., BALTIMORE, MD.


QUICK CINNAMON ROLLS

One quart of flour, three cups of milk, four tablespoons of Armour's
Simon Pure Leaf Lard, two teaspoons of baking powder, one teaspoon of
salt. Sift salt and baking powder with flour, chop in the lard, add milk
and mix to a soft dough. Roll out in a thin sheet, sprinkle with sugar
and cinnamon, add bits of butter and raisins or currants. Roll up as for
jelly roll and cut into pieces about half an inch thick. Place in pan
and bake.--MISS C. P. LYNCH, 701 JAMES BLDG., CHATTANOOGA.


SPANISH BUN CAKE

One third cup of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard and one third cup of
butterine, two cups of white sugar, the yolks of four eggs, one cup of
cold water, two heaping cups of flour sifted with two teaspoons of
baking powder, one cup each of raisins and nuts. Fold in the whites of
four eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Add two teaspoons of ground cinnamon.
Ice with caramel icing.--MISS SOPHIA GORDON, COLUMBIA, MO.


RAISIN BREAD

To one cup of bread sponge add one cup of sugar, one cup of raisins, one
half cup of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard. Sift one cup of flour with
one level teaspoon of soda and a level teaspoon of cloves, cinnamon and
allspice. Add to the first mixture with two well-beaten eggs, and beat
all until smooth. Bake in a buttered pan in moderate oven.--MISS MAY
STONE, UNDERWOOD, MINN.


NUT BREAD

One egg, one half cup of brown sugar, one teaspoon of salt, two cups of
milk or water, two tablespoons of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard, four
teaspoons of baking powder sifted in four cups of flour, one cup of
broken nut meats. Beat well and stand twenty minutes to rise. Bake
forty-five minutes to one hour.--CARRIE W. LAMB, 358 WEST 52ND ST.,
SEATTLE, WASH.


MOTHER'S CAKE

Two cups of sugar, three eggs, one half cup of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf
Lard, three cups of flour, three teaspoons of baking powder, one half
teaspoon of vanilla extract.

ICING: One generous cup of XXX sugar, softened with a glass of pineapple
marmalade and a few drops of vanilla.--MRS. LLOYD R. SHUMAN,
THOMPSONTOWN, PA.


CARAMEL PIE

Take the yolks of four eggs, one cup of sugar, four level tablespoons of
flour and beat lightly together. Add one pint of sweet milk, put into a
double boiler and boil until thick. Then put one cup of sugar into an
iron skillet. When melted to a brown syrup pour into the first mixture,
adding two tablespoons of melted butter, two teaspoons of vanilla, and
bake in a single crust made with two cups of flour, one cup of Armour's
Simon Pure Leaf Lard, one half cup of water and a pinch of salt.--MRS.
C. A. DOUGLAS, HUMBOLDT, TENN.


GRANDMOTHER'S COOKIES

One cup of sugar, one half cup of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard, one
half teaspoon of salt, one egg well beaten, two cups of flour in which
two teaspoons of baking powder have been mixed, one cup of sweet milk
and one teaspoon of lemon extract. Roll the dough, cut with biscuit
cutter and bake in moderate oven.--MISS STELLA SEIROSER, WALTON, KY.


BROWN COOKIES

Boil together for five minutes the following ingredients: One cup of
brown sugar, one cup of water, one cup of seeded raisins, one half cup
of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard, one teaspoon of ground cinnamon, one
half teaspoon of nutmeg and a pinch of salt. Remove from the stove and
let cool. When cold add one level teaspoon of soda dissolved in hot
water and add three and one half cups of flour and one teaspoon of
baking powder. Drop from teaspoon on greased pan and bake in moderate
oven.--MRS. EMMETT DAVISON, WOODWARD, OKLA.


WHIPPED CREAM CAKE

Cream together two tablespoons of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard and one
cup of sugar. Add a well-beaten egg and half cup of milk. Stir in two
and one fourth cups of sifted flour to which have been added two
teaspoons of baking powder, and vanilla. Bake in layers in moderate oven
about fifteen minutes. When ready to serve, whip one half pint of cream,
add two teaspoons of sugar and a little vanilla. Spread between layers
and on top layer. Serve on dessert plate with fork.--MRS. WALDO BOGLE,
567 EAST 35TH ST., PORTLAND, OREGON.


RAISIN PIE

Three fourths cup of stoned raisins washed and chopped, one fourth cup
of currants washed and chopped, pinch of salt, one tablespoon of
vinegar, two tablespoons of butter, one half cup of molasses, one cup of
brown sugar, two cups of water. Thoroughly mix the above and boil
together for ten minutes, then thicken with five tablespoons of flour
mixed with water. For the crust take one heaping cup of flour, one half
teaspoon of salt, one half teaspoon of baking powder, one third cup of
Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard, and enough cold water to make a stiff
dough.--MRS. MABEL G. WARNER, 27 PEYTON ST., SANTA CRUZ, CALIF.


FRUIT CAKE FROM BREAD DOUGH

Rub together until creamy one half cup of butter or Glendale Butterine,
one half cup of Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard and two cups of granulated
sugar. Add three eggs well beaten, one cup of raisins, one teaspoon of
cinnamon, one teaspoon of nutmeg, one half teaspoon of soda dissolved in
a little water. Add this mixture to three cups of very light sponge and
beat well, adding a little more flour if needed. Should be as thick as
ordinary loaf cake batter. Fill greased bread pans half full and let
rise one hour. Bake in a moderate oven forty-five minutes.--MRS. M. L.
CURZON, 845 PENNSYLVANIA AVENUE, MILWAUKEE, WIS.


WINE DROPS

Two eggs, two cups of sugar, one cup of molasses, three fourths cup of
coffee, one small teaspoon of salt, five large tablespoons of Armour's
Simon Pure Leaf Lard melted, two teaspoons of soda dissolved in the
coffee, one teaspoon of cloves and one of cinnamon, one cup of raisins
and five cups of flour. Drop by spoonfuls on buttered tins and bake in
quick oven.--MRS. E. W. PINE, CLARESHOLM, ALBERTA, CANADA.




The Daily Menu

     Planning the days meals ahead is a big help in systematizing
     the days work. The following menus--each of which has won a
     prize of FIVE DOLLARS--show how women in all states of the
     union have planned nourishing, economical meals.


ALABAMA

MRS. A. M. CRUM, 622 MORRISON AVE., FLORENCE

     BREAKFAST--Soft Peaches halved with whipped Cream, Oatmeal
     and Cream, French Fried Potatoes, Corn Bread Sticks, Broiled
     Star Ham with Cream Gravy, Soft Boiled Eggs, Hot Biscuit,
     Butter, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Tomato Soup, Bread Toasted in Small
     Squares, Creamed Potatoes with Shredded Star Ham and
     Mayonnaise Dressing, Tomatoes Stuffed with Chopped Celery,
     Sliced Sweet Potatoes with Cream Dressing, Strawberry Jello
     with Whipped Cream, Marshmallow Cake and Iced Tea.

     DINNER--Spiced Star Ham Boiled, Veribest Pork and Beans,
     Rice Cakes Fried, Creamed Potatoes, Corn Pudding, Tomatoes
     Stuffed with Salad made of Veribest Potted Ham, Pineapple
     Cake, Sherbet, Coffee.


ARIZONA

MERTIE R. JONES, MESA

     BREAKFAST--Cereal with Cream and Sugar, Broiled Star Bacon,
     Poached Eggs, Graham Gems, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Chicken Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes),
     Creamed Veribest Chicken in Biscuit Cases, French Fried
     Potatoes (Fried in Simon Pure Leaf Lard), Brown Bread and
     Butterine Sandwiches (Armour's Glendale Butterine), Cake,
     Armour's Grape Juice, Iced.

     DINNER--Cream of Veribest Tomato Soup, Veribest Roast Beef
     with Brown Sauce (Made from Armour's Extract of Beef),
     Veribest Pork and Beans, Potatoes, Creamed Onions, Armour's
     Grape Juice Ice, Small Cakes, Coffee.


ARKANSAS

MRS. W. H. BLAKELY, 713 NORTH 19TH ST., FORT SMITH

     BREAKFAST--Oranges, Armour's Star Bacon Broiled, Poached
     Eggs, Toast, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Sliced Veribest Tongue, Hashed Browned Potatoes,
     Rolls, Individual Custards in Ramekins, Tea.

     DINNER--Cream Tomato Soup (Veribest), Casserole Roast
     (Veribest Roast Beef), Candied Sweet Potatoes, Stuffed Green
     Peppers (Filling of Bread Crumbs, Onion, Veribest Deviled
     Ham), Pineapple and Cheese Salad on Lettuce, Mayonnaise
     Dressing, Potato Rolls, Frozen Apricots in Tall Glasses of
     Whipped Cream, Angel Food Cake, Coffee.


CALIFORNIA

MRS. EDITH V. SCHLIEMANN, SUSANVILLE

     BREAKFAST--Corn Flakes, Broiled Star Ham, Poached Eggs,
     Fried Potatoes, Toast, Chocolate.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Pork and Beans, Egg Salad, Hot Biscuits,
     Raspberry Shortcake, Armour's Grape Juice Lemonade.

     DINNER--Veribest Consomme, Rice Curry and Veribest Veal,
     Creamed Peas, French Fried Potatoes, Lettuce Salad, Plum
     Cake, Iced Tea.


COLORADO

MRS. BURTON A. SMEAD, 1281 SOUTH DOWNING ST., DENVER

     BREAKFAST--Rolled Oats with Hot Dates, Liver and Star Bacon
     Skewered and Broiled, Popovers, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Creamed Veribest Chicken in Pastry Shells, French
     Fried Sweet Potatoes, Bread and Butter, Orange Marmalade,
     Tea.

     DINNER--Mock Turtle Soup (Armour's Extract of Beef),
     Croutons, Two-inch Slice of Star Ham Braised with Tomato
     Sauce, Boiled Rice, Green String Beans, Jellied Celery
     Relish (Armour's Beef Bouillon Cubes), Bread, Snow Pudding,
     Sponge Cake, Coffee.


CONNECTICUT

P. CURTIN, EDSON HOUSE, PLANTSVILLE

     BREAKFAST--Fruit, Buckwheat Cakes with Armour's Star Bacon,
     Rolls, Coffee.

     DINNER--Armour's Star Ham Soup, Veribest Roast Beef with
     Brown Sauce, Baked Potatoes, Creamed Onions, Veribest Mince
     Meat Pie, Coffee.

     SUPPER--Armour's Veribest Pork and Beans, Brown Bread,
     Armour's Hot Chicken Bouillon with Butter Thins.


DELAWARE

MRS. G. A. SMITH, EDGEMOORE, ROUTE 2, BOX 81A.

     BREAKFAST--Grapefruit, Star Ham Omelet, Tomato Catsup, Hot
     Cakes, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Cream of Onion Soup, Little Pigs in Blankets
     (Armour's Star Bacon), Tomato Catsup, French Fried Potatoes,
     Iced Tea, Peach Shortcake.

     DINNER--Veribest Veal Loaf, Riced Potatoes, Tomatoes Stuffed
     with Star Ham, Hot Rolls, Grape Sherbet (Armour's Grape
     Juice).


DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA

MRS. E. W. SILLINGS, 625 E. ST. S. E., WASHINGTON

     BREAKFAST--Grapefruit with Armour's Grape Juice, Star Ham
     Croquettes, Baked Potatoes, Buttered Toast, Cocoa.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Boned Chicken, Sweet Potatoes, Gravy,
     Apple Sauce, White Bread, Cookies, Milk Shake.

     DINNER--Split Pea Soup with Crackers, Roast Star Ham with
     Parsnips, Stuffed Cabbage, Sliced Tomatoes, Brown Bread,
     Peach Short Cake, Iced Postum.


FLORIDA

IDA C. WESTGAARD, BUENA VISTA, DADE CO.

     BREAKFAST--Iced Grapes, Puffed Rice with Cream, Broiled Star
     Bacon, Poached Eggs on Toast, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Tomato Soup, Boiled Potatoes with Cream
     Sauce, Cold Baked Star Ham Sliced, Bread and Butter, Hot
     Gingerbread, Jelly, Coffee.

     DINNER--Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes), Veribest Roast
     Beef with Mushroom Sauce, Creamed Asparagus, Candied Sweet
     Potatoes, Tomato Jelly, Salad with Mayonnaise, Armour's
     Grape Juice Sherbet, Cake, Coffee Mints.


GEORGIA

MRS. NELLIE H. DUSENBURY, 997 MILLEDGE AVE., ATHENS

     BREAKFAST--Figs with Cream, Creamed Chipped Beef (Veribest),
     Saratoga Chips, Sliced Tomatoes, Hot Rolls, Tea, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Stuffed Peppers (Force Meat made from Veribest
     Veal Loaf), Light Bread, Veribest Pork and Beans, Pickled
     Beets, Armour's Grape Juice Frappe, Angel Food Cake, Iced
     Tea.

     DINNER--Fruit Cocktail, Tomato Soup (Seasoned with Armour's
     Extract of Beef), Baked Star Ham, Creamed Onions, Squash,
     Tomato and Asparagus Salad with French Dressing, Bread
     Sticks, Fresh Peaches with Cream, Coffee with Cheese Wafers.


IDAHO

MRS. H. W. ZIMMERMAN, PAYETTE

     BREAKFAST--Cantaloupe, Fried Star Bacon and Eggs, Toast with
     White Sauce, Oatmeal Cookies, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Pork and Beans, Hot Rolls and Honey,
     Sliced Tomatoes, Potato Chips, Baked Apple with Cream Sauce,
     Iced Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup, Veribest Creamed Chicken,
     Baked Potatoes, Cabbage Salad, Carrots and Peas, Peaches and
     Cream, Cake, Coffee.


ILLINOIS

ELIZABETH M. VAN HUYSEN, 501 CEDAR ST., QUINCY

     BREAKFAST--Green Gage Plums, Cereal and Cream, Armour's Star
     Bacon and Fried Eggs, Simon Pure Parker House Rolls, New
     White Clover Honey, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Pork and Beans, Brown Bread and Butter
     Sandwiches, Tomato Salad, Simon Pure Doughnuts, Armour's
     Grape Juice.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup with Croutons, Veribest Roast
     Beef with Browned Sweet Potatoes, Green Corn on Cob, Beet
     Salad, Mashed Potatoes, Simon Pure Concord Grape Pie,
     Coffee, Cheese Wafers.


INDIANA

MRS. L. B. KILMER, BURDICK

     BREAKFAST--Apple Fritters or Baked Apples, Star Ham Rolls,
     Soft Boiled Eggs, Corn Meal Mush (Fried in Simon Pure Leaf
     Lard), Coffee, Hot Milk.

     LUNCHEON--Hot Beef Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes),
     Cheese Sticks, Armour's Veribest Beef Tongue and Tomato
     Salad, Cream Biscuits, Apple Sauce, Grape Juice with
     Marshmallows.

     DINNER--Veribest Soup, Ragout of Beef (Armour's Veribest),
     Potatoes and Brown Gravy flavored with Beef Extract,
     Escalloped Tomatoes, Cream of Grape Pie (Made with Armour's
     Grape Juice and Simon Pure Leaf Lard), Coffee.


IOWA

MRS. J. C. BRANDT, LE MARS

     BREAKFAST--Chilled White Grapes in Cantaloupe, Corn Meal and
     Ham Mush (Fried in Bacon Grease), Broiled Star Bacon, Toast
     with Honey, Doughnuts and Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Corned Beef au Gratin, Graham and White
     Bread Sandwiches, Rhubarb Marmalade, Cheese, Simon Pure Leaf
     Lard Cake, Sliced Peaches, Armour's Mulled Grape Juice.

     DINNER--Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes), Croutons,
     Casserole of Veal, Riced Potatoes, Armour's Baked Beans,
     Stuffed Tomatoes, Veribest Tongue and Egg Salad, White Bread
     (Butterine in balls and sprig of parsley), Armour's Mince
     Meat Pie, Coffee.


KANSAS

MRS. J. L. HOBBS, 309 WABASH AVE., WICHITA

     BREAKFAST--Iced Cantaloupe, Shredded Wheat Biscuits with
     Sugar and Cream, Veribest Corned Beef Hash, Baking Powder
     Biscuits, Apple Butter, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Star Ham Souffle, Creamed Potatoes, Fresh Rolls,
     Blackberry Jam, Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup with Toast Cubes, Veribest
     Roast Beef with Potatoes and Brown Gravy, Creamed
     Cauliflower, Veribest Chicken Salad served in Red Pepper
     Shells on Lettuce Leaves, Cheese Sandwiches, Olives, Banana
     Shortcake with Whipped Cream, Coffee.


KENTUCKY

MRS. M. GEO. MOORE, R. 5, LEXINGTON

     BREAKFAST--Bananas with Cereal and Cream, Broiled Star
     Bacon, Fried Apples, Creamed Hominy, Buttermilk Biscuit,
     Blackberry Jam, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Cream of (Veribest) Tomato Soup, Sweet Peppers
     stuffed with Veribest Veal Loaf, Escalloped Corn, Cottage
     Cheese with Cream, Sally Lunn, Tea.

     DINNER--Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes), Baked Star Ham,
     Corn Pudding, Sweet Potatoes, Green Beans, Tomatoes with
     Mayonnaise Dressing, Veribest Chicken Salad, Amber Pie
     (Simon Pure Leaf Lard), Cheese, Coffee.


LOUISIANA

MRS. T. J. BINGHAM, CONCORDIA PARISH, VIDALIA

     BREAKFAST--Broiled Star Ham, Poached Eggs on Toast, Hot
     Muffins, Butter, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Chicken Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes),
     Veribest Veal Loaf, Raisin Bread, Butter, Cream Puffs (Made
     of Simon Pure Leaf Lard), Iced Armour's Grape Juice.

     DINNER--Cream of Corn Soup, Broiled Chicken on Toast with
     Baked Apples, Stuffed Peppers (Using Armour's Star Ham
     Minced), Scalloped Potatoes, Fruit Salad with Mayonnaise,
     Mince Meat Pie with Hard Sauce (Veribest Mince Meat),
     Coffee, Mints.


MAINE

MISS GERTRUDE JONES, 59 COTTAGE ST., SO. PORTLAND

     BREAKFAST--Bananas and Cream, Star Ham Omelet, Rye Biscuit,
     Breakfast Cake, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Vegetable Soup, Simon Pure Luncheon
     Rolls, Creamed Potatoes, Orange Sauce, Iced Tea.

     SUPPER--Stuffed Baked Ham, Irish Potatoes, Baked Onions,
     Armour's Grape Juice Sherbet, Cake, Coffee.


MARYLAND

MRS. GEO. E. LOANE, 711 E. 22ND ST., BALTIMORE

     BREAKFAST--Oranges, Grapenuts with Cream, Armour's Star
     Bacon, Bread dipped in Egg and fried in Bacon Fat or Simon
     Pure Leaf Lard, Corn Pone, Cloverbloom Butter, Coffee.

     DINNER--Armour's Veribest Tomato Soup, Croquettes of
     Veribest Chicken, Mashed Potatoes, Lima Beans with Cream
     Dressing, Lettuce Salad, Ice Cream and Black Coffee.

     SUPPER--Slice Boiled Star Ham, Tomato Salad, Biscuit,
     Cheese, Cake, Tea.


MASSACHUSETTS

MISS ISABELLE M. WALKER, 17 HOVEY AVE., CAMBRIDGE

     BREAKFAST--Cracked Wheat, Corn Bread, Star Ham Omelet,
     Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Extract of Beef, Croutons, Apple Turnovers,
     Russian Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Roast Beef, Baked Sweet Potatoes, Pickled
     Beets, Boiled Rice, Syrup, Tea.


MICHIGAN

MRS. THOS. WESTWOOD, 2309 S. MICH. AVE., SAGINAW, W. S.

     BREAKFAST--Wheatena with Dates, Sugar and Cream, French
     Toast, Broiled Star Ham, Golden Omelet, Peach Marmalade,
     Fried Cakes, Coffee.

     DINNER--Noodle Soup (Armour's Extract of Beef), Creamed
     Chicken (Armour's Veribest) in Riced Potato Border, Ginger
     Pears, Watermelon Pickles, Beet and Tomato Salad, Strawberry
     Custard, Grape Juice Mousse, Coffee, Black Tea.

     SUPPER--English Tea Cakes, Fruit Salad, Veribest Tongue
     Garnished with Shoe String Potatoes, Peanut Cookies, Cocoa
     with Whipped Cream.


MINNESOTA

LILLIAN HUDSON, 1809 FREMONT AVE. SO. MINNEAPOLIS

     BREAKFAST--Oranges, Boiled Star Ham, Oatmeal with Sugar and
     Cream, Creamed Potatoes, Popovers, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Cold Sliced Armour's Star Ham, Cheese Fondue,
     Bread and Butter, Sliced Peaches, Cookies, Coffee.

     DINNER--Tomato Soup, Braised Beef, Riced Potatoes, Squash,
     Refugee Stringless Bean Salad, Baking Powder Biscuits
     (Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard), Cherry Pie, Coffee.


MISSISSIPPI

MISS LOLA PERRY, 912 39TH AVE., MERIDIAN

     BREAKFAST--Baked Bananas, Creamed Veribest Corned Beef,
     Potato Chips, French Toast, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Ox Tail Soup, Armour Star Ham Timbales,
     Deviled Eggs, Jellied Baked Apples, Parker House Rolls, Iced
     Tea.

     DINNER--Fricassee of Veribest Roast Beef, Creamed
     Cauliflower, Shrimp Salad, Spaghetti with Tomato Sauce,
     Philadelphia Potatoes, Angel Cake, Grape Nectar (Armour's
     Grape Juice).


MISSOURI

MISS SOPHIA GORDON, R. 1, COLUMBIA

     BREAKFAST--Peaches and Cream, Broiled Star Bacon, Eggs on
     Toast, Graham Cakes with Maple Syrup, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Tomato Soup Served with Whipped Cream, Crackers,
     Fish Croquettes with Sliced Lemon, Apple and Nut Salad,
     Baked Sweet Peppers with Tabasco Sauce, Light Rolls, Iced
     Tea.

     DINNER--Cold Boiled Star Ham, Asparagus on Toast, French
     Fried Potatoes, Sliced Tomatoes, Hot Biscuits, Armour's
     Grape Ice, Cake, Coffee, Mints.


MONTANA

MRS. GEO. SINCLAIR, 130 GRANDE AVE., BILLINGS

     BREAKFAST--Sliced Peaches, Cereal, Star Ham and Eggs, Toast,
     Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Veal Loaf with White Sauce, Sliced
     Tomatoes, One Egg Muffins, Cantaloupe with Ice Cream, Iced
     Tea, Wafers.

     DINNER--Fried Chicken with Extract of Beef Sauce, Riced
     Potatoes, Green Corn on the Cob, Rolls, Olives and Sweet
     Midgets, Stewed Pears, Sponge Cake, Tea.


NEBRASKA

MRS. DAISY CANNON, BURTON

     BREAKFAST--Oranges (Halved), Puffed Rice with Sugar and
     Cream, Star Ham and Eggs (Baked), Hot Breakfast Rolls,
     Strawberry Jam, Graham Wafers, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Fruit Salad, Chicken Bouillon (Armour's), Sliced
     Cold Star Ham, Mashed Potatoes with Border of Buttered Peas,
     Sliced Tomatoes, Buns, Simon Pure Marshmallow Delights, Ice
     Cream with Nuts, Armour's Grape Juice.

     DINNER--Veribest Vegetable Soup, Beef en Casserole, Creamed
     Cabbage, Veribest Bean Croquettes with Cubes of Tomato
     Jelly, Cold Mashed Potato Balls, Peas, Onions with Salad
     Dressing, Graham and White Bread, Salted Cherries, Nuts,
     Fruit Cake (Made with Veribest Mince Meat), Grape Juice
     (Armour's), Charlotte Russe, Coffee.


NEVADA

MRS. C. E. CADY, MONTELLO

     BREAKFAST--Puffed Wheat, Sliced Apples and Cream, Armour's
     Star Ham and Eggs Fried, Fried Sweet Potatoes, Young Onions,
     Hot Cinnamon Rolls, Buttered Toast, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Combination Salad, Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon
     Cubes), Armour's Veribest Deviled Tongue, Sliced Cold,
     Veribest Pork and Beans, Cantaloupe a la Mode, White Bread,
     Iced Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Vegetable Soup, Watercress Salad, Spiced
     Veribest Roast Beef, Cold Boiled Star Ham, Stewed Carrots,
     Escalloped Onions, Baked Potatoes, Hot Biscuits, Blanc
     Mange, Apple Pie with Cheese, Milk.


NEW HAMPSHIRE

MRS. ALMOND SMITH, NEW LONDON

     BREAKFAST--Peaches and Cream, Puffed Rice and Cream, Star
     Bacon and Eggs, Creamed Potatoes, Popovers, Coffee.

     DINNER--Veribest Chicken Soup with Bread Sticks, Tomato and
     Cucumber Salad, Veribest Roast Beef with Brown Gravy, Mashed
     Potatoes, Sweet Potatoes Boiled, Sweet Corn, Apple Tapioca
     Pudding, Grape Juice and Crackers.

     SUPPER--Creamed Veribest Chicken, Baking Powder Biscuits,
     Pickled Beets, Cranberry Tarts, Mocha Cake, Tea.


NEW JERSEY

MRS. WM. H. REGER, WHITE HOUSE STA.

     BREAKFAST--Baked Apples, Graham Mush, Eggs Shirred on Mince
     of Veribest Veal, Simon Pure Hasty Biscuit, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Chicken Salad Sandwiches, Fried Oysters
     (Simon Pure Leaf Lard), Peach Shortcake, Armour's Grape
     Juice.

     DINNER--Chicken Bouillon (Armour's), Braised Beef Heart,
     Mashed Potatoes, Macaroni, Spinach Timbales, String Bean
     Salad, Cocoanut Pie.


NEW MEXICO

MRS. D. E. BREWER, COLUMBUS, BOX 136

     BREAKFAST--Fruit, Star Ham, Eggs, Hot Cakes, Doughnuts,
     Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Musk Melon, Spiced Ham, Egg Salad, Bread and
     Butter Sandwiches, Marshmallow Cake, Tea.

     DINNER--French Peas and Chicken, Veribest Roast Veal, Brown
     Potatoes, Tomato Relish, Baked Greens, Waldorf Salad,
     Washington Pie, Coffee.


NEW YORK

MRS. ELEANOR EVERTS, 66 EAGLE ST., FREDONIA

     BREAKFAST--Sliced Peaches, Cream of Wheat, Broiled Star Ham,
     Baked Potatoes, Graham Gems, Ginger Cookies, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Beef Loaf, Fresh Rolls, Glendale
     Butterine, Pear Conserve, Apple Pie, Cheese, Armour's Grape
     Juice.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup, Saltines, Veal Pocket (Extract
     of Beef), Mashed Potatoes, Brown Gravy, Green Corn Pudding,
     Red Cabbage Salad, Salt Rising Bread, Blackberry Pudding,
     Pumpkin Pie, Coffee.


NORTH CAROLINA

MRS. WM. H. BOND, 435 CUTLER ST., BOYLAN HEIGHTS, RALEIGH

     BREAKFAST--Fresh Figs and Cream, Poached Eggs on Toast, Star
     Brand Bacon Panned, One-Egg Muffins, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Veal Loaf with White Sauce and Pimentos,
     Perfection Salad, Swedish Rolls, Sliced Peaches and Cream,
     Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Ox Tail Soup, Escalloped Chicken, Baked
     Bananas, Asparagus Vinagrette, Potatoes au Gratin, Stuffed
     Cucumbers, Pineapple Short Cake with Whipped Cream, Coffee,
     Toasted Crackers and Cheese.


NORTH DAKOTA

MRS. T. J. TIDEMANSON, WYNDMERE

     BREAKFAST--Grapefruit, Armour's Star Bacon and Eggs,
     Muffins, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Veal Loaf, Celery and Apple Salad, Corn
     Bread, Maple Syrup, Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Bouillon, Armour's Star Ham Baked,
     Creamed Potatoes, Creamed Onions, Lettuce Salad, Apple Pie.


OHIO

MRS. E. WIEMEYER, 2860 COLERAIN AVE., CINCINNATI

     BREAKFAST--Corn Fritters, Apple Sauce, Fried Star Ham and
     Eggs, Currant Bread, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Roast Beef Pie, Fried Sweet Potatoes, Stuffed
     Tomatoes, Soda Wafers, Tomato Bouillon, Grape Jelly.

     DINNER--Brunswick Stew made from Veribest Beef and Chicken,
     Lyonnaise Potatoes, Sliced Tomatoes, Custard Junket, Coffee.


OKLAHOMA

MRS. E. ANDREWS, 625 W. 18TH ST., OKLAHOMA CITY

     BREAKFAST--Grapefruit with Armour's Grape Juice, Cereal,
     Star Ham, Poached Eggs, Biscuits, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes), Veribest
     Creamed Chicken, Stuffed Tomatoes, Rolls, Hot Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Vegetable Soup, Baked Star Ham, Baked Sweet
     Potatoes, Escalloped Corn, Combination Salad, Apple
     Dumplings, Coffee.


OREGON

MRS. DAN FISHER, BROWNSVILLE

     BREAKFAST--Cracked Wheat Mush with Dates, Mountain Trout
     with Star Bacon, Potato Chips, Strawberry Jam, Popovers,
     Coffee.

     DINNER--Chicken Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes), Served
     with Popped Corn, Baked Ham in Cider, Fried Apples, Banana
     and Peanut Salad, Browned Potatoes, Pineapple Cream Pie.

     SUPPER--Veal Loaf (Veribest), Tomatoes Stuffed with Corn,
     Wilted Lettuce, Rye Bread, Cantaloupe filled with Grape
     Sherbet.


PENNSYLVANIA

MRS. H. C. WEINSTOCK, 5410 GIRARD AVE., PHILADELPHIA

     BREAKFAST--Sliced Bananas and Corn Flakes with Sugar and
     Cream. Veribest Sausage on Simon Pure Waffles, Rolls,
     Butter, Cocoa, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Tomato Soup with Croutons, Club
     Sandwiches (Veribest Chicken and Star Bacon), Creamed
     Potatoes, Cakes, Fruit, Tea.

     DINNER--Grape Fruit Salad, Beef Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon
     Cubes), Baked Star Ham (Baked and Served with Champagne
     Sauce), Asparagus on Toast, Mashed Sweet Potatoes, Sliced
     Tomatoes and Lettuce, French Dressing (Simon Pure), Peach
     Dumplings, Whole Wheat Crackers and Cheese, Coffee, Mints.


RHODE ISLAND

MAUDE E. SEARS, 10 VERNDALE AVE., PROVIDENCE

     BREAKFAST--Bananas, Hominy with Cream, Star Ham with Fried
     Eggs, French Fried Potatoes, Toast, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Beef Bouillon (Armour's Bouillon Cubes), Sliced
     Tongue with Tomato Sauce, Cream of Tartar Biscuits, Sliced
     Peaches, Honey Gingerbread, Armour's Grape Juice.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup, Milk Crackers, Veribest
     Creamed Chicken en Casserole, Baked Potatoes, Apple
     Fritters, Stewed Tomatoes, Celery, Ambrosia, Sponge Cake,
     Coffee.


SOUTH CAROLINA

MRS. S. E. TRUE, 108 ST. JOHN ST., SPARTANBURG

     BREAKFAST--Iced Cantaloupe, Cereal and Cream Poached Eggs on
     Toast Garnished with Crisp Star Bacon, Waffles and Maple
     Syrup, Coffee.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Bouillon, Wafers, Broiled Trout with
     Mashed Potatoes, Star Boiled Ham Sliced Thin, Peas in
     Timbales, Macaroni au Gratin, Rolls, Sliced Tomatoes on
     Lettuce with Mayonnaise Dressing, Caramel Ice Cream, Cake,
     Coffee.

     SUPPER--Veribest Chicken Sandwiches, Celery and Nut Salad,
     Salted Crackers, Armour's Grape Juice Sherbet, Oatmeal
     Cakes, Iced Tea.


SOUTH DAKOTA

MRS. WALTER YORKER, BOX 471, BERESFORD

     BREAKFAST--Sliced Peaches, Creamed Veribest Dried Beef, Bran
     Muffins, Raisin Cookies, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Baked Beans, Apple Sauce, Rye Bread,
     Angel Food Cake, Cocoa.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup, Veribest Roast Beef with Cream
     Gravy, Baked Sweet Potatoes, Pickled Pears, Rolls, Cream
     Pie, Coffee, After Dinner Mints.


TENNESSEE

MISS ROBERTA FRY, R. F. D. NO. 10, COLUMBIA

     BREAKFAST--Grapefruit, Cream of Wheat, Star Bacon, Eggs, Hot
     Biscuits, Blackberry Jelly, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Creamed Chicken, Tomato and Green Pepper
     Salad, Bread and Butter Sandwiches, Applesauce, Doughnuts,
     Iced Tea.

     DINNER---Veribest Tomato Soup, Mashed Potatoes, Veribest
     Pork and Beans, Baked Star Ham, Creamed Peas, Hot Rolls,
     Sweet Pickles, Armour's Grape Juice Sherbet, Cake, Coffee.


TEXAS

MRS. M. E. SCOVILL, KENEDY

     BREAKFAST--Fruit, Oatmeal with Sugar and Cream, Frizzled
     Star Ham and Eggs, Delmonico Potatoes, Raised Biscuits,
     Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Cream of Tomato Soup (Veribest), Veribest Beef
     Loaf, Tomato Salad, Rye Bread, Butter, Nut Cake, Armour's
     Grape Juice Punch.

     DINNER--Armour's Bouillon, Roast Loin of Pork, Apple Sauce,
     Rice, Creamed Turnips, Celery Mayonnaise, Wafers, Cheese,
     Armour's Mince Meat Tarts, Coffee.


UTAH

MRS. EMMA CALDWELL, MURRAY

     BREAKFAST--Sliced Peaches, Grape-Nuts and Cream, Star Ham
     fried, Poached Eggs on Toast, Graham Gems, Grapes, Postum.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Cold Tongue, Homemade Mustard Pickles,
     Sliced Tomatoes, Luncheon Rolls, Peach Sherbet, Feather
     Cake, Ice Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup, Crackers, Veribest Chicken
     Creamed, Mashed Potatoes, Browned Cabbage, String Beans,
     Cream Cocoanut Pie, Watermelon, Coffee.


VERMONT

MRS. HENRY J. MCNALLY, 91 CHERRY ST., BURLINGTON

     BREAKFAST--Peaches and Cream, Broiled Star Ham, Creamed
     Potatoes, Poached Eggs, Triscuit, Graham Muffins and Postum.

     LUNCHEON--Armour's Beef Bouillon, Chicken Salad from
     Veribest Chicken, Brown Bread and Butter Sandwiches,
     Sunshine Cookies, Armour's Grape Juice.

     DINNER--Stuffed Tomatoes on Lettuce Leaves with Mayonnaise
     Dressing, Veribest Beef Loaf with Brown Sauce flavored with
     Armour's Extract of Beef, Riced Potatoes, Evergreen Corn on
     Cobb, Beet Pickles, Bread and Butter, Armour's Grape Juice
     Frappe, Chocolate Tokens, Coffee.


VIRGINIA

MISS ELSIE A. SHEETZ, 715 E. GRACE ST., RICHMOND

     BREAKFAST--Cereal, Fried Apples with Star Bacon, Cornmeal
     Muffins, Coffee.

     DINNER--Bouillon from Armour's Bouillon Cubes, Veribest
     Chicken Pie, Creamed Peas and Carrots, Potato Salad, Hot
     Rolls, Date Pudding, Coffee.

     SUPPER--Armour's Tomato Soup with Croutons, Veribest Bean
     and Celery Salad, Cold Sliced Tongue, Hot Biscuits, Jelly,
     Tea.


WASHINGTON

MISS B. E. SMITH, R. F. D. NO. 36, BURTON

     BREAKFAST--Iced Cantaloupe, Armour's Fancy Select Eggs fried
     with Armour's Star Bacon, Corn Muffins, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Pork and Beans, Cucumber and Tomato
     Salad, Devil's Cake, Sliced Peaches, Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup, Veribest Boned Chicken in
     Bechamel Sauce, French Fried Potatoes, Cauliflower,
     Blackberry Pie, Cheese, Coffee.


WEST VIRGINIA

MRS. M. L. WHITE, 1409 MAGAZINE ST., CHARLESTON

     BREAKFAST--Cream of Wheat with Maple Syrup, Fried Star Ham
     and Eggs, Hot Biscuits and Butter, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Corn Beef Hash, Baked Apples, Potato Salad,
     Lettuce, Cream Cake, Tea.

     DINNER--Tomato Soup (Veribest), Cream Potatoes, String Bean
     Salad, Sliced Tomatoes, Pickles, Sliced Star Ham, Hot Rolls,
     Coffee.


WISCONSIN

MISS GENEVIEVE RAYMOND, EAGLE RIVER

     BREAKFAST--Cereal with Dates, Broiled Star Bacon, Buttered
     Toast, Boiled Eggs, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Vegetable Soup with Crisp Crackers,
     Celery, Stewed Figs, Chocolate Marble Cake, Armour's Grape
     Juice.

     DINNER--Veribest Chicken Fricasseed, Mashed Potatoes, Baked
     Squash, Creamed Turnips, Green Tomato Pickle, Watermelon,
     Pumpkin Pie, Coffee.


WYOMING

MRS. A. M. HUMPHRY, 646 SUMMER ST., SHERIDAN

     BREAKFAST--Graham Porridge with Dates, Fried Star Ham and
     Eggs, Dry Toast and Butter, Coffee.

     LUNCHEON--Veribest Chicken Sandwiches, Creamed Potatoes,
     Tomato and Lettuce Salad, Hot Doughnuts (Armour's Simon Pure
     Leaf Lard), Tea.

     DINNER--Veribest Vegetable Soup with Croutons, Veribest
     Roast Beef, Brown Sauce, Browned Potatoes, Cauliflower au
     Gratin, Rolls, Beet Pickles, Armour's Grape Juice Sherbet,
     Cake, Nuts, Coffee.


CANADA

MRS. G. E. POSTE, 231 MOSS ST., VICTORIA, B. C.

     BREAKFAST--Oranges, Wheat Flakes with Cream, Baked Hash
     (Veribest Beef), Preserved Peaches, Muffins, Coffee.

     DINNER--Veribest Tomato Soup, Baked Stuffed (Star) Ham,
     Mashed Potatoes, Creamed Cauliflower, Pickled Carrots,
     Chocolate Pie, Tea.

     SUPPER--Sliced Meat Loaf, Potato Salad Garnished with Sliced
     Hard Boiled Eggs and Parsley, Raspberry Preserve, Cheese,
     Lemon Tarts, Cake, Cocoa.




Little Stories by Our Readers


A Ham Story

[Illustration]

As we are lovers of good ham we always use Armour's Star Brand. I
generally buy the ham on Saturday as it keeps better than fresh meat. I
buy a whole ham (try to get one about ten pounds), then get the dealer
to cut two nice slices thick enough to broil, a little beyond the
center, leaving two nice ends, the string end the smaller. One slice I
use for Sunday morning Breakfast, the other one I wrap in a moist cloth,
place between two plates. This will keep three or four days.

I now take the large end, put it on in cold water, let simmer for a
couple of hours, then take out and drain; cut off skin, and part of the
fat and put it in the oven to finish cooking. The skin I save for use on
the griddle, the fat I render and use the dripping for salads. After
baking, serve hot or cold, sliced; I still have a small end and one
slice left, the small end I boil until thoroughly done, take out and use
the water for vegetables, such as cabbage, spinach, beans, etc. The
small end does not slice as well as the other so I take all the meat
from the bone, and put it through the chopper, grind it fine, and use it
for ham loaf, toast filling for tomato cups or for ham omelet. The baked
end I serve sliced, also, use for sandwiches. If I have to keep the
sandwiches I put them in a moistened napkin; it keeps the ham moist and
juicy.

       *       *       *       *       *

How I Arrange to Use a Whole Ham

SUNDAY BREAKFAST: Water cress, slice Star Ham broiled with milk gravy,
hot rolls, coffee, home-made peach cake.

SUNDAY DINNER: Beef pot roast, white potatoes whipped, sweet potatoes
roasted under the meat, cauliflower boiled in the ham water, cream
dressing, fruit sherbet, in which I use Armour's Grape Juice.

SUNDAY SUPPER: Cold baked Star Ham sliced thin, or tomato cups on
lettuce with mustard dressing, white bread and butter, home-made cake,
sliced peaches, and tea.

To make TOMATO CUPS, take medium size tomatoes, skin them (by pouring
boiling water over them first, this is easily done) and put on ice until
cold; scoop out the center. Make a filling of minced ham, a little
chicken, breadcrumbs (equal parts), a seasoning of chopped peppers; fill
tomatoes; on top of each put a little mustard dressing. Set each cup on
a lettuce leaf, and serve.

Now I still have one slice of ham left, some minced ham, some of the
baked ham. The last slice I broil and serve with poached eggs; the baked
ham, makes sandwiches. The week I buy a whole ham I don't buy much other
meat. Trusting this will be of value to some, I remain,--I. M. B.,
Philadelphia.

       *       *       *       *       *

Milk Toast

"Have kept Armour's Beef Extract always on hand for years and it has
helped me out of many a tight place. One day the children teased for
milk toast for supper, and to my dismay I found the milk was 'short'
that day. Not wishing to disappoint them I tried to see what I could do.
I made a consomme with Armour's Beef Extract, using a quarter
teaspoonful to a cup and seasoning it with salt and pepper, and used
this in the same way as I would milk. Our 'milk' toast was fit for a
king. The children pronounced it the best ever. In these times of high
prices, with milk at ten cents per quart, many a family would welcome
such an excellent substitute as Armour's Extract."

Most useful are the Armour's Bouillon Cubes. I use them in preparing
soups, gravies, dissolved and poured over a roast while cooking. I give
my husband and children each one in a cup of hot water, every morning
for breakfast, the first thing, as it seems to be an appetizer; also
serve it to my aged parents in the morning before rising, as it gives
them strength to make their toilet. They are both very aged and failing
and the effect of the bouillon is wonderful. My husband also takes
Armour's Bouillon Cubes with him in his lunch basket to the factory
where he holds a clerical position; he keeps his bouillon cup and spoon
and there is plenty of boiling water accessible, so it makes a nice,
nourishing drink at lunch time.--Mrs. E. B., Greensburg, Pa.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Red Letter for Armour's Extract

We have a friend who derived more benefit (in our estimation) from
Armour's Extract, than any one we have ever heard of. He is an expert
machinist and is sent to all parts of the world to put up machines, such
as reapers, mowers, etc. The particular trip I write of he was sent to
Bulgaria, to a small village, where the accommodations were very poor.
Sleep was almost out of the question and to eat the black bread, which
was the principal food, was impossible. The water in all foreign
countries was so bad that he always carried jars of the Extract with
him. This time he not only dissolved it in hot water and drank it, but
took his penknife and fed himself the extract raw. He claims it saved
his life, as for four days that was all he had with him to eat or drink.
He says he felt fine and did his work better than when he had been where
the food was palatable and he had eaten heartily. Of course he swears by
the Extract and never takes a trip now without taking a good supply with
him.--Mrs. H. L., Yorktown Heights, Westchester Co., N. Y.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: A New Use for Stale Bread. The Roll is Hollowed Out to
Make a Serving Cup for Creamed Chicken]

Don't stint the kiddies on their daily spread--give them Armour's
Glendale Butterine




Making Money for the Church


"Besides selling recipes for eggless, butterless cake, we made seasoning
bags to sell, for soups and such, using eight peppercorns, four cloves,
six mustard seeds, one third teaspoon celery seed, four tiny sprigs each
of thyme, summer savory, sweet basil, and parsley in each. This gives a
blend pleasant to many tastes, and it is sufficient to flavor a soup for
a large family. When the soup seems to have taken enough of the flavor
the bag should be removed. To make one bag at a time would be foolish,
but when enough are made to last the year out it helps out in fine
shape. We also made jelly bags for sale, many ladies not having the
right thickness of cloth in the house at jelly-making time."

"At Christmas time the young girls of our congregation made quite a few
dollars for the church by selling boxes of preserved orange. This is
their recipe: Cut six large navel oranges in slices the long way of the
fruit, and boil, until tender, in three waters, pouring off the water
each time. Make a syrup of five cups of sugar and one cup of water and
boil the orange in this until the syrup is almost boiled away. Remove
with skimmer and let stand half an hour and roll each piece in
granulated sugar. The confection was packed in dainty white boxes and
covered with paraffin paper. They found a very ready sale."--K. C. B.

"It has been our experience that everyday necessities in the household
are better sellers than fancy nicknacks," writes a reader, "and when the
social club of our church met last winter we decided to stick to them.
Here are some of the things we made with the result that when we held
our sale at Easter there was not one article left over and we had the
sum of ninety-five dollars in the treasury."


Ice Bags

"These bags, made out of ordinary potato sacking, are for covering the
cake of ice, and do much to keep down the ice bill. They are twenty-four
inches long by twenty-seven inches wide and have a drawstring of common
twine. They cost almost nothing and found ready sale at a quarter
apiece."


Wringing Bags

"This idea we got from a trained nurse who was with us for a time, and
it is a very good thing to have on hand when there is sickness. When hot
cloths are to be applied it is hard to wring them out by hand as hot as
the doctor would like. The bags are made of strong ticking and measure
eighteen inches in width and are ten inches deep. At each end a loop the
depth of the bag was stitched, through which a piece of broom handle was
run when in use. To use, put the flannel into the bag, and set the bag
into the pan of boiling water on the stove (first inserting the sticks).
When ready, simply lift the bag and wring it by the sticks."


Carpenter's Aprons

"There has been a good deal of building done in our small town and one
of our members, whose husband is a building contractor, offered to buy
half a dozen carpenter's aprons if we would make them. This order has
led to our making over two hundred of these aprons, as others hearing of
it would want their aprons home-made rather than factory made. They are
made of strong ticking, with a strap around the neck and another at the
waist. In some, the straps are around the shoulders instead of the neck.
Pockets are made for a rule, knife, nails, and a strap for a
hammer."--Mrs. T. G. H.

[Illustration: Clever Fingers Made This Lounge from an Old Single Bed]

ARMOUR'S SIMON PURE LEAF LARD--the best for all purposes




Where Does Your Housekeeping Money Go?

     Housekeeping money to many men means the actual money
     required for food. Not very many husbands realize how many
     little expenses the housekeeping money has to take care
     of--little expenses that have nothing to do with food. Here
     are some and the Editor will be very glad if the readers
     will send in their own experiences in this line.


[Illustration]

Most men smoke, and most men like to pocket a nice fresh box of matches
when starting off for the day. Matches don't cost much to be sure but a
fresh box each morning cuts quite a hole in the housekeeping money which
is used to buy them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Does your husband like to sit up late reading, playing chess, etc.? That
sort of thing increases the light and coal bill quite a bit.

       *       *       *       *       *

The pennies given for charity, church collections, etc., are also
"extras."

       *       *       *       *       *

Returning little courtesies--very often to "his" people--such as sending
flowers, books, and occasional lunch or matinee, etc., etc., all make
quite a hole in the housekeeping money.

       *       *       *       *       *

The wear and tear of household utensils, linen, etc., means constant
replenishment of one thing or another. A man may realize that his buggy
or motor car has to have certain parts replaced once in a while but he
is not apt to think of the pots and pans of the household side of things
unless reminded.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a good plan to keep a few simple medicines at hand in case of
sudden sickness, also a few bandages and the usual dressings required
for accidents. Does your housekeeping money make provision for this?

       *       *       *       *       *

Money for the education of the children is not generally included in the
housekeeping money, but when the children get old enough to want to have
their friends visit them it means little lunches, suppers,
entertainments of various kinds, all of which cuts into the housekeeping
money. As this is really the social side of their education it is only
fair that extra provision should be made for it.




Why Eat Fruit?

[Illustration]


It is a very good plan to find out the medicinal and curative properties
of the different fruits and to make the fruit your system requires a
part of your diet.

Apples, for instance, have an excellent effect on the health generally.
They contain a large proportion of water and a large quantity of potash
as well as of malic acid, which has valuable properties, and ether which
is beneficial to the liver. Plums, too, have certain virtues and lemons
are good for several forms of stomach trouble. As for grapes, they are
so valuable as to form a distinctive "cure" just in themselves. They
possess an enormous quantity of potash and plenty of water and they also
contain sugar and salts of tartar. That all means that grapes will do
much for the person who is tired and run down, whose nerves are weakened
and whose organs are overworked, that they will tone and regulate the
system, purify the blood and assist the different organs in performing
their functions. The presence of sugar indicates that they can provide
fuel for the body--the human engine--whether it be the romping child or
the man whose day is filled with hard physical labor. So it follows that
grapes are really a very valuable addition to our diet list.

Unfortunately, it is not always possible to have grapes on our table but
wise manufacturers have found a way by which the juice of the grape may
be possible at all times of the year and in every corner of the land.
They have built large factories right in the very heart of the country
where the best grapes grow and there the grapes are taken while the dew
is still on them and their luscious fragrant deliciousness is squeezed
out, poured into bottles and quickly sealed to prevent any escape of the
exquisite bouquet.

Nothing is added--no water to weaken and adulterate, no sugar to
sweeten, no coloring essence to deceive the eye. It is just the pure,
natural juice of earth's best offering. This bottled concentration of
earth's sweetness and richness with all the life and warmth of the
sunshine is Armour's Grape Juice.

[Illustration: Jessie Tarbox Beals

Marshmallow Cake with Decoration of Marshmallows and Leaves Cut Out of
Citron Peel]


Start the day right with DEVONSHIRE FARM SAUSAGE




Baked Beans--A National Dish


To many people baked beans means just one thing--baked beans, served hot
or cold. To the woman, however, who is really interested in furnishing
variety in diet, and this in a very economical way, baked beans offers
boundless possibilities. First of all, she lays in a stock of Veribest
Baked Beans--Veribest, because she knows that in this particular brand
the beans are even more thoroughly cooked than she herself could do
them. There are two kinds of Veribest Baked Beans, plain, and with
tomato sauce, and with both the mellow richness of the bean is preserved
with all its natural flavor, making it a most toothsome dish as well as
nutritious and economical. Having a good stock to draw from the
economical housewife proceeds to serve baked beans to her family every
day for a week, varying the dish each day.

FOR MONDAY there is a New England Supper--baked beans with hot Boston
brown bread. Drop the can of baked beans into hot water and boil for 20
minutes. Turn out, garnish with parsley and serve with mustard pickles.

TUESDAY, FOR LUNCH.--BEAN CROQUETTES. Drain Veribest Pork and Beans
(without tomato sauce), and pass them through a colander. Measure and
allow one teaspoon of dry bread crumbs to each cup of beans. Season with
cayenne pepper and a little minced parsley. For a pint of the mixture,
beat one egg. Save enough of the egg to dip the croquettes in, and add
the remainder to the beans. Mix and form into small croquettes, or
balls, then roll in fine bread crumbs. Dip them in egg and again in the
crumbs, and fry in deep boiling Simon Pure Leaf Lard. Border with slices
of dill pickles or sweet green peppers.

WEDNESDAY, SCHOOL LUNCHES.--BEAN SANDWICHES. Cut some thin slices from a
loaf of brown bread, butter and put crisp lettuce leaves, with a
teaspoon of mayonnaise, on each half of the slices, and on the others
spread a layer of Armour's Veribest Pork and Beans, which have been
mashed until smooth. Put the slices together and wrap each sandwich
separately in paraffin paper.

THURSDAY.--BEAN CELERY SALAD. Mix one can of Veribest Pork and Beans,
four tablespoons of celery cut in one eighth inch rings, two tablespoons
of finely chopped onions, and one fourth cup of good boiled dressing.
Marinate thoroughly, but stir slightly. Rub the salad dish with a cut
clove of garlic. Arrange lettuce leaves around the salad bowl and in the
center make a mound of the salad mixture, to which one fourth cup of
whipped cream has been added. Garnish with stuffed olives cut in rings.

FRIDAY.--ATTRACTIVE LUNCHEON DISH. Heat one can of Veribest Pork and
Beans (without tomato sauce), tossing about with fork to prevent
breaking or mashing the beans. Season to taste. Serve in beet shells
which have been previously prepared as follows: Wash the beets
carefully, so as not to break the skins, and boil rapidly until tender.
Then cover with cold water, and with the hands remove the skins. Scoop
out the centers and fill the cases with the beans. Garnish with young
celery leaves.

SATURDAY.--PUREE OF BEANS. To one can of Armour's Veribest Beans and
Tomato Sauce add two cups of milk; boil for a few minutes and pass
through a sieve. Add salt and pepper to taste, a dash of sage, dry
mustard and more water if required. Strain over croutons in the tureen
and sprinkle with chopped parsley.

SUNDAY NIGHT SUPPER.--BEAN LOAF. Two cups of Veribest Pork and Beans,
mashed to a pulp, one fourth cup of chopped nuts, one cup of browned
bread crumbs, two teaspoons of grated onion, two eggs, one half cup of
cream or rich milk, one teaspoon of salt. Mix thoroughly and put into a
greased bread pan. Brush with the beaten yolk of egg, milk or cream and
bake one half hour. Serve with tomato sauce.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Jessie Tarbox Beals

Utilizing a Chimney Corner for a Book Case]

       *       *       *       *       *

Homely Virtues

    "Scorn not the homely virtues. We are prone
    To search through all the world for something new;
    And yet sometimes old-fashioned things are best--
    Old-fashioned work, old-fashioned rectitude,
    Old-fashioned honor and old-fashioned prayer,
    Old-fashioned patience that can bide its time,
    Old-fashioned firesides sacred from the world,
    Old-fashioned satisfaction, with enough
    Old-fashioned candour and simplicity,
    Old-fashioned folks that practice what they preach."




Answers to Correspondents


_Please tell me the proper way to send wedding announcements. In a
family where there are several young men and women do I send each a
separate one?_

If economy is no object send each a separate card. If you do not care to
do this and they are brothers and sisters you may say "The Misses Brown"
and "The Messrs. James and John Wilson."

_I would like very much to be able to help other housekeepers, but I
always feel that I only know the simple things of my rather humdrum life
in the country._--MRS. D., OHIO.

What you know is not known to everyone, nor is what any housekeeper
knows a matter of everyday use with other housekeepers. Everyone has
some short cut or recipe, or personal way of doing things that would
lighten the way for others. Your recommendation of butterine for
instance, would carry weight with some housekeepers who had never before
thought of trying it and they would be grateful always for being shown
how to cut their butter bill. So with the other suggestions in your good
letter from which I have taken extracts for the other pages. I want just
such letters as yours. We must not forget that the younger generation of
housekeepers are starting housekeeping and scanning columns like these
for "the things everyone knows."

_Yellow and white scheme for coming-out party._--H. M. B.

Many thanks for the nice things you say about the Cook Book. Am very
glad you have enjoyed it so long. The color scheme you mention could be
carried out further by wearing white dresses with yellow sashes and hair
ribbons. Have yellow ices and cakes with white and yellow frosting. Egg
sandwiches, potato salad garnished with hard boiled eggs halved and
yellow flowers, which are quite plentiful now would all help to carry
out the idea.

_What is the seventh anniversary of a wedding called? and is the
celebration of these anniversaries out of style?_--E. G. T., BOISE CITY.

It is perfectly proper to celebrate and you can have a merry time with
little expense. Have tiny woolly toy sheep for favors and serve lamb
salad (made after a chicken salad recipe). Wear a woolen dress and your
husband white flannels.

_I belong to a little card club and have to entertain the other members
one afternoon soon. Can you suggest something which is easily prepared
and can be served as a lap lunch?_--MRS. F. T., HUNTINGTON, W. VA.

Ham mousse in individual moulds with thin bread and butter sandwiches.
Ice cream served in cantaloupe. Iced tea with a slice of lemon and
Armour's Grape Juice, which needs no flavoring.

_What can I put with my silverware when packing it away to keep it from
tarnishing?_--MRS. S.

Pack in bags of Canton flannel before putting into the drawers or boxes
and place with them a few pieces of camphor gum.

_Please tell me if it is proper to eat cake with the fingers or must a
fork be used?_

It depends on the cake. If one with a soft filling, a fork will be
necessary.


Requested Recipes


FOR G. H.

Molasses Custard

Take one cup molasses (ribbon cane is the best; I have never tried corn
syrup), add one half cup sugar, stir well and put on fire to boil for at
least five minutes. Let cool for a short time, than add three
well-beaten eggs, stirring constantly to keep the eggs from curdling.
Add a tablespoonful of cornstarch. Bake in pie crust in the regular way
but slowly. To keep from browning too quickly I sometimes place a tin in
oven over pie.

Many thanks to Mrs. F. A. F., Jacksonville, Texas.


FOR MRS. T. H., OSWEGO, N. Y.

Boiled Bacon

Place the bacon in a saucepan with sufficient cold water to cover it.
Bring the water to the simmering point and simmer gently until done
(time, about half an hour for a pound for large pieces, less for
smaller). Add to the water an onion with two or three cloves stuck in
it, one carrot, one turnip and some sticks of celery. Skim carefully
several times. When done, remove the skin and cover with browned bread
crumbs.


Found Out!

When making shells for custard and lemon pies prick the crust all over
with a fork before baking. Bake the shells over an inverted pie plate,
then place them in pie plate as usual before filling.--Mrs. D. H.,
Media, Pa.

If a cake gets scorched on top when baking, grate lightly with a nutmeg
grater rather than try to scrape it with a knife. You will have a better
surface for frosting.--C. K., Hurley, Texas.

When your tablecloths begin to wear out make napkins out of the best
parts and get a new tablecloth.

Save your old newspapers and when you sweep soak the papers in water in
which a tablespoonful of ammonia has been dissolved. Squeeze out and
throw the paper pulp on the floor you are about to sweep. It will keep
the dust from flying and at the same time brighten the carpets.

Save all soap scraps and put them into an empty baking powder can that
you have turned into a soap shaker by the help of a hammer and nail.
Punch eight or ten small holes in the top and bottom, run a piece of
wire from lid to bottom to hang it up by. When washing dishes shake the
box in the water and you will have a nice suds.

Do not throw away the small pieces of paraffin that you take from the
tops of jelly glasses. They can be melted and used again. If you do not
make jelly, use them to mix with the kindling. They start a fire like
coal oil. Ends of candles may be used in the same way. If the wick in
the lamp is short and you are out of coal oil, fill the lamp with water.
The oil will rise to the top and the wick will burn as long as there is
oil to burn.

Put a tablespoonful of salt in your lamp and the blaze will be twice as
bright.--C. L. E., Dayton.

A damp or slightly oily cloth is all that is necessary to polish oak
furniture if it is in good condition. Marks made by wet glasses should
be rubbed with a mixture of nine parts olive oil and one part
paraffin.--Mrs. W., Stilesboro, Ga.

A very simple, attractive and inexpensive gift may be made by crocheting
a simple edge for bath towels of the silk finished crochet cotton, and
working the monogram or initial in cross stitch, using the same thread.
The washrag should have a tiny edge to match.--Mrs. J. H. M., New
Mexico.

My linen dress had a tear and as it was bought ready made there were no
left over pieces. I drew a few threads from the under hem and darned it
with these and when laundered it could scarcely be seen.--Mrs. J. E. F.




Hints for October


A Hot Drink with the School Lunch

Whether the individual drinking cup is a requirement in all public
schools, or not, its use is a habit which should be encouraged. A
collapsible cup takes up little room in the lunch basket. With it place
one of the Armour Bouillon Cubes. At lunch time this cube dropped into a
cup of hot water provides a drink of bouillon that is refreshing,
stimulating and healthful.

Armour's Bouillon Cubes, chicken and beef flavor, are sold in tins of
12, 50 and 100--each cube wrapped separately in tin foil.


Fruit Out of Season

The tonic value of pure fruit juices makes them desirable all the year
around, and the caloric properties of grape juice place it at the head
of the list. Just now the Armour factories, in the heart of the
grape-growing sections of New York and Michigan, have their presses at
work extracting the pure juice from the season's luscious Concords. This
juice, undiluted, unfermented and unsweetened, is immediately bottled,
retaining all the delicious fragrance and flavor of the grape.

     For household use there are cases of bottles in quarter-pint
     sizes and larger. Armour's Grape Juice is a splendid flavor
     for desserts and ices.


Government Inspection

Housewives realize, more than ever before, their responsibility in
selecting for their families foods that are wholesome and healthful. One
of the strictest Government inspections is on butterine. In using
Glendale Butterine there is a saving of fully one third over the cost of
butter, and there is no question about its cleanliness, purity and
wholesomeness.

     Armour's Glendale Butterine is carefully wrapped and sold in
     paraffined cartons.


The Family Cupboard

Anyone in the family can serve on short notice a meal that is sure to
please,--_if_ the cupboard is well stocked from the extensive variety of
Veribest Soups, Meats and Food Specialties. All are as thoroughly cooked
and seasoned as in the home kitchen, and it's a simple matter to heat
the contents of the cans and serve.

     Best grocers in all parts of the country sell Veribest
     goods.


A Simple Lesson in Soup Making

The usual process of simmering meats and vegetables is so tedious and
troublesome that frequently soup is omitted from the bill of fare when
there is good reason for its presence. It is especially beneficial in
preparing the way for the easy digestion of heavier foods. Veribest
Soups are scientifically cooked and seasoned. For use, heat the soup and
dilute it to the preferred consistency.


The Choice of the Many

It is the greatest satisfaction to know of one breakfast dish that is
always welcomed by guests. Whether they come from North or South, they
relish sweet, crisp bacon. Armour's Star Bacon is a mild sugar cure,
hickory smoked, and is most delicate.

     Star Bacon is sold in glass jars and paper cartons.


Keeping Household Accounts

Buying ham by the single slice is necessarily much more expensive than
buying a whole ham, for there is the cost of cutting besides the waste
by this method. After slices are cut from the whole ham, considerable
meat will be left on the bone. These bits can be used in many ways, and
the bone can be boiled with vegetables or for soup.

     Armour's Star Ham is cured and smoked by special process
     which has given it the famous flavor.


Little But Efficient

No product is better known or more highly appreciated than the little
jars of Armour's Extract of Beef. This Extract has many uses, and a
little goes far in making soup stock, beef tea, flavoring the cheaper
cuts of meat, gravies and vegetables.

     Most druggists and grocers can supply Armour's Extract of
     Beef in two sizes of jars.


Women Who Succeed

To have light, flakey pastry, doughnuts that are neither heavy nor
grease-soaked, and fried dishes that are just right, our successful
cooks have found that the first essential is good, old-fashioned pure
leaf lard, tried out in open kettles, just as our grandmothers made it.
Such is Armour's Simon Pure Leaf Lard, which is sold only in pails. Best
dealers can supply it.


A Luncheon Innovation

A piquant meat filling for sandwiches--one that is already prepared and
requires only careful slicing--is Armour's Summer Sausage. Each of the
several kinds is a careful blending of meats and seasoning. Packed in
casing, they will keep indefinitely and therefore it is possible to have
a supply at hand ready for any emergency.




The Secret of Good Cooking Is in the Flavoring


Armour's Extract of Beef is the pure rich flavor of lean beef, in highly
concentrated form. Its use solves many kitchen problems and makes for
economy. Being four times stronger than ordinary extract, only
one-fourth as much can be used, or your food will be too rich.

     This Extract of Beef supplies delicious flavor to the
     cheaper cuts of meat, enriches vegetable dishes, restores
     original tastiness to left-overs, and flavors soups and
     gravies.

_Always keep a jar at hand. Sold by druggists and grocers._






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Armour's Monthly Cook Book, Volume 2,
No. 12, October 1913, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARMOUR'S COOK BOOK, OCT. 1913 ***

***** This file should be named 26005.txt or 26005.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/0/26005/

Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Josephine Paolucci
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
