The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sylvan Cabin, by Edward Smyth Jones

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sylvan Cabin
       A Centenary Ode on the Birth of Lincoln and Other Verse

Author: Edward Smyth Jones

Contributor: William Stanley Braithwaite

Release Date: July 12, 2008 [EBook #26036]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SYLVAN CABIN ***




Produced by K Nordquist, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









THE SYLVAN CABIN

[Illustration]

EDWARD SMYTH JONES




THE SYLVAN CABIN

A CENTENARY ODE ON
THE BIRTH OF LINCOLN

AND OTHER VERSE


BY
EDWARD SMYTH JONES


WITH INTRODUCTION BY
WILLIAM STANLEY BRAITHWAITE

[Illustration]

BOSTON
SHERMAN, FRENCH & COMPANY

1911




Copyright, 1911

SHERMAN, FRENCH & COMPANY




TO

THE HON. ARTHUR P. STONE

Justice of the Third District Court

Cambridge, Massachusetts

[Illustration: (signature)]

Edward Smyth Jones
Boston, Mass.




INTRODUCTION


A poet that comes through a unique experience, as so many poets have,
and very recently as the author of this volume has, arrives through
his personality rather than his work at a precipitate sort of fame
that may serve his talents well or serve them ill. To know that a man
was sent to jail as the consequence of a passionate desire to go to
college, and that that desire involved the tramping of dusty and
hungry miles, adds to the interest to the man that cannot fail in some
significant way to set a glamor upon the poet. Poetry is made out of
experience--the experience of dreams, of action, of desires and hopes
baffled on the inexplicable sea of circumstance; in these latter the
dream is as the spirit, and the man whose art becomes an expression of
all he has realized in living, his experiences become something more
than art, they are the subtle rendering reality that is truth.

In these poems of Mr. Jones' it is that which gives them a unique
value because they are in a deeply essential manner the rendering of a
human document, as all poems must be, of an individual who speaks
universally. I emphasize this quality first because art registers its
worth by the vitality of its substance. If the substance be vital,
then its embodiment is artistically successful to the degree in which
the maker has felt his experiences. These poems, then, will come to
many readers with a freshness, with the appeal for a certain sympathy
that will compel attention. The opening poem which celebrates the
centenary of Lincoln's birth, with its fine imaginative sweep, is as
good as any poem I have seen which that occasion called forth. In it
is poetry that ought to assure Mr. Jones' future if circumstances
permit him to cultivate an art for which nature has so obviously
endowed him. "The Sylvan Cabin" in spirit may be said to characterize
the author's book; that upward striving toward the ideal, which taking
a personal expression in his own experience, in his own hopes, has
also a larger significance in voicing the aspirations of those for
whom, as is shown in many other poems, he becomes a voice, a
representative.

Mr. Jones' work has already won for him the approbation of many
literary people, his poems having appeared from time to time in
various publications; this fact not only justifies his gathering them
together in this volume, but being so recognized must fill him with a
certain assurance for the future. To this I can only add that, good as
these are, they give us the hope for better from one who ought
certainly to go on and upward.

            WILLIAM STANLEY BRAITHWAITE.

_Boston, April 5, 1911._




CONTENTS


                                                 PAGE

THE SYLVAN CABIN                                    9

LIFE IN A DREAM                                    22

THE MORNING STAR                                   24

TO ESTELLE                                         25

A SONG OF THANKS                                   27

NOT YET A POET                                     32

A BOUQUET                                          33

AN ODE TO THE SOLDIERS' AND SAILORS' MONUMENT      34

TO A FADED FLOWER                                  37

DAINTY DORA                                        39

THE VIOLIN                                         40

WOMAN                                              41

THE BACHELOR'S SONG                                45

PUT NOTHING IN ANOTHER'S WAY                       47

FLOATING WITH THE GALE                             50

LULA JOHNSON'S SONG                                53

A TRIBUTE TO DUNBAR                                57

WERE I A BIRD                                      59

AN ODE TO ETHIOPIA                                 62

TO J. S. B.                                        72

THE MAYOR'S RING                                   73

WHAT'S THE USE?                                    74

O GOD, WILT THOU HELP ME IN SCHOOL?                76

BEHIND THE BARS                                    84

HARVARD SQUARE                                     86

THE END                                            96




THE SYLVAN CABIN

A CENTENARY ODE ON THE BIRTH OF LINCOLN


I

    O, fairest Dame of sylvan glades,
We come to pay thee homage due,
Embrace thee softly and to kiss
Thy lovely, long-forsaken cheeks;
To smooth thy flowing silver locks
And bind about thy snowy neck
A necklace golden studded full
With rarest gems and shining pearls.
    Our eyes, though sometimes dimmed with tears,
In purer lustre sparkle forth
Whene'er they fall agaze on thee!
Our ears attuned to thy sweet lay
Catch every flowing, cadent note
And bear it ever safe within
Our rapturous hearts, which gladly leap
Whene'er thy name is called!
Deep in our souls the quenchless fire
Of love full brightly burns upon
The sacred altar, set apart
For sprite commune and sacrifice;
Whose high-priest tends with loving care,
And unto thee sweet incense burns.
Our tongues most gladly sing thy praise,
And from it ne'er shall cease--till all
The land be free!


II

    A century lonely hast thou stood
Here all forsaken and forgot!
All men failed thee to visit save
Some idle lover of sylvan haunts
Who trod, perchance, this hallowed spot,
And cast a pensive eye upon
This lovely glade, thy sole abode
(Full lost in these continuous woods),
And brooding o'er thy lowly lot,
Oft thus did muse: "This cabin lone
Here stands to tell the tale of him,
Back-woodsman brave, who having scaled
The mystic mountains ne'er returned
To them, though loved yet left behind;
But here he chose his last abode,
These gloomy woods whose blackness stands
Up hard against horizon's slope;
Grim, spectral, dreaded, and untrod
Save monsters great of savage mien,
That prowled, or crouched upon their prey;
Sent forth a vicious roar that fairly shook
Old Sylvia far and near, from vale
Through crag to mountain peak!
    Upon this spot the redskin oft
Has danced his 'War dance' and his 'Feast,'
His face a reddish hue aglow--
Long locks with eaglets' plumes bedecked;
His bow and never-failing dart,
And scalper dangling at his side.
More brightly gleamed his wary eye,
As braves the war-whoop loudly yelled--
A sight more like the fiery fiends
From Pluto's ghastly shore returned
Than human blood and bone!
    They all have gone and left no tale
But woe which hurled them ever hence
To that shore whence no bark returns.
Old Cabin, thou, a land-mark art,
Of human progress' steady march!"


III

                            Of thee
Thus has time passed with naught more said;
For man in his pedantic art
Soars far in feeble flights of song
From Nature's heart, and thus he fails
With Nature's God to hold commune!
    The bard has slept, dreamed many a dream,
But failed to dream one dream of thee.
High hangs his lyre on willow reed,
And sitting 'neath yon shady nook,
He fails to catch one note of thy
Immortal song that fills the air.
Awake, O bard, from sleep so deep!
Attune thy lyre; let Nature breathe
In her immortal breath of song;
Then wilt thou sing a song most sweet,
The song by Nature's vesper choir,
Through all the countless ages sung,--
And still is singing day by day.
Then all the world will join thy sweet
Refrain in praise and ardent love
Of this fair forest Dame!


IV

    The nations all their day shall have;
Yet each in turn shall rise and fall,
As falls the dark brown autumn leaf;
Or as those dread sky-kissing tides,
Which toss frail barks high upon
Some ghastly, frowning storm-beat shore,--
Though slowly, yet quite surely ebb away.
   --Aye! Egypt fair once spread the Nile,
And green-bay-tree-like proudly flourished;
Her snowy sails sea-ports bedecked,
And deeply ploughed the rolling main,
Or clave the placid lakes, as does
The gentle swan, when some soft breeze
The bulrush stirs, flings its perfume
Upon the rippling silver waves!
    Fair cities dotted here and there
Her vast domain. Her royal line
Of Pharaohs held the sceptre gold
Upon her all-emblazoned throne.
    Now Egypt fair is wreck and ruin.
For, as fled on the flight of years,
The unrelenting Hand of time
Wiped her sweet visage off the globe!
Naught save the grim, grey pyramid,
Sublimest work of man, yet stands
To greet the rosy morn, with proud
Uplifted head, expanded chest--
A death defiant scoff at time!
Yet hoary Time in his wild rage
Of wreck and ruin, like Jove shall hurl
His fiery bolts upon the head
Of pyramid with ire, and crush
And raze it to its base with scorn!


V

    Next Greece, the fairest nymph that trod
This belted globe upon, once shone
As shines the Morning Orb, long ere
The Dawn the rosy East has kissed;
High reared her sacred temples in
Olympia's shady groves, and built
There sacred altars to her gods.
    Old Zeus and Phoebus oft here sat
In council with their fellow gods.
And Homer, fiery bard, was first
To smite the chords of nature's lyre;
Sweet sang he till the earth was filled
With rarest strains of rapturous song!
    Then art and letters blew and blushed,
The fairest flowers of ages past,
Whose essence, spilled upon the breeze,
Is wafted still forever on
The twin deft with the flight of years;
And man in calm delight inhales
The fragrance of pure classic lore!
    But Greece is gone! Her statues fair
Are mingled with the dust; each god
Has flown some fairer clime to rule,
Or, subdued, walks the dark abyss.


VI

    Then Rome, the gaudy Southern Queen,
On seven rugged, rock-ribbed hills
Securely built her throne. The world
Then saw a mighty power rise
In splendor great, as does the sun
On some young, swift-winged morn of June.
A brighter dawning seemed to break;
Another life was lived,--for through
The Roman vein there coursed a blood,
A fiery burning blood of ire,
That rose and conquered all the world.
    Great Caesar led her legions forth
From victory on to victory,
And hung her royal pennons high
In tower, palace-hall, and throne;
The Roman sceptre swayed the globe.
Soft music soothed her savage ear,
Fine arts and sculptor were her toys,
And glory was her "starry crown."
But now we read the "Fall of Rome,"
The doleful lay that tells the tale
Of all who thus have passed away.


VII

    To thee, fair Dame, we thus relate
The things which were but are no more;
That thou mightest know the worldly way,
And knowing, have no timid fear
To ever stir thy peaceful breast.
No fate like theirs awaits for thee;
For Fortune's maid shall tend with care
Thy every nod and beck--yes, place
Upon thy queenly brow a crown,
The "starry crown" by Freedom worn!
    'Tis true no flint rock ribs thy base,
No stone thy corner marks; for that
What carest thou? For boasted pride?
Thy frame is of the sturdy oak,
Inlaid with ribs of stately pine;
The Prince and Princess twain are they
Of all Columbia's giant woods.
The sylvan songsters sing thy praise
From dawn till set of sun, and then
The nightingale, the queen of song,
In praise of thee poureth forth her lay
Till every mellow silver note,
Far floating in the silent trees,
Is taken by an elfish choir,
And chanted softly to the moon.
    The eagle her wee eaglets tells
Of thee, that they may freedom love;
Then soaring full beyond the clouds,
She looks with vaunted pride on thee.
So must thy spirit fill the hearts
Of all Columbia's youth, as once
It filled old "Honest Abe," thy son,
Thy pride--the first-born of thy love.
For when each lowly lad well knows
That ever upwards he may soar,
Beyond vain tyrants' galling sway
To fairer climes where Freedom reigns:
Then will the shadow of thy wing
For aye to them a shelter be!




LIFE IN A DREAM


There is nothing so sweet as our life in our dreams,
  When we soar far on fancy's swift wing;
For a thing in our dreams is all that it seems,
  And the songs are so sweet that we sing.
Ah! the sun shines the brightest, and stars twinkle lightest
  At the moon in her silvery beams!

There is nothing so gay as the life in our dreams,
  With its joy and its laughter and mirth;
For the pleasure that teems is far greater, one deems,
  Than any he finds in the earth.
There are homes are our natal, and nothing is fatal
  In the beautiful land of our dreams!

There is nothing so bright as the life in our dreams,
  Far away from earth's trickery chance;
There the music's wild screams and the wine in its streams
  Are both lost in the song and the dance.
Oh! our joy is the sweetest and life is completest,
  Ah! the life in our beautiful dreams!

There is nothing serene as the life in our dreams,
  When the dove to his mate softly cooes
In the groves by the streams and the moon's silver beams,
  Where the swain oft his maid gently wooes.
There the swains are the rarest and maids are the fairest,
  And their love is as true as it seems!




THE MORNING STAR

TO A. B. B.


Thou art, fair maid, the Morning Star,
  The guide of dawning day,
And sendest diamond sparkles far
  To wake the flowers of May.

Thou makest earth to bloom anew,
  A boon thou'rt wont to give,
And spillest out the morning dew,
  That all may blush and live.

Thou guardest with thy hand of might,
  And never showeth frown;
Earth lullest sleep when cometh night,
  And wak'st her with the dawn.

Fair maiden, God hast given thee
  All power near and far,--
The rosy dawning's light to be,
  The brightest Morning Star.




TO ESTELLE


Coy, sweet maid, I love so well,
    Fair Estelle.
How much I love thee tongue can't tell,
    Sweet Estelle.
But I love thee--love thee true--
More than violets love the dew,
More than roses love the sun--
Do I love thee, dearest one,
    Dear Estelle!

Ah! my heart love's passions swell
    For Estelle!
How I love my actions tell
    Thee, Estelle:
That I love thy smiling face,
And thy captivating grace--
Love thy dreamy 'witching eyes
More than planets love the skies,
    Wee Estelle!

Now I smite my lyre to swell
    For Estelle;
Music's most entrancing spell
    O'er Estelle.
With my fingers on my keys,
Like the balmy morning breeze
Stealing softly through the grain,
Will I gently wake a strain
    For Estelle!

How I love my little belle,
    My Estelle!
Deepest in my sacred dell
    Is Estelle!
I esteem my maiden love
More than angels high above,
More than demons in the sea;
Love is light and life to me,
    And Estelle!




A SONG OF THANKS


For the sun that shone at the dawn of spring,
For the flowers which bloom and the birds that sing,
For the verdant robe of the gray old earth,
For her coffers filled with their countless worth,
For the flocks which feed on a thousand hills,
For the rippling streams which turn the mills,
For the lowing herds in the lovely vale,
For the songs of gladness on the gale,--
From the Gulf and the Lakes to the Oceans' banks,--
Lord God of Hosts, we give Thee thanks!

For the farmer reaping his whitened fields,
For the bounty which the rich soil yields,
For the cooling dews and refreshing rains,
For the sun which ripens the golden grains,
For the beaded wheat and the fattened swine,
For the stalled ox and the fruitful vine,
For the tubers large and cotton white,
For the kid and the lambkin frisk and blithe,
For the swan which floats near the river-banks,--
Lord God of Hosts, we give Thee thanks!

For the pumpkin sweet and the yellow yam,
For the corn and beans and the sugared ham,
For the plum and the peach and the apple red,
For the dear old press where the wine is tread,
For the cock which crows at the breaking dawn,
And the proud old "turk" of the farmer's barn,
For the fish which swim in the babbling brooks,
For the game which hide in the shady nooks,--
From the Gulf and the Lakes to the Oceans' banks,--
Lord God of Hosts, we give Thee thanks!

For the sturdy oaks and the stately pines,
For the lead and the coal from the deep, dark mines,
For the silver ores of a thousand fold,
For the diamond bright and the yellow gold,
For the river boat and the flying train,
For the fleecy sail of the rolling main,
For the velvet sponge and the glossy pearl,
For the flag of peace which we now unfurl,--
From the Gulf and the Lakes to the Oceans' banks,--
Lord God of Hosts, we give Thee thanks!

For the lowly cot and the mansion fair,
For the peace and plenty together share,
For the Hand which guides us from above,
For Thy tender mercies, abiding love,
For the blessed home with its children gay,
For returnings of Thanksgiving Day,
For the bearing toils and the sharing cares,
We lift up our hearts in our songs and our prayers,--
From the Gulf and the Lakes to the Oceans' banks,--
Lord God of Hosts, we give Thee thanks!




NOT YET A POET


Aye! many a rhyme my pen has flown,
  In oblivion, all unknown;
Still many more, perchance, I say,
  Float on in one unbroken lay--
But ask me naught of where or when,
  Long as they ring in hearts of men!
Dear friend, I say these words to you,
  Which through the ages will be true:
Though I have power to combine
  These subtle rhymes of each sweet line--
Yet, I shall never live to see,
  The title "POET" given me!




A BOUQUET


A blossom pink, a blossom blue,
  Make all there is in love so true.
'Tis fit, methinks, my heart to move,
  To give it thee, sweet girl, I love!
Now, take it, dear, this morn and wear
  A wreath of beauty in thy hair;
Think on it, when from bliss we part--
  The emblem of my wooing heart!




AN ODE TO THE SOLDIERS' AND SAILORS' MONUMENT


Thou most majestic Queen of sculptural art,
  What learned architect designed thy throne?
Who traced thy stately form in head and heart,
  And sent the sculptor forth to carve the stone?
O speak, fair Queen, for thou art not alone;
  Ten thousand unseen voices join refrain
That softly floats in one melodious tone,
  As sweet as any ancient harper's strain
  In odes to Indiana's silent victors slain.

Thy court well marks the conquest of the West,
  A citadel sprung out the forest wild,
A mecca where the pilgrims quietly rest:
  Each dame's content--content each sportive child;
The fiery redmen nevermore revile,
  Nor haunt the footprints of thy daring sons,
Whose noble spheres are widening all the while,
  Like as some brilliant star its orbit runs
  And sheds on earth its light down from a thousand suns.

Thy throne emblazoned with the rarest jewels,
  Each wall adorned with battered coats of mail,
Choice relics of some bloody fields or duels,
  A legend or some untold battle tale.
I see the scouts go forth upon the trail,
  And soldiers charging over battlements--
The weeping mother sends to God her wail;
  While passion's rage the mortal heart laments,
  The dove of peace is caged in direst banishments.

But see yon arms, full flushing victory
  Brings hope, and joy is ringing everywhere
Beneath the "starry banner of the free,"
  That shields her children from the tyrant's snare.
The peasant turns him to his lowly fare,
  The rich pursues wild phantoms at his ease,
The rustic plies his long-forsaken share,
  And lo! the dove is cooing, "Peace, sweet peace;"
  For Mars has snatched his bolts from out the rosy East.

And when the last familiar scene has gone,
  And brightest dawn has kissed the sable night,
Then thou shalt smile on faces yet unborn,
  And be to them a gleaming beacon light;
For Might shall fall and on his throne sit Right,
  When bloody wars and petty strifes have ceased;
Then thou shalt don thy spotless robe of white,
  And say to man as hostess of the feast:
  "My brother, sheath thy sword; the end of life is peace."




TO A FADED FLOWER

    To a violet that faded on my coat at Natchez, Miss. March
    8th, 1902.


Alas! thou lovely floweret wee,
  Fate blew a blighting breath
Upon the delicate form of thee,--
  Thou'st met untimely death!
Thou blowest, blushest nevermore,
  To drink the dews of night;
Thy sweet though short-lived life is o'er,
  Thou seest no more the light.

'Twas vain! aye, vain! the selfish strife
  That drooped thy purple crest;
Some swain or maiden took thy life,
  To deck a love-lorn breast.
Ah, floweret wee, the God who made
  All in the earth and sky,
Decreed that thou should blow and fade,--
  All else should live and die!

Now, he who wails the floweret's fate,
  And all the rest of man,
Must meet that fate, aye soon or late,
  And scale their measured span.
We are but flowers that blush and blow,
  As flight of years rolls on,
With time and tide's cold ebb and flow--
  'Tis said--"He's dead and gone!"

For as the maid clips off the stems
  Where once the flowers have been,
So angels pluck earth's rarest gems,
  Immortal souls of men!
The flower fadeth into air,
  From whence its life is given--
But man's soul shining rich and rare
  Ascendeth into heaven.




DAINTY DORA

TO D. M. M.


Greeks once sang a lovely song
  To their maiden Cora;
But my lay floats soft along
  To my Dainty Dora.

Frenchmen sing of Anne Belle,
  Romans sang of Flora;
But I sing my song to tell
  Of my Dainty Dora.

Scotchmen sing their songs to move
  Mary or Debora;
But I sing my song of love--
  Love for Dainty Dora.

Poets now a song may give
  Psyche or Lenora;
But I'll sing long as I live
  Just for Dainty Dora!




THE VIOLIN


Thrice hail the still unconquered King of Song!
  For all adore and love the Master Art
  That reareth his throne in temple of the heart;
And smiteth chords of passion full and strong
Till music sweet allures the sorrowing throng!
  Then by the gentle curving of his bow
  Maketh every mellow note in cadence flow,
To recompense the world of all its wrong.
Although the earth is full of cares and throes
  That tempt the crimson stream of life to cloy,
Thou mak'st glad hearts and trip'st "fantastic toes,"
  And fillest weary souls with mirth and joy--
The soul-entrancing cadence of thy strings
Proclaims thee Song's unconquered "King of kings"!




WOMAN


I call thee angel of this earth,
  For angel true thou art
In noble deeds and sterling worth
  And sympathetic heart.
I, therefore, seek none from afar
  For what they might have been,
But sing the praise of those which are
  That dwell on earth with men.

For when man was a tottling wee,
  Snug nestling on thy breast,
Or sporting gay upon thy knee,
  Oh, thou who lovest him best;
An overflowing stream of love,
  Sprung at his very birth,
And made thee gentle as a dove,
  Fair angel of this earth.

Thou cheerest ever blithesome youth
  With songs and fervent prayers,
And fillest heart with love and truth
  A store for future cares.
Thou lead'st him safely in his prime,
  True guide of every stage,
And then at last, as fades the time,
  Thou comfortest his age.

Like as the sunshine after rain,
  Far chasing 'way the mist,
Thou soothest human grief and pain,
  Fleet messenger of bliss.
In battles where the sword and shield
  Full lay the mighty low,
Thou hov'rest ever o'er the field,
  To ease life's ebb and flow!

Thou standest, ever standest near,
  Before man's waning eyes,
An angel true to him more dear
  Than all beyond the skies!
No fabled sprites of chants and creeds,
  Nor myths of bygone years,
For thou suppliest all his needs
  And wip'st his briny tears.

So, if he quail in desert waste
  Or toss life's stormy sea,
He turns his tear-stained eye in haste
  For one fond glimpse of thee.
He longs to hide beneath thy wing,
  And nestle on thy breast;
He lists to hear thee softly sing
  Him into peaceful rest!

Oh, sing aloud Mt. Zion's songs,
  To cheer each languid heart;
For now some feeble spirit longs
  Thy blessings to impart.
And thus thou keepest the Master's will,
  And showest all thy worth,
Through loving kindness thou art still
  The angel of this earth!




THE BACHELOR'S SONG


While I keep my lonely hall,
You are welcome one and all,
As I sing my little song;
Stay, I'll cheer you all day long--
And sow my bachelor-buttons,
And sow my bachelor-buttons.

While this world is wild with glee,
Chime I now my song to thee;
In my bosom lurks no care,
I can loiter everywhere--
And sow my bachelor-buttons,
And sow my bachelor-buttons.

Oh dear, what a happy life
For the man who has no wife,
To bind with sore distresses,
And silk and satin dresses--
While he sows his bachelor-buttons,
While he sows his bachelor-buttons.

His heart is ever merry,
His way is bright and cheery;
No peevish baby crying,
No jealous wife a-sighing--
While he sows his bachelor-buttons,
While he sows his bachelor-buttons.

Ah! praise the God who hath given
A life so much like heaven;
Quit it? Oh no, I'll never,
But live happy forever--
And sow my bachelor-buttons,
And sow my bachelor-buttons.




PUT NOTHING IN ANOTHER'S WAY


Put nothing in another's way,
  Who's plodding on through life,
But fill each heart with joy each day,
  With peace instead of strife.
So then let not a missent word,
  Or thought, or act, or deed
Be by our weaker brother heard
  To cause his heart to bleed.

Put nothing in another's way,
  It clear and ample leave;
For words and actions day by day
  Life's great example weave.
'Tis then not meet that we should think
  That we are solely free
In manners, dress, in food, or drink,
  Or fulsome revelry.

Put nothing in another's way,
  Just learn the Christian part
To let a holy, sunny ray
  Shine in thy brother's heart.
Help him to bear his load of care,
  His soul get edified--
'Twas only for the soul's welfare
  That Jesus bled and died.

Put nothing in another's way,
  Ye who are sent to teach;
No dark cloud cast across the day,
  Ye who the gospel preach.
Ye twain must set the truth aright
  With joy and peace and love;
For in your souls shines forth the light
  From Jesus Christ above.

Put nothing in another's way,
  Beloved Christian friends;
On through your toils, and cares, still pray,
  Till life's fleet journey ends.
When at the resurrection dawn
  Eternal life is given,
We'll get our harp, our robe, our crown,
  The star-lit crown of heaven.




FLOATING WITH THE GALE

TO MY LOST BROTHER


Ships the angry sea is lashing;
  But I launch my little bark,
Though the thunder peals are crashing,
  And the sea is pitchy dark!
See by lightning's vivid flashing
  How to shift my tattered sail--
Far across the billows dashing,
  I am floating with the gale.

CHORUS

Floating, floating, floating ever
  On the stormy deep blue sea,
Far from father and dear mother
  And, true love, away from thee!
Go, ye zephyrs, sweetly laden,
  Cheer my loved ones in their wail;
Tell my wee sweet bright-eyed maiden
  I am floating with the gale!

When the siren maids are waking,
  And are singing wild sea songs,
Dear, they start my heart to aching,
  For its love to thee belongs.
Now my love-lorn soul is shaking
  With a spell of bitter wail,
And my heart is sadly breaking,
  For I'm floating with the gale!

CHORUS

Now my hopes are fading ever,
  Gloom is chasing 'way the bliss;
Dear, I know that I can never
  Come thy ruby lips to kiss!
But my heart will cling forever
  To that love I oft did hail,
For those ties I can not sever,
  Though I'm floating with the gale!

CHORUS

Dear, my heart is ever longing,
  Longs surfmen my bark to save;
Through my brain these thoughts are thronging,
  Of a grave beneath the wave;
Of loved ones my heart is wronging,
  And the belly of the whale;
'Round my soul their ghosts are thronging,
  As I'm floating with the gale!

CHORUS

Dear, I fain would be returning
  To the cove just where thou art,
While my languid breast is burning
  Light and love full out my heart!
But cruel Fate my hopes is spurning,
  And winds blow against my sail;
While out Death my life is burning,
  I'm still floating with the gale!

CHORUS




LULA JOHNSON'S SONG

    Written in Quinn Chapel, A. M. E. Church, Ninth and Walnut
    Streets, Louisville, Ky., Wednesday evening, October 16th,
    1907, while Miss Lula E. Johnson was singing "Ave Maria."


I have heard the mock-bird singing when the orchards were in bloom,
And the sweetness of his music made the peacock don his plume;
Ay! I've heard cock-robin-redbreast chirping on a sunny day,
And the skylark soaring skywards, merrily sing his festal lay;
And the brown thrush and the bluebird thrill their little treble notes;
All the woodland songsters pouring songs of gladness from their throats--
But not one has touched so deeply, and not one has last so long
As the ever ringing cadence of sweet Lula Johnson's song!

When the breeze has ceased to whisper and the night is soft and still,
Save the awe-provoking shrilling of the ghastly whippoorwill,
As the moonbeams pour down brightly on the woodland, hill and dale,
I oft listen at my window to the queenly nightingale;
But no song of merry woodland, neither hill, nor dale, nor dell,
Has ever smote my bosom, nor has made my spirit swell,
Like the soul-inspiring music that so softly glides along
Oh! so softly and so gently in sweet Lula Johnson's song!

Oh! my soul has caught the music, as it softly floats along--
Ah! the soul-entrancing music of sweet Lula Johnson's song!
If my feet shall ever falter, it shall cheer me on my way;
Ay, sustain and give me comfort,--make my feeble spirit gay.
All we need to have, my brothers, in our war of peace 'gainst strife,
Is the cadence of sweet music sprinkled in to sweeten life;
It will sweeten all our bitters, which now seem so very long,
If we have it soft and gentle, as sweet Lula Johnson's song.

In the lonely hours of midnight, when fair Luna 'gins to pale,
I have heard her songs a-ringing, floating softly on the gale.
And I hope when dawns the morning, when I draw my fleeting breath,
When my friends are gathered 'round me, and my eyes are closed in death--
Ere you throw the sods upon me, on my never-heaving breast,
While my body's lying silent and my soul is seeking rest--
Then I'll wing straight home to glory, for the journey won't be long,
On the spirit-wafting music of sweet Lula Johnson's song!




A TRIBUTE TO DUNBAR


The sweetest singer once thou wast, but art no more;
  An elf thou wast of what thou now shalt be,
Where thou art in realms of that celestial shore;
  There thou shalt sing through all eternity.
    We, peerless bard, bewail thy loss
      And shed heart-broken tears,
    Though meekly thou hast borne thy cross
      And winged the flight of years!

Thrice blessed singer, wrapped in heavenly bliss,
  Of earth's poor souls thy fortune who can tell?
Perchance thy splendid lot be solely this:
  To change thy lute with the angel Israfel!
    If so, then smite thy golden strings
      With fingers nimble, strong,
    Till all along fair heaven rings
      With cadence of thy song!

Thee tyrant earth once held, imprisoned soul,
  That suffered tortures of relentless strife,
Fair heaven now holds within her sheltered fold,
  And gives thee robe and harp--eternal life!
    Grant him, O God, unfaltering breath
      To sing from heaven afar
    A song to cheer our souls in death--
      The peerless Paul Dunbar!




WERE I A BIRD


Were I a bird free born to fly
  Aloof on two wee, downy wings,
My canopy would be the sky
  When rosy morn its dawning springs.

Were I a bird I'd sweetly sing
  Earth's vesper song in tree-tops high,
And chant the carol of the Spring
  To every weary passer by.

Were I a bird, the sweetest voice
  That human ear has ever heard,--
The mocking-bird would be my choice,
  For he's the sweetest singing bird!

Were I a bird my life would be
  In keeping with the Will divine--
I'd sing His carols full and free
  In spreading oak and cony pine!

Were I a bird through air I'd roam,
  Just flitting on the morning breeze,
In search of summer's sunny dome,
  To live contentedly at ease.

Were I a bird I'd sing a tune
  For farmers seeking shady rest
Beneath the spreading oak in June,
  In swinging boughs that rock my nest.

Were I a bird I'd scale the cliff
  When dawns the bleak December day,
Far from the ice and snow I'd shift
  Until the fairest day in May!

Were I a bird, a mocking-bird,
  The King of birdie's singing sons,
My music would fore'er be heard
  As I sweet sang to cheerless ones.

Were I a bird I'd seek my rest
  When jocund Day blows out his light;
In boughs that hover o'er my nest
  I'd sweetly sing, "Good Night, Good Night!"




AN ODE TO ETHIOPIA

TO THE ASPIRING NEGRO YOUTH

    After years of patient study and historical research, I have
    made the following deductions of parts played by the
    Ethiopian in the annals of history, under the caption, "An
    Ode to Ethiopia." It is true that questions will rise
    regarding the racial identity of some of my characters, in
    view of historical statements which place them with the
    Caucasian race; yet I firmly believe, were impartial history
    written, my claims would be justified. However, Time, the
    great Arbiter, will finally decide the equity of my claims.


I

Thou Sovran Queen of Afric's sunny strands,
  I smite my lyre to sing thy praise unsung;
In strains far sweeter than seraphic bands,
  A lay deep in my bosom's core is sprung.
Fair Queen, although my years as yet be young,
  Deep thoughts and musings of thy history old,
Where odes and fiery epics long have hung,
  Live centuries in my immortal soul
  And strike sweet Lydian measures on my harp of gold.


II

Therefore, my song floats softly up to thee,
  Full soft as those sweet zephyrs of the spring,
Of which it was and is and still must be,
  The sweetest of aeolian strains that ring!
I breathe it on the soft sea winds which bring
  Their cooling treasures from the rolling deep;
They 'fresh my brow and make my sad heart sing
  And ever lure my drowsy eyes from sleep,
  And bid thy vesper chorist strictest vigil keep.


III

Of all the nations that have trod the earth,
  In civil states or in the forest wild,
Thou wast the first of real enlightened birth,
  Born in fair Egypt on the spreading Nile.
In valleys fertile, sunny climates mild,
  Thou sternly taught the "chosen" Hebrew race--
Madonna sheltered with her Holy Child,
  Who came to plead man's all unworthy case,
  And drained His sacred heart, earth's vilest sin efface!


IV

Long ere the Grecian oped his classic lids
  Or mould' true beauty with artistic hands,
Thou reared upon thy plains the lofty pyramids,
  With sphinx and obelisks 'decked thy burning sands.
Aye! Queen, thou then wast hailed in all the lands
  Long ere vain Babel 'fused the human tongue
In dialects rude of wild barbaric bands;
  Thou soared to Wisdom's realm, her sceptre wrung,
  And reigned the wisest queen the nations all among.


V

Thou first taught man the mystic sciences probe,
  To scan earth's apex, median, and base;
Thou, too, inscribed the belt around the globe,
  And made deep tracings on its hoary face.
Well fixed each angle, arc, and line in place,
  Then soared thou far into the "milky way,"
Far in the bright, celestial span of space,
  Where orbs and planets all their homage pay
  Unto the sun, the ever reigning "King of Day."


VI

Once in great splendor did thy Pharaohs rule
  In Egypt, with her glory flown of yore;
They laid foundations of the mundane school,
  And taught the art of governmental lore.
And then from thy great military store
  Thou sent the gallant Hannibal to war,
Taught Romans tactics never known before,
  And filled their hearts with ever-cowering awe,
  And bowed their haughty heads to thy majestic law.


VII

But in this age is writ another story;
  Then pen of arrogant, vain Caucasian sage,
Has thee full robbed of thy immortal glory,
  And smeared thy name on History's sacred page!
Forsooth, the Book, once closed for many an age,
  Is opened by thy sons--though fraught with pain--
The curtain's drawn; they rise upon the stage;
  And their valiant deeds and blood shall wash the stain
  As clean as April showers wash the dusty plain.


VIII

I sing now of thy heroes of today,
  Thy sturdy warriors and thy gallant knights,
Who charge into the thickest of the fray,
  And die for country and their free-born rights,--
For orphans, widows and their little mites.
  Thus, Attucks brave, without a moment's pause,
(While reeled the Nation in her darkest plights)
  Full bared his breast in Freedom's holy cause,
  First fell and tore the code of Tyranny's cruel laws!


IX

Now, if my lay is yet not sweet enough,
  I'll bid a gentler, subtler strain awake,
And sing of fights with Jackson on the Gulf
  And Perry's hard-fought battle on the Lake!
Of fights in fen and moor and hoary brake,
  On Lookout Mountain and the rolling main--
Through searing blasts of bleak December's flake,
  And drenching torrents of fair April's rain:
  Their valiant deeds are springing ever up amain!


X

They fought, the Union from State's Rights to free;
  At Vicksburg, Wagner, and Port Hudson lent
Their aid; their deeds at Pillow and Olustee
  Rose surge on surge like ocean billows rent!
The praises of the gallant Ninth and Tenth
  Will ever rise and soft float to the sky--
They bagged Old Bull in Rocky Mountain tent;
  Then stormed the Spanish block-housed Hills on high,
  And bade the tyrant Spaniard's heaving heart to die!


XI

"High time, my Haitian islet must be free!"
  Great Touissant thus his declaration tacks;
Then drives proud Frenchmen into the yawning sea--
  "The bravest whites, by bravest of the blacks."
Brave Maceo pursues the Spanish packs,
  And Aguinaldo, in the mountain wilds,
Pours shot and shell into the tyrants' backs--
  They save her throne and Freedom on them smiles,
  True heroes, and the Fathers of their sunlit Isles!


XII

Thy sons have triumphed in the Halls of State;
  Hamilton and Douglas were the first to gain,
With lightning eye and tongue of thunder great,
  The civic lead of thy illustrious train.
Next Bruce and Revels, senatorial twain;
  John Lynch and Small emit a brilliant light,
And Langston, Pinchback, Cheatham all remain;
  With Dancy, Vernon, Anderson, and White,
  Liang Williams, Lyons, Terrell stand for "Civic Right."


XIII

In science's realm with Banneker we start,
  Then read on Medicae's emblazoned wall:
"Dan Williams here first stitched the human heart!"
  Close by the names of Curtis, Boyd, and Hall.
But others list'd and heard Invention's call,
  In all its sweetness of the days of yore,
And Woods, the greatest foreman of them all,
  Shouts on his voyage with Black and Baltimore:
  "We come! we come! good Dame, thy region to explore!"


XIV

"I, too," said 'Monia Lewis, "can make a man!"
  Then mould' his form with most artistic ease--
But all aeolian strains Blind Tom could scan,
  And play as softly as the South Sea breeze
Upon his major and his minor keys!
  Good Douglas gently wakes the violin's song,
And White leads home the zephyrs from the seas;
  While Coleridge-Taylor with an art more strong
  Full finds the key-note of Dame Nature's vesper song!


XV

If shady nooks in Poesy's realm they choose,
  Or barks to drift the smooth, prosaic stream,
There Phillis held communion with the Muse,
  And Chesnutt woke the "Colonel" from his dream!
Max Barber, Thompson, Knox and Fortune beam;
  Great Braithwaite scales the classic mountain heights,
And Cooper, like a beacon light, will gleam;
  While Dunbar, sun-like, sheds his holy lights
  In dazzling splendor on his solar satellites!


XVI

These brilliant names shall never fade away:
  Emblazoned in the sacred Hall of Fame,
They shall remain till dawns that direful Day,
  The valid seal beneath thy sacred name.
Deft Tanner, artist, ever blazing flame,
  With Pickens, Bruce and Locke of classic dell,
Old Truth and Harper, Yates and Ruffin came,
  And Walker, Terrell, Williams, known so well
  Long ere Marie had taught the hoary world to spell!


XVII

The learned Scarborough writes the classic Greek;
  Dean Miller thinks in calculations cold;
While Cogman writes the annals of the meek,
  DuBois reveals the secrets of the Soul!
But all shall read in letters gilded gold:
  "Who teaches head and heart and hands, has won
The priceless boon, the guerdon of the goal,
  The portion due thy most illustrious son,
  Tuskegee's seer and sage, the noble Washington!"


XVIII

Thy songs inspire and cheer the human soul,
  Still plodding forth in search of Beulah's vale;
Lead wondering lambs into the Master's fold,
  When Flora Burgeon's notes far float the gale!
Though Patti Brown we loud applaud and hail,
  And Hackley's voice is heard in every land,--
Black Patti is the queenly nightingale
  That leads the chorus, as they singing stand
  As Miriam stood, to sing thee to the "Promised Land!"


XIX

I see the Prophet's mandate to the land,
  In golden letters glit'ring in the sky:
"Fair Ethiopia shall stretch forth her hand,
  Her sons shall sway the earth long ere they die!"
As swift as lightnings with the storm-clouds fly,
  To light the path celestial feet have trod:
So be thy soaring to the realms on high,
  When mortal feet no more shall tread this sod,
  And thy holy spirit wings its homeward flight to God!




TO J. S. B.

    On seeing her December 25th, 1904, after two years' travel.


Take, fair maid, these simple lines
  From my pen;
Think of strollings 'neath the pines,
  Which have been--
Long and lonesome were the days
  We were apart,
But may Love, now, have her sways,--
  Bind heart to heart!
O'er main to isle and back to land
  Have I been;
Beheld on either hand
  A maiden queen:
But none with captivating charms
  Like thine;
None to nestle in her arms,
  Love of mine!
Charms unto thee God gave
  To banish strife;
To glorify and save
  One sweet life--
Take this, dear, before we part
  From this bliss;
'Tis but love flowing from my heart,
  Thine to kiss!




THE MAYOR'S RING


I hold a token in my hand,
  A very tiny thing;
And yet within its golden band
  A thousand memories cling.

Aye! thrice ten thousand memories cling
  Of signal victories won,
Enshrined within this little ring,
  Reward of duty done.

I ever shall this token prize,
  And wear it with true grace--
The tie that binds the kindred ties
  Of friendship race to race.

And when I soar full through the skies,
  Yet ever will I cling
Within the gates of Paradise
  This sacred little ring!




WHAT'S THE USE?


Oh! What is living but moving about,
Buoyed up with hope and crushed down by doubt?
What is the draught of breath we harp on as life?
Naught but a sip of peace, a cup full of strife--
      What's the use?

What is the place we call our home, "sweet home"?
Naught but a span of space where one may roam:
Night's pitchy corner; a hard crust of bread;
Cot for your feeble limbs, pillow your head--
      What's the use?

Now, what is loving but acting a fool?
And what is quitting?--Producing a rule:
Break short the flight of Dan Cupid's swift dart,
Aimed at the core of an innocent heart!
      What's the use?

Say, what is marrying but getting in trouble?
Trifling 'way joy while your sorrow is double?
What, then, is your state my friend, after you've wed?
Naught but a vial of wrath poured upon your head!
      What's the use?

Ah! what is batching but living a man;
Sporting and sleeping--just running his plan?
Come when he's ready, and go when he please--
Brain's full of joy, his heart is at ease--
      See, that's the use!




O GOD, WILT THOU HELP ME IN SCHOOL?


    On Saturday, March 1, 1902, I left Alcorn and went home in
    order to earn money enough to defray my expenses for the year
    1902-03. I began work as soon as I reached home and labored
    on father's farm until the last week in June, 1902. I had
    seen by that time that there was nothing to be realized from
    that source but disheartening failure.

    I then acted as agent for the "Zion Record," published by
    Rev. R. A. Adams, 39 St. Catherine Street, Natchez, Miss.,
    until August 20, 1902. Knowing that there was a dormitory to
    be built for girls at Alcorn, I went there, hoping to get
    work and to be there when school opened. On arriving, I
    failed to get employment. I had no money. The Boarding Hall
    was run by boys who stayed over summer. Finding I was
    unemployed, they refused to let me take meals with them.
    There I was--friendless and penniless--without a bite of
    bread and nowhere to lay my head. To drive the wolf of
    starvation away and to keep from being devoured, I made
    arrangements with President Lanier to cut wood for something
    to eat, until school opened Sept. 2, 1902.

    When school opened, the Faculty met the first day and
    distributed the positions to the eligibles. On going down to
    the Hall to take my first meal, to my surprise I found I had
    been awarded the position of waiter. To hold a position, or
    even remain on the Campus, one must matriculate within three
    days after school starts, if there when it opens, or after he
    arrives, if not. I then wrote home for the matriculation fee
    ($13), as I had labored there all summer. As that letter was
    sealed my destiny was sealed in it. It was one that hauled my
    anchor of hope; yes, one to bring glad tidings of great joy
    and crowning success, or the gloom of disastrous failure.
    Thus, having my hope sealed, I wrote across it "In Haste!"

    The night of its return was a dark, rainy one. As all sat
    discussing different events that had transpired since the new
    session had begun, suddenly a whistle was heard. How our
    hearts throbbed with gladness as we exclaimed, "There, that's
    the mail!" Dear reader, you cannot imagine how overjoyed I
    was. I knew that bag contained a letter for me; so anxious
    was I to receive it I did not trust anyone, but rushed to the
    office, and ere long my name was called.

    I opened it then and there, with an eager look for a green
    piece of paper styled a "Money Order." I looked, but found it
    not. All hope vanished; joy faded; and gloom hovered over
    me--a feeling I never before had, nor since, and I hope never
    again to have, electrified my body. It was then raining at
    full headway: the lightnings flashed; the thunders pealed out
    peal after peal, each succeeding one louder than the first.
    By this time all had gone to bed but me. I thought thought
    after thought, prayed prayer after prayer, sent up cry after
    cry, shed tear after tear. I went to bed, but could not
    sleep. I then thought of this subject: "O God, Wilt Thou Help
    Me in School?" After writing it, my feelings were changed,
    the gloom was dispelled, and 'Smiling Hope' returned with
    joyous tidings of happiness and a blissful future.


O, God to Thee, who knowest all things,
  To Thee each being his praises brings,
In heaven, or earth, or sea, or sky--
  To-night to Thee I raise my cry.

To-night as Thou doth know the why,
  The why I make each tearful sigh--
Hast Thou not crowned and blest my way?
  Why'st Thou forsaken me to-day?

To-night while in my deepest grief,
  I calmly wait Thy sweet relief;
Thou knowest I have done my best,
  Oh, give my pondering soul some rest.

To-night, O God, grant all to know,
  For man to reap he first must sow;
To know to have both bread and wine
  He must reap all at harvest time.

To-night, O God, to Thee I plead,
  Thou must protect me, guide and lead
Through this which is my darkest night
  To a day when Thou shalt give me light.

To-night my soul does bleed with pain,
  As murky clouds drip down the rain!
O God, heal me of this heart ache,
  For thy dear Son Christ Jesus' sake.

To-night me compass grief and fears,
  To-night while drip heart-broken tears;
There seems to be no one to save
  My weeping soul from chilly grave.

To-night as I, Thy servant, pray
  To Thee, to turn my darkness day,
And change my many blinding fears
  To brighter hope for future years.

O restless soul, thou canst not sleep,
  For, ship-like, thou art tossed the deep;
Aye, tossed by surge of mighty wave,
  With none to share and none to save.

O God, in Thee I now believe,
  Since life in Thee I do receive;
I pray Thee now with trembling fear
  To my sad soul draw near, draw near.

O God, Thou knowest this night I dread,
  As 'twere to number me with the dead--
I plead to Thee as by a rule,
  O God, wilt Thou help me in school?

To-night, O God, the darkest gloom
  Hangs o'er me like a cloud to doom;
I cry while sitting on this stool--
  O God, wilt Thou help me in school?

This wide world o'er my mind doth roam,
  So many miles away from home,
With thoughts thread-like wound in a spool--
  O God, wilt Thou help me in school?

Dear Lord, I ask of Thee one boon,
  Pure as the light of "harvest moon";
And cry as when bathed in a pool--
  O God, wilt Thou help me in school?

While time and tide flow o'er my mind,
  For wisdom, Lord, I ever pine;
But not in folly of a fool--
  O God, wilt Thou help me in school?

Oh, may I now look up and smile,
  As children, mirthful all the while,
When playing in the shade so cool--
  O God, wilt Thou help me in school?

When life's long journey nears its end,
  And friend so dear must part from friend,
To bathe deep in Thy living pool--
  O God, wilt Thou help me in school?

Oh days of woe, oh do relent,
  For all my sins I now repent,
To bathe in Siloam's ancient pool--
  O God, right now help me in school.

Ah, when this stormy life is o'er,
  I'll moor my bark on th' eternal shore;
Then shall I cross life's mortal pool,
  And God will then help me in school!




BEHIND THE BARS


I am a pilgrim far from home,
  A wanderer like Mars,
And thought my wanderings ne'er should come,
  So fixed behind the bars!

I left my sunny Southern home
  Beneath the silver stars;
A northward path began to roam,
  Not seeking prison bars.

I sought a higher, holier life,
  Which never virtue mars;
But Fate had spun a net of strife
  For me behind the bars!

My mother's lowly thatched-roofed cot
  My nobler senses jars;
And so I seek to aid her lot,
  But not behind the bars!

'Tis said, forsooth, the poet learns
  Through sufferings and wars
To sing the song which deepest burns
  Behind the prison bars!

Thus I resign myself to Fate,
  Regardless of her scars;
For soon she'll open wide the gate
  For me behind the bars.

I plead to you, my fellow man,
  For all who wear the tars;
To lend what little help you can
  To us behind the bars.

O God, I breathe my prayer to Thee,
  Who never sinner bars:
Set each immortal spirit free
  Behind these prison bars!




HARVARD SQUARE


'Tis once in life our dreams come true,
  The myths of long ago,
Quite real though fairy-like their view,
  They surge with ebb and flow;
Thus thou, O haunt of childhood dreams,
  More beauteous and fair
Than Nature's landscape and her streams,
  Historic Harvard Square.

My soul hath panted long for thee,
  Like as the wounded hart
That vainly strives himself to free
  Full from the archer's dart;
And struggled oft all, all alone
  With burdens hard to bear,
But now I stand at Wisdom's throne
  To-night in Harvard Square.

A night most tranquil,--I was proud
  My thoughts soared up afar,
To moonbeams pouring through the cloud,
  Or some lone twinkling star;
And musing thus, my quickened pace
  Beat to the printery's glare,
Where first I saw a friendly face
  In classic Harvard Square.

"Ho! stranger, thou art wan and worn
  Of journey's wear and tear;
Thy face all haggard and forlorn,
  Pray tell me whence and where?"
"I came--from out--the Sunny South--
  The spot--on earth--most fair,"
Fell lisping from my trembling mouth--
  "In search--of--Harvard Square."

"Here rest, my friend, upon this seat,
  And feel thyself at home;
I'll bring thee forth some drink and meat,
  'Twill give thee back thy form."
And then I prayed the Lord to bless
  Us, and that little lair--
Quite sure, I thought, I had found rest
  Most sweet in Harvard Square.

"I came," I said, "o'er stony ways,
  Through mountain, hill and dale,
I've felt old Sol's most scorching rays,
  And braved the stormy gale;
I've done this, Printer, not for gold,
  Nor diamonds rich and rare--
But for a burning in my soul
  To learn in Harvard Square.

"I've journeyed long without a drink
  Nor yet a bite of bread,
While in this state, O Printer, think--
  No shelter for my head.
I mused, 'Hope's yet this side the grave'--
  My pluck and courage there
Then made my languid heart bear brave--
  Each throb for Harvard Square."

A sound soon hushed my heart's rejoice--
  "The watchman on his search?"
"No!" rang the printer's gentle voice,
  "'Deak' Wilson in from church.
O'er there, good 'Deak'," the printer said,
  "The wanderer in that chair,
Hath come to seek the lore deep laid
  Up here in Harvard Square."

"It matters not how you implore,
  He can no longer stay;
But on the night's 'Plutonian shore,'
  Await the coming day.
I'm sorry, sir," he calmly said,
  "Though hard, I guess 'tis fair,
Thou hast no place to lay thy head--
  Not yet in Harvard Square!"

"Good night!" he said, and we the same--
  I sighed, "Where shall I go?"
He soon returned and with him came
  An officer and--Oh!
"Now sir, you take this forlorn tramp
  With all his shabby ware,
And guide him safely off the 'Camp'
  Of dear old Harvard Square."

As soon as locked within the jail,
  Deep in a ghastly cell,
Methought I heard the bitter wail
  Of all the fiends of hell!
"O God, to Thee I humbly pray
  No treacherous prison snare
Shall close my soul within for aye
  From dear old Harvard Square."

Just then I saw an holy Sprite
  Shed all her radiant beams,
And round her shone the source of light
  Of all the poets' dreams!
I plied my pen in sober use,
  And spent each moment spare
In sweet communion with the Muse
  I met in Harvard Square!

I cried: "Fair Goddess, hear my tale
  Of sorrow, grief and pain."
That made her face an ashen pale,
  But soon it glowed again!
"They placed me here; and this my crime,
  Writ on their pages fair:--
'He left his sunny native clime,
  And came to Harvard Square!'"

"Weep not, my son, thy way is hard,
  Thy weary journey long--
But thus I choose my favorite bard
  To sing my sweetest song.
I'll strike the key-note of my art
  And guide with tend'rest care,
And breathe a song into thy heart
  To honor Harvard Square.

"I called old Homer long ago,
  And made him beg his bread
Through seven cities, ye all know,
  His body fought for, dead.
Spurn not oppression's blighting sting,
  Nor scorn thy lowly fare;
By them I'll teach thy soul to sing
  The songs of Harvard Square.

"I placed great Dante in exile,
  And Byron had his turns;
Then Keats and Shelley smote the while,
  And my immortal Burns!
But thee I'll build a sacred shrine,
  A store of all my ware;
By them I'll teach thy soul to sing
  'A place in Harvard Square.'

"To some a store of mystic lore,
  To some to shine a star:
The first I gave to Allan Poe,
  The last to Paul Dunbar.
Since thou hast waited patient, long,
  Now by my throne I swear
To give to thee my sweetest song
  To sing in Harvard Square."

And when she gave her parting kiss
  And bade a long farewell,
I sat serene in perfect bliss
  As she forsook my cell.
Upon the altar-fire she poured
  Some incense very rare;
Its fragrance sweet my soul assured
  I'd enter Harvard Square.

Reclining on my couch, I slept
  A sleep sweet and profound;
O'er me the blessed angels kept
  Their vigil close around.
With dawning's smile, my fondest hope
  Shone radiant and fair:
The Justice cut each chain and rope
  'Tween me and Harvard Square!

          _Cell No. 40, East Cambridge Jail,
              Cambridge, Mass., July 26, 1910_




THE END


Though man through life so swiftly wends,
  And o'er its journey runs his race;
Though rough, or smooth, or 'round the bends,
  In distance putting fleetest friend:
Alas! there comes a halting place,
  A place of rest--the journey's end!




       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes

Original variations in spelling, hyphenation, and punctuation have
been retained except for the following three changes:

Page 29: A comma was added after banks for consistency.
  (From the Gulf and the Lakes to the Oceans' banks,--)

Page 62: Caucasin was changed to Caucasian
  (statements which place them with the Caucasian race;)

Page 65: Pharaoahs changed to Pharaohs.
  (Once in great splendor did thy Pharaohs rule)

Page 22: In the line: "There are homes are our natal, and nothing is
fatal," the first "are" may be a typo for "our." Left unchanged.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sylvan Cabin, by Edward Smyth Jones

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SYLVAN CABIN ***

***** This file should be named 26036.txt or 26036.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/3/26036/

Produced by K Nordquist, Diane Monico, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
