The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of Thomas, Lord Cochrane, Tenth
Earl of Dundonald, Vol. II, by Thomas Lord Cochrane and H. R. Fox Bourne

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Life of Thomas, Lord Cochrane, Tenth Earl of Dundonald, Vol. II

Author: Thomas Lord Cochrane
        H. R. Fox Bourne

Release Date: July 15, 2008 [EBook #26067]
Last updated: March 6, 2009

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE OF LORD COCHRANE ***




Produced by Stefan Cramme, Ted Garvin, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









THE LIFE OF

THOMAS, LORD COCHRANE,

TENTH EARL OF DUNDONALD, G.C.B., ADMIRAL OF THE RED,
REAR-ADMIRAL OF THE FLEET, ETC., ETC.,

COMPLETING "THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A SEAMAN."

BY

THOMAS, ELEVENTH EARL OF DUNDONALD,

AND

H. R. FOX BOURNE,

AUTHOR OF "ENGLISH SEAMEN UNDER THE TUDORS," ETC. ETC.

_IN TWO VOLUMES._

VOL. II.


LONDON:
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET,
Publisher in Ordinary to Her Majesty.
1869.




CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.


                                                                   PAGE

CHAPTER XVII.

[1827.]

Lord Cochrane's Arrival in Greece.--His Account of Hydra and
Poros.--The Congratulations offered to him.--Visits from Tombazes,
Mavrocordatos, and Miaoulis.--Letters from the National Assembly and
other Public Bodies and Leading Men.--The Divisions in Greece.--The
French or Moreot, and English or Phanariot Factions.--Lord Cochrane's
Relations with them.--The Visit of Kolokotrones and other Deputies
from the National Assembly.--Lord Cochrane's Efforts to procure
Unanimity.--Sir Richard Church.--Lord Cochrane's Commission as First
Admiral.--The National Assembly at Troezene.--The Election of
Capodistrias as President--Lord Cochrane's Oath-taking.--His Advice to
the National Assembly and Proclamation to the Greeks                  1


CHAPTER XVIII.

[1827.]

The Siege of Athens--The Defenders of the Acropolis.--The Efforts of
Gordon and Karaiskakes.--Lord Cochrane's Plan for Cutting off the
Turkish Supplies.--The Arguments by which he was induced to proceed
instead to the Phalerum.--His Arrival there.--His other Arrangements
for Serving Greece.--His First Meeting with Karaiskakes.--The
Condition of the Greek Camp.--Lord Cochrane's Position.--His Efforts
to give Immediate Relief to the Acropolis, and the Obstacles raised by
the Greeks.--Karaiskakes's Delays, and General Church's
Difficulties.--The Convent of Saint Spiridion.--The Battle of
Phalerum.--The Capture of Saint Spiridion.--The Massacre of the Turks,
and its Consequences.--Lord Cochrane's renewed Efforts to Save the
Acropolis.--The Death of Karaiskakes.--The March to the
Acropolis.--Its Failure through the Perversity of the Greeks.--The
Battle of Athens.--The Fall of the Acropolis                         31


CHAPTER XIX.

[1827.]

Lord Cochrane's Return to Poros.--His Attempts to Organise an
Efficient Greek Navy.--The Want of Funds and the Apathy of the
Greeks.--His Letter to the Psarians, and his Visits to Hydra and
Spetzas.--His Cruise Round the Morea.--His First Engagement with the
Turks.--The Disorganization of his Greek Sailors.--His Capture of a
Vessel bearing the British Flag, laden with Greek Prisoners.--Seizure
of Part of Reshid Pasha's Harem.--Ibrahim Pasha's Narrow Escape.--Lord
Cochrane's Further Difficulties.--His Expedition to Alexandria.--Its
Failure through the Cowardice of his Seamen.--His two Letters to the
Pasha of Egypt.--His Return to Poros.--Further Efforts to Improve the
Navy.--His Visit to Syra.--The Troubles of the Greek Government.--Lord
Cochrane's Visit to Navarino.--His Defeat of a Turkish Squadron      77


CHAPTER XX.

[1827.]

The Action of Great Britain and Russia on Behalf of Hellenic
Independence.--The Degradation of Greece.--Lord Cochrane's Renewed
Efforts to Organise a Fleet.--Prince Paul Buonaparte, and his
Death.--An Attempt to Assassinate Lord Cochrane.--His Intended
Expedition to Western Greece.--Its Prevention by Sir Edward
Codrington.--Lord Cochrane's Return to the Archipelago.--The
Interference of Great Britain, France, and Russia.--The Causes of the
Battle of Navarino.--The Battle                                     114


CHAPTER XXI.

[1827-1828.]

The First Consequences of the Interference of the Allied Powers and
the Battle of Navarino.--Lord Cochrane's intended Share in Fabvier's
Expedition to Chios.--Its Abandonment.--His Cruise among the Islands
and about Navarino.--His Efforts to Repress Piracy.--His Return to the
Archipelago.--The Misconduct of the Government.--Lord Cochrane's
Complaints.--His Letters to the Representatives of the Allied Powers,
acquitting Himself of Complicity in Greek Piracy.--His Further
Complaints to the Government.--His Resolution to Visit England.--His
Letter to Count Capodistrias Explaining and Justifying that
Resolution.--His Departure from Greece, and Arrival at
Portsmouth.--His Letter to M. Eynard                                134


CHAPTER XXII.

[1828-1829.]

Lord Cochrane's Occupations on Behalf of Greece in London and
Paris.--His Second Letter to Capodistrias.--His Defence of Himself
with Reference to his Visit to Western Europe.--His Return to
Greece.--Capodistrias's Presidency and the Progress of Greece.--Lord
Cochrane's Reception by the Government.--The Settlement of his
Accounts.--His Letter of Resignation.--The Final Indignities to which
he was Subjected.--The Correspondence thereupon between Admiral Heyden
and Dr. Gosse.--Lord Cochrane's Departure from Greece.--His Opinions
Regarding her.--The Character and Issues of His Services to the Greeks
                                                                    162


CHAPTER XXIII.

[1828-1832.]

A Recapitulation of Lord Cochrane's Naval Services.--His Efforts to
obtain Restitution of the Rank taken from him after the Stock Exchange
Trial.--His Petition to the Duke of Clarence.--Its Rejection by the
Duke of Wellington's Cabinet.--Lord Cochrane's Occupations after the
close of his Greek Service.--His Return to England.--His Memorial to
William IV.--Its Tardy Consideration by Earl Grey's Cabinet.--Its
Promoters and Opponents.--Lord Cochrane's Accession to the Peerage as
Tenth Earl of Dundonald.--His Interview with the King.--The Countess
of Dundonald's Efforts in Aid of her Husband's Memorial.--Their
Ultimate Success.--The Earl of Dundonald's "Free Pardon," and
Restoration to Naval Rank                                           197


CHAPTER XXIV.

[1833-1847.]

The Inventions and Discoveries of Lord Dundonald's Father.--His own
Mechanical Contrivances.--His Lamps.--His Rotary Steam-Engine, his
Screw-Propeller, his Condensing-Boiler, and his Lines of
Ship-building.--Their Tardy Development.--His Correspondence upon
Steam-Shipping with Sir James Graham, the Earl of Minto, the Earl of
Haddington, and the Earl of Auckland.--The Progress of his
Inventions.--The _Janus_.--The Beneficial Results of his Experiments
                                                                    221


CHAPTER XXV.

[1833-1848.]

Lord Dundonald's Secret War-Plans.--His Correspondence concerning them
with Lord Lansdowne, Lord Minto, Lord Haddington, and Lord
Auckland.--His Letter to the "Times."--The Report of a Committee,
consisting of Sir Thomas Hastings, Sir John Burgoyne, and Lieut.-Col.
Colquhoun, upon the Secret War-Plans.--A French Project for Naval
Warfare with England.--Lord Dundonald's Opinions Thereupon.--His Views
on the Defence of England                                           246


CHAPTER XXVI.

[1839-1848.]

The Earl of Dundonald's Request for the Restoration of the Order of
the Bath.--His Good Service Pension.--The Investigation of his Secret
War-Plans.--His Pamphlet on Naval Affairs,--His Installation as a
G.C.B.--His Candidature for Election as a Scotch Representative
Peer.--The Queen's Permission to his Wearing the Brazilian Order of
the "Cruziero."--His Appointment as Commander-in-Chief of the North
American and West Indian Station                                    273


CHAPTER XXVII.

[1848.]

Lord Dundonald's Departure for North America.--Extracts from the
Correspondence of Lord Auckland and others Respecting West Indian
Affairs and European Politics.--Bermuda.--The French Revolution of
1848 and its Issues.--Ireland and the Chartists.--The Death of Lord
Auckland                                                            294


CHAPTER XXVIII.

[1848-1850.]

Lord Dundonald's Visit to the North American and West Indian Colonies,
and his Opinions thereon.--Newfoundland and its
Fisheries.--Labrador.--Bermuda; its Defences and its Geological
Formation.--Barbadoes.--The Negroes.--Trinidad.--Its Pitch Lake.--The
Depressed Condition of the West Indian Colonies.--Lord Dundonald's
Suggestions for their Improvement                                   307


CHAPTER XXIX.

[1851-1853.]

Lord Dundonald's Return from America.--His Arguments for the Relief of
the Newfoundland Fisheries and the West India Trade.--The Trinidad
Bitumen.--Lord Dundonald's other Scientific Pursuits and Views
                                                                    328


CHAPTER XXX.

[1851-1860.]

The Russian War.--Lord Dundonald's Proposals to Employ his Secret
Plans against Cronstadt, Sebastopol, and other Strongholds.--His
Correspondence thereupon with Sir James Graham and Lord
Palmerston.--Their Rejection.--Lord Dundonald's Appointment as
Rear-Admiral of the United Kingdom.--Prince Albert's Invitation to him
to become an Elder Brother of the Trinity House.--His Correspondence
with Lord Palmerston respecting the Restitution of his Half-Pay.--His
Last Work.--His Death and Burial.--Conclusion                       337

       *       *       *       *       *

APPENDIX.

(Page 161.)--Captain Frank Abney Hastings's Letters to Lord Cochrane
(1827)                                                              370




THE LIFE

OF

THOMAS, TENTH EARL OF DUNDONALD.




CHAPTER XVII.

LORD COCHRANE'S ARRIVAL IN GREECE.--HIS ACCOUNT OF HYDRA AND POROS.--THE
CONGRATULATIONS OFFERED TO HIM.--VISITS FROM TOMBAZES, MAVROCORDATOS,
AND MIAOULIS.--LETTERS FROM THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND OTHER PUBLIC
BODIES AND LEADING MEN.--THE DIVISIONS IN GREECE.--THE FRENCH OR MOREOT,
AND ENGLISH OR PHANARIOT FACTIONS.--LORD COCHRANE'S RELATIONS WITH
THEM.--THE VISIT OF KOLOKOTRONES AND OTHER DEPUTIES FROM THE NATIONAL
ASSEMBLY.--LORD COCHRANE'S EFFORTS TO PROCURE UNANIMITY.--SIR RICHARD
CHURCH.--LORD COCHRANE'S COMMISSION AS FIRST ADMIRAL.--THE NATIONAL
ASSEMBLY AT TROEZENE.--THE EJECTION OF CAPODISTRIAS AS PRESIDENT.--LORD
COCHRANE'S OATH-TAKING.--HIS ADVICE TO THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND
PROCLAMATION TO THE GREEKS.

[1827.]


Lord Cochrane entered the Egean Sea with his little schooner _Unicorn_
and the French brig _Sauveur_ on the 17th of March, 1827. In the
afternoon he halted off the island of Hydra, there to leave the Greek
deputy Orlando, who had accompanied him from Marseilles. "I was
surprised," he said, "to observe that, except the open batteries near
the town of Hydra, the whole coast of the island remained unprotected,
although, in a smooth sea, a landing might be effected in almost every
part of its circumference. The town of Hydra is built in an irregular
manner on the fall of the mountain about the port, and presents a clean
appearance, the houses being all whitewashed. There is not a tree on the
island, though there are a few straggling bushes. There is scarcely any
land capable of cultivation; but there are some vineyards on the south
side and a few small gardens near the town. The port is small, the water
deep, and the vessels made fast by hawsers to the shore. It is evident,
that, if Greece obtains independence, this island, to which the
inhabitants fled to enjoy that species of precarious liberty that
depends on eluding the view of tyranny, must be abandoned. Even water is
only to be had from tanks which are filled by the winter's rain."

From Hydra Lord Cochrane proceeded to Egina, making a circuit in order
that he might have a view of Athens. "The Acropolis," he wrote, "with
the whole scenery at sunset, was beautiful. Alas, what a change! what
melancholy recollections crowd on the mind! There was the seat of
science, of literature, and the arts. At this instant the barbarian Turk
is actually demolishing, by the shells that now are flying through the
air, the scanty remains of the once magnificent temples in the
Acropolis."

He called at Egina on the 18th, in order to despatch letters, announcing
his arrival, to the Governing Commission, as it was called, then located
in the island, before proceeding to Poros, where he anchored on the
morning of the 19th. "The main entrance," we further read in his
journal, "is scarcely wide enough to work a ship in, if the wind is from
the land. The water, however, is sufficiently deep close to the shore;
and the port, when you have entered through this narrow channel, is one
of the finest in the world. There is another entrance towards the south,
but it is shallow and crooked, and consequently used only by small
vessels. The town of Poros consists of a number of irregularly-built
houses on the side of a hill, and merits the appellation of picturesque.
There are remains of temples on the island, and the stone is yet to be
seen on which Demosthenes is said to have been sitting when he was
recalled by Antipater to Athens, and in consequence of which recall he
took poison and died."

No sooner was the joyful intelligence conveyed to the inhabitants that
Lord Cochrane, the long-expected deliverer of Greece, had actually
arrived, than all the leading men who happened to be in Poros at the
time hurried on board the Unicorn to welcome their champion and to give
personal assurance of their devotion to him. The first to arrive was
Jakomaki Tombazes, who was now acting with Dr. Gosse as superintendent
of marine affairs, having surrendered the chief command of the fleet
into the hands of Andreas Miaoulis. Miaoulis himself soon followed, and
with him Alexander Mavrocordatos and many others. "Prince
Mavrocordatos," wrote Lord Cochrane's secretary, Mr. George Cochrane,
"was a short, stout, well-built man, of very dark complexion, with black
eyes, an oval face expressing great intelligence, and his hair very
long, hanging upon his shoulders. He was dressed in the European style,
and wore on his head a little cloth cap. He also habitually wore
spectacles. His manners indicated a man perfectly accustomed to the
society of persons of rank. He immediately entered into familiar
conversation with Lord Cochrane in the French language. He carried his
pipe with him, which he continually smoked. Miaoulis was dressed in the
Hydriot fashion; but, of course, as became a primate of the island, his
attire was of a description much superior to that of his poorer
fellow-countrymen.[1] His countenance was open and dignified, and so
calm that it appeared like a rock which nothing could move. Not that it
had any character of sternness in it; on the contrary, it possessed a
placidity, blended with firmness, which was anything but forbidding. The
moment Miaoulis came on deck, he cordially shook hands with Lord
Cochrane, and a broken conversation commenced between them in Spanish,
Miaoulis speaking that language but imperfectly. At the period in
question he commanded the _Hellas_ frigate. He knew perfectly well that
Lord Cochrane's arrival would take the command out of his hands.
Nevertheless, he evinced not the least jealousy, but was one of the
first to offer his services under Lord Cochrane. 'I know my countrymen,'
he said, 'and that I can be of service to your lordship on board the
frigate. I will therefore sail under your command.' Such an offer was
not to be refused, and he was requested to remain on board. Miaoulis
informed Lord Cochrane that the hope of Greece rested in the _Hellas_,
and in the quondam merchant brigs belonging to private individuals in
the islands of Hydra, Spetzas, Poros, and Egina, amounting to about two
hundred and fifty. These vessels had been armed as men-of-war; some had
been turned into fireships, and it was the latter that struck so much
terror into the Turks, several Turkish vessels of the line and frigates
having been destroyed under the guidance of the brave Kanaris, a native
of the ill-fated island of Psara."

  [1] "These men," says the same authority, "generally speaking, from
  their complexions, evinced that they had been mariners all their lives,
  the sun having well tanned them. They wore small red caps, from which
  their hair flowed wildly down their shoulders. On the upper lip they
  wore very long mustachios, which the older ones were continually
  curling, and bringing out the point. They wore trousers of blue cotton,
  and a jacket; and by the immense capacity of the former, I should
  suppose they must have contained at least twelve yards. This was
  gathered into plaits round the waist, and only descended to the knees,
  which were left open. The hinder part presented a most singular
  appearance. It hung down almost trailing upon the ground in a huge bag,
  which kept moving backwards and forwards in a ludicrous manner at every
  motion of the body. They wore shoes, but no stockings; and their legs
  were as dark as their countenances, and covered with hair. Round their
  waist they wore a large red sash in several folds. Their jacket was
  similar to a waistcoat, with sleeves, and ornamented with small buttons
  from the wrist to the elbow, and the same on the bosom."--"Wanderings in
  Greece."

The compliments and congratulations offered in person to Lord Cochrane
immediately after his anchoring off Poros were followed by compliments
and congratulations yet more profuse conveyed to him in writing by all
classes and from all quarters. One of the first and most important
communications was addressed to him on the 18th of March, in the name of
the National Assembly, as it styled itself, met at Kastri, by its
president, Georgios Sissinis. "Greece," he said, "rejoices at your
appearance in her seas. The aspirations of the Greeks are realised.
Their hopes in the success of their sacred struggle revive. The Greek
nation, assembled here in a third National Assembly, desires to see you
and invites you here, sending to you, with that object, the
General-in-Chief of the armies of the Peloponnesus, Theodore
Kolokotrones, Messrs. Kanaris, Botazes, and Bulgaris, General Zavella
and Count Metaxas, who will tender to you the thanks of all for your
zeal on behalf of their cause." "The Government is seized with
unutterable joy at your auspicious arrival," wrote the members of the
rival assembly at Egina, on the same day: "the Government wishes you
happy success in all your enterprises, and hopes soon to find in you a
triumphant conqueror." "For a long while past," wrote the governors of
Hydra, "our brave mariners have centred all their hopes on your arrival.
You can understand then the joy that we felt when we saw your brig and
schooner, and when we knew that you had actually arrived. We hasten to
tender to you the homage of our island, and to express to you our
impatience to see our little navy placed under your orders, and guided
by you to new victories, by which the safety and independence of Greece
may be secured." "Your arrival in our beloved country," wrote the
primates of Spetzas, "has filled the soul of every inhabitant of our
island with joy, and every one presents his thanks to Heaven for having
at last sent such an one to fight with us and to protect our
fatherland." "You have come to Greece," wrote Konduriottes, "at a moment
when this unfortunate country most needs all that it can hope from the
wisdom and courage of so great a defender. The announcement of your
arrival will form an epoch in the history of our Revolution, and, I dare
to hope, in that of our moral regeneration."

That moral regeneration was needed Lord Cochrane already well knew, and
he had not been a day in Greece before the knowledge was forced upon him
afresh. The unworthy disposition of most of the men in power had never
been more plainly shown, nor threatened more imminent danger to the
independence of Greece, than at the time of Lord Cochrane's arrival.
With a few notable exceptions, of whom Miaoulis was perhaps the chief,
the Greek leaders had forgotten all their national duty in personal
ambition and jealousy. If they united in parties, it was only because
each one hoped that, as soon as his own party was triumphant, he himself
would be able to obtain the mastery over all his associates.

Two factions, especially, prevailed in Greece at this time, which,
partly from the circumstance that they were supported by unwise
Philhellenes of the two nations, partly because their native members
looked for their chief support to those nations, were known as the
French and English parties.

Among Philhellenes the leading promoter of the French party was Colonel
Fabvier, who was now, with some of the troops whom he commanded,
defending the Acropolis from the siege of the Turks. He was an officer
of considerable merit, with the interests of the Greeks at heart, but of
surpassing vanity and ambition. His hope was to become the Napoleon of
the East, to convert the whole male population of Greece into a huge
army, with himself at its head. With him sympathized most of the
military leaders, who, originally little better than brigands, found
everything to gratify their present tastes and their future hopes in a
scheme which would give them endless employment in lawless warfare and
martial dominion. These, coming chiefly from the Morea, caused the
faction also to be known as the Moreot party.

More formidable was the English party, with little that was English
about it but the name. Its ambition was not military, but diplomatic,
the possession of place and power in such ways as were then possible.
Its real, if not avowed, leader was Prince Mavrocordatos, with an able
abettor in his brother-in-law, Mr. Spiridion Trikoupes. All through the
previous year Mavrocordatos and his friends had sought zealously to win
for Greece the protection of England. They had corresponded to that end
with Mr. Stratford Canning, the British ambassador at Constantinople,
with Captain Hamilton, who was then stationed in Greek waters to watch
the interests of English shipping, and with others. They had sent an
irregular deputation to treat with the British Government, and had used
all the means in their power, so far as foreign intervention was
concerned, for the establishment of a smaller but more organized Greek
nation than that which their rivals desired. Had that end been worthily
sought, they would have deserved universal sympathy. But they showed by
their conduct that they cared little for good government, or for the
real interests of the community. They exercised their abilities and
squandered their resources in schemes for selfish aggrandisement, and
the possession of authority which was to benefit none but themselves.
Many of their prominent members having studied statecraft, before the
time of the Revolution, as Christian officials in the employment of
Turkey, to whom the name Phanariot was given from the Christian quarter
of Constantinople, the whole party acquired the name of Phanariot.

This latter party had all along hoped to make Lord Cochrane its tool. It
was Mavrocordatos who first invited him to enter the service of the
Greeks; and when that service was agreed upon no effort was spared to
attach him to the group of partizans among whom Mavrocordatos was chief.
Lord Cochrane, steadily refusing this, soon incurred their opposition,
and to this opposition is to be attributed some of the unreasonable
blame which was afterwards brought upon him. Much further opposition to
him, moreover, was soon aroused by his, in like manner, refusing to
become the creature of the other leading faction. He wisely resolved,
from the first--and he maintained his resolution throughout--to belong
to no party, but having devoted himself to the cause of the Greek nation
as a whole, to seek only those objects which were for the good of all.

That resolution was soon put to the test. Immediately after his arrival
on the 19th of March, great efforts were made to implicate him in the
schemes of the Governing Commission, as it was called, which, having
outrun the time appointed for its duration, was continuing to assert its
authority in Egina, and to use that authority in the interests of the
Phanariot party. Two days after that his partizanship was sought for the
Moreot faction, which had set up a rival government, styled the National
Assembly, at Hermione, under the joint leadership of Kolokotrones,
Konduriottes, and Kolettes. On the 20th he was waited upon by the
deputation named in the congratulatory letter which has already been
quoted from.

"With his whole party," said Lord Cochrane's secretary, reporting this
interview, "Kolokotrones rode down to the beach opposite the ship, and
sent off to say he would there wait until a boat should be sent for him
and his followers, the whole being about a hundred men, armed, according
to the custom of the country, with pistols or daggers stuck in the left
side of a sash or belt. The two boats sent being insufficient, not more
than twenty came on board with the general. Kolokotrones was the
spokesman, and there appeared to be great energy in his gesticulations,
which did not correspond with the translation by Count Metaxas, who,
from the smile on his countenance, seemed to hold in no great respect
the mental acquirements of Kolokotrones. 'Greece,' said the latter,
'required a government to bring order out of chaos. The functions of the
commission appointed by the last Legislative Assembly ought to have
ceased. Its continuance in power was not legal, and consequently the
members of the National Assembly had met at Hermione to name their
successors; to which place it was requested that Lord Cochrane would
proceed, in order to be present at their deliberations.' A letter to
this effect, signed by the President of the Assembly, was then put into
Lord Cochrane's hands.

"Lord Cochrane made answer verbally through Count Metaxas to the
deputies, that he held in due estimation the honour they had done him by
personally delivering the communication as well as by the very
flattering terms used towards him by the members assembled at Hermione.
He regretted the decision that had taken place, and, recommending
reconciliation, urged the necessity of prompt exertion and the little
good that the wisest legislative enactments could effect, whilst the
Turks overran their country, whilst they possessed three-fourths of its
strongholds, and whilst the enemy besieged the capital of the state,
which was in danger of falling into their power. His lordship expressed
his regret that so many able and brave military officers as those he saw
before him should occupy themselves with civil discussions in the
present state of their country.

"Upon this being interpreted to Kolokotrones, he became exceedingly
warm, and urged that the duty he was now occupied with was more
essential than any other. He, however, cooled on seeing, as we presume,
that no one seconded his opinion, which he evidently expected by his
glances towards his companions. Kolokotrones remained some time without
saying a word, and then rising, took Lord Cochrane by the hand and
assured him that he would do his utmost to produce a reconciliation of
parties. Lord Cochrane urged that the termination of differences between
the parties should be within the space of three days. Kolokotrones
requested five; but afterwards caused his interpreter, Count Metaxas, to
say that possibly an answer might be received from Hermione even before
the shortest period fixed. Count Metaxas was the last who left the
cabin, and as soon as the others were gone, he turned to Lord Cochrane
and assured him that his utmost endeavours should not be wanting to
accomplish so desirable an object. The Count has evidently the
management of Kolokotrones, to whom he probably adheres in order to
arrive at real power, under the sanction of an individual on whose
shoulders may be heaped all the evil measures to be anticipated in
acquiring or upholding any authority over a multitude of rival chiefs
and their rude followers.

"Kolokotrones and his party then left the schooner, having first
directed one of their soldiers to await Lord Cochrane's reply to the
communication of the Assembly. A deputation from Hydra, and a crowd of
other visitors, however, precluded Lord Cochrane's despatching the
courier until the following morning."

The reply, dated the 21st of March, was wise and bold. "I have had the
honour," wrote Lord Cochrane, "to receive the despatches which you have
addressed to me, and I cannot but be flattered by the sentiments that
they convey. This satisfaction is the more lively because I have had the
opportunity of becoming personally acquainted with his excellency
General Kolokotrones, and the officers who accompanied him. But I freely
acknowledge that it is blended with a feeling of regret, in that it
appears to me that the bravest and most renowned officers of Greece are
devoting all their energies to the formation of a civil government and
wasting their time in discussions as to the place in which they shall
effect a reunion while the enemy is overrunning the country without
resistance. Already he possesses three-fourths of the fortresses of
Greece, and is besieging the capital of the republic. Athens is on the
point of falling into the power of the Ottoman forces; the brave Fabvier
and a few heroes, full of enthusiasm, are engaged in aiding the valiant
defenders of that city; and meanwhile the officers of Greece betake
themselves again and again to frivolous discussions on civil affairs. If
the shade of Demosthenes could again animate the ashes of this great man
which are here entombed, he would, changing only the names of persons
and places, address to you his first Philippic, and you would hear from
the lips of a compatriot profoundly versed in history and in the
knowledge of mankind, what ought to be your manner of acting. I
recommend you to read his discourse in full assembly, and I especially
recommend the citizens charged with presiding over the destinies of
Greece to follow his counsels point by point. With an authority so
applicable to the existing circumstances, it would be unpardonable
presumption in me to address to you other than his own words. 'If,
Athenians, you will now, though you did not before, adopt the principle
of every man being ready, where he can and ought to give his service to
the state, to give it without excuse, the wealthy to contribute, the
able-bodied to enlist; in a word, plainly, if you will become your own
masters, and cease each expecting to do nothing himself, while his
neighbour does everything for him, you will then, with God's permission,
get back your own, and recover what has been lost, and punish your
enemy.'"

To the same effect were Lord Cochrane's answers to the congratulatory
letters sent to him by the other leading persons and parties in Greece.
"It may be well to notice," he wrote on the same day to the Government
at Egina, "that in the conversation which I had with the deputation from
Hermione, I respectfully suggested that, as laws cannot be promulgated
with advantage whilst the mass of the country is under the iron yoke of
Turkish despotism, nor executed whilst the lives and properties of all
continue insecure, the National Assembly might be adjourned with
advantage until the capital is free, and thus we should avoid debating
whilst we should be acting, and check those animosities and divisions
which naturally arise from difference of sentiment under the peculiar
conditions of modern Greece." "The time now draws near," he wrote to the
Government of Hydra, "when the approach of a large force may reasonably
be anticipated, and when consequently the means that the Greeks possess
of contending with their enemies will be comparatively diminished. I
have, therefore, in the name of all Europe--by whose people I may in
truth say that I have been sent here--called upon the Executive
Government, and upon all those connected with public affairs, to act
with union and promptitude, and I have informed them that without
harmony and exertion amongst the chiefs, the slender means placed at my
disposal, and any services which I personally could render, would prove
of no avail. The people are split into factions, and operations are
paralyzed by the conflicting personal interests of chiefs who perceive
not that the prize about which they are contending will fall to the
share of others. I have as yet taken no authority upon me in naval
affairs, because if union do not prevail I shall deceive Greece and
deceive the world by inducing a belief that I could assist you."

While waiting, however, for the rivalries of the Greek leaders to be
removed, or at any rate set aside for a time, Lord Cochrane was not
idle. He had frequent interviews, not only with Admiral Miaoulis and the
other native seamen of ability, but also with Dr. Gosse, and with
Captain Abney Hastings, who joined him on the 22nd, and provided him
with much precise information as to the naval strength of Greece, the
character of the officers and crews, and the best methods of attacking
the Turks with advantage. Information as precise about the land forces
was derived from other Philhellenes, among whom Colonel Heideck and
Colonel Gordon were perhaps the best informed. Lord Cochrane also made
the acquaintance of a new comer in Greece, with whom he was soon to have
very intimate relations--Sir Richard Church.

General Church had begun life as an officer in the British army. He had
seen various service between 1801 and 1809, and in the latter year had
organised a battalion of Greeks at Zante, with which, and afterwards
with another which he also formed, he had played an important part in
the war for the liberation of the Ionian Islands. On the establishment
of peace, he had passed into the Neapolitan service. Many of his old
Greek soldiers were now leaders in the Revolution, and, while Lord
Cochrane was on his way to become the First Admiral of the Greeks,
General Church had been invited to become Generalissimo on land. He
arrived at Porto Kheli, near Kastri or Hermione, on the 9th of March,
eight days before the appearance of Lord Cochrane. The generals
assembled at Hermione came out to meet him and tender their submission.
"Our father is at last come," said one; "we have only to obey him and
our liberty is secured." Sir Richard Church was at once sought as a
leader by the Moreot faction, just as Lord Cochrane was claimed by the
Phanariots as their champion. He, however, like his new comrade, wisely
resolved to avoid partisanship and to study the interests of Greece as a
whole, and to him must be assigned a share of the good work of
pacification in which Lord Cochrane was the prime mover. "This unhappy
country," he wrote to his new friend on the 19th of March, "is now
divided by absurd and criminal dissensions. I hope, however, that your
lordship's arrival will have a happy effect, and that they will do
everything in their power to be worthy of such a leader."

They did something, if not everything. It was firmly believed that party
strife had reached such a point that, had Lord Cochrane's arrival been
delayed only a few days longer, the leaders of the National Assembly at
Hermione, turning aside from their useless discussions, would have acted
upon a plot that had been in preparation for several weeks, and, landing
a hostile force at Egina, would have violently seized the whole
Governing Commission there established. Lord Cochrane's honest reproofs
averted this, and so saved Greece from the horrors of another civil war.

"I am happy to be able to inform you," wrote General Church on the 25th
of March, "that things are brought to that state that the union of the
parties is, I think, now effected. The deputies from Kastri came over to
me yesterday morning to Damala, and there they met those of Egina. After
some discussion, they have come to a conclusion, which, if ratified by
the Assembly at Egina, will finally terminate the affair."

The affair was not terminated immediately. Lord Cochrane had to despatch
many more letters and messages of earnest entreaty and indignant
reproach to the leaders of the rival factions at Egina and Hermione, and
to other prominent men, before the good end that he and all true
Philhellenes and patriots sought could be gained. "I have received the
letter which your excellency has addressed to me," wrote the worthy
Miaoulis, on the 3rd of April, in answer to a letter declining to take
command of the fleet until the differences were settled; "and I
appreciate the objections which it contains. I wish with all my heart
that the reasons which prevent you may not exist beyond this evening,
and that a general union will induce you to place yourself at the head
of the Greek navy."

Before that, on the 28th of March, Lord Cochrane had received a formal
commission from the Government at Egina. "Knowing well," ran the
document, "the valour, wisdom, ability, and energy, and all the warlike
virtues which are joined in the estimable person of Lord Cochrane, and
by which he has been distinguished in all the various services with
which he has elsewhere been charged, the Governing Commission ordains,
first, that Lord Cochrane be appointed First Admiral of the Fleet and of
all the naval forces of Greece; secondly, that he rank above all other
naval officers, and enjoy all the honours, privileges, and rights that
appertain to his office; thirdly, that all the admirals, officers, and
seamen of Greece recognize him as their superior, and obey his orders in
all that concerns the service of the nation, and that all servants of
the State, whether civil or military, render him the honour and respect
that are his due; fourthly, that the General Secretary of the Government
execute this order in all respects so soon as his Excellency Lord
Cochrane shall have taken oath to perform the duties, in regard of which
he pledges himself to serve and to act." The document was signed by
Andreas Zaimes, as president, by Trikoupes, Demetrakopoulos, Blakos,
Zamados, Mavromichales, Anargiros, Monarchides, and Zotos, and by
Glarakes, the Secretary of State.

Lord Cochrane refused to accept the trust thus imposed upon him,
however, until the authorities at Egina had united with those at
Hermione and with the primates of the islands in forming one true
National Assembly. They still hesitated and objected, and he still had
to warn and to expostulate. At length, on the 3rd of April, being
convinced that milder language was useless, he wrote to the rival
leaders, informing them that, as his counsels appeared to be of no
avail, seeing that they were addressed to persons, who, professing to
have the interests of the nation at heart, were determined to ruin those
interests by their obstinate selfishness, he should quit Greece at once,
unless, before the close of the day, they agreed to lay aside their
differences.

That wise threat was successful. The factions coalesced, and decided to
meet in joint assembly at Damala, also known by its ancient name of
Troezene. On the 4th of April Lord Cochrane was able to write to them in
a different tone. "Having come to Greece," he said, "with a firm
determination to have nothing to do with party rivalries, except so far
as to seek to conciliate them for the public good, and not to trouble
myself about civil affairs, beyond assuring myself of the legality of my
functions as Admiral of Greece, and having resolved to do all in my
power to obtain its deliverance from the Mahometan yoke, as well as from
all foreign domination, I am well pleased at the reunion of all your
members in a single National Assembly, and congratulate you on the
restoration of harmony. Allow me, at the same time, to offer my prayers
for the unanimity of the members of the Government, and for the prompt
completion of the business of the National Assembly, in order that its
members may depart to their respective provinces, and use their great
influence to impress upon their compatriots the imminent danger of the
State, and induce them to rush to arms, and by one simultaneous effort
expel the oppressors of Greece. After that the Legislative Assembly will
have leisure, and the requisite security, to deliberate upon the
constitution, the laws, and the arrangements necessary to establish upon
a permanent footing the happiness and the prosperity of their
fellow-citizens."

Having thus done so much for Greece, Lord Cochrane was asked to do more.
"The deputies whom you did me the honour to send," he wrote, on the
following day, "having informed me of the difficulties which you find in
forming a Government with the necessary promptitude because of the
jealousies shown in choosing citizens to fill situations of authority,
permit me to advise that each member should write down the name of the
person of his choice, and place it in an urn, and that he who thus
obtains the highest number of votes should be president, the second,
vice-president, and the others ranged in order until the number of
functionaries is complete. In this way you will avoid discussions,
animosities, and the loss of time, which is so precious in the present
circumstances of Greece. At present naval and military operations alike
are all suspended, while the enemy is preparing to put an end at once to
the question which engrosses your attention, and to the independence and
liberty of Greece!" That sensible advice was not taken, but the first
difficulties in the way of administrative reform were overcome.

On the 7th of April, the National Assembly met at Damala, on the coast
opposite to Poros, and half way between Hermione and Egina--the
meeting-place, for want of a building large enough, to hold the two
hundred members, being a lemon-grove, watered by the classic fountain of
Hippocrene. Its first business, attended by turmoil which threatened to
bring the whole proceeding to a violent close, was the election of Count
Capodistrias as President, for seven years, of the Greek nation.
Capodistrias was the favourite of the Moreot party, but disliked by the
Phanariots, and hated by the island primates. The two latter would have
prevented the election, but for the support given to it by Lord
Cochrane, who on this account has been frequently and seriously
blamed.[2] There can be no doubt, however, that, whatever may have been
the subsequent shortcomings of Capodistrias, he was greatly superior to
any of the other and native candidates for the office. None of these
candidates had given any proof of statesmanlike powers or disinterested
regard for the welfare of Greece. Lord Cochrane judged, with good
reason, that that welfare could only be promoted by placing at the head
of affairs a man who had hitherto had no share in party strife, who had
proved himself to be possessed of great abilities and of generous love
for the nation of which, as a native of Corfu, he was in some sort a
citizen. Unfortunately, though for this Lord Cochrane was in no way
responsible, the management of affairs during the time that must elapse
before Capodistrias, if he accepted the office tendered to him, could
enter upon it, was entrusted to a Vice-governing Commission composed of
three inefficient men, Georgios Mavromichales, Milaites of Psara, and
Nakos of Livadia.

  [2] See especially Trikoupes, vol. iv., p. 126, and Gordon, vol. ii., p.
  364. Mr. Finlay approves of the choice, but, not caring to say anything
  in favour of Lord Cochrane, makes no mention of his share in the work.
  Vol. ii., p. 139.

The most important business done by the Troezene Assembly was the
installation of Lord Cochrane as First Admiral of Greece. This was done
on the 18th of April. Landing for the first time on the continent, Lord
Cochrane proceeded in state on horseback for the distance of a mile and
a-half that was between the shore and the lemon-grove. At the entrance
he was met by Kolokotrones, who embraced him, saying, "You are welcome;"
words that were repeated by many other leading Greeks, who attended and
conducted him into the centre of the grove. There he was formally
introduced to the delegates as the First Admiral. Through an interpreter
he addressed to them a few sentences, urging the necessity of continued
harmony, and of a prompt expedition against the Turks, to be conducted
both by sea and by land. After that, placing his hand on the hilt of his
sword, he took the necessary oath: "I swear to shed my blood for the
safety of the Greeks and for the liberation of their country; I swear
that I will not abandon their cause so long as they do not themselves
abandon it, but sustain my efforts."

The election of Sir Richard Church as Generalissimo of the Land Forces
was, in like manner, completed on the 15th of April.

The essential business for which Lord Cochrane had desired that the
united National Assembly should meet at Troezene being now accomplished,
he hoped that it would speedily adjourn, in order that the military
leaders should be enabled to proceed at once to the work pressing
urgently upon them. "The critical moment," said Lord Cochrane, in a
letter addressed to them on the 16th of April, "has arrived in which you
are called upon to decide whether the population of Greece shall be
annihilated or enslaved, your country peopled with barbarous hordes, and
the name of Greece blotted out from the list of independent nations."
The National Assembly, however, spent more than another month in idle
discussions, and in disputing upon matters the settlement of which ought
to have been postponed to a less perilous time. Again and again Lord
Cochrane had to impress upon them the necessity, in war as in council,
of prompt and united action; but with very poor result.

"Once more I address you by letter," he wrote a few days later, "in the
hope that you may be persuaded instantly to take measures to save your
country from the ruin which protracted deliberations must at the present
moment entail--ay, with as much certainty as a continuance of those
dissensions which have hitherto so unhappily prevailed; and I follow
this course the more readily in order that, as I have ever advocated
liberal forms of government, my advice, that your Assembly shall bring
its labours to a close, shall not be misrepresented to Greece and to the
world. First, then, the agitated state of the country, by reason of the
presence of the enemy, precludes the hope of obedience in ordinary
course of law, which is as essential to the existence even of a shadow
of republican forms as the practice of virtue and forbearance are to
their reality--which, in states that would be free, ever must be
accompanied by universal conviction in the public mind that power and
wealth are not essential to the enjoyment of personal security, and are
desirable or useful only as they promote the common welfare or
administer to the wants or comforts of individuals themselves. The
Grecian people, however good, naturally cannot be expected instantly to
practise virtues which are the offspring of long-established freedom.
Greece requires not, at the present moment, sage deliberations regarding
permanent forms of government, nor permanent rulers; but she requires
energetic authority, that she may be free at least from her foreign
oppressors. If, without delay, the military officers take the field, if
your labours be brought to a close and every citizen in his respective
capacity exert himself to the utmost for the defence of his country,
Athens perhaps may yet be saved, although that object assuredly is
rendered far more doubtful by the unfortunate delay that has already
occurred."

In entering upon his own share of the work no time was wasted by Lord
Cochrane. He had already made himself acquainted with the naval
resources of Greece, and done much in devising measures for augmenting
them. He had resolved upon the first enterprise to be entered upon; and,
while rapidly completing his arrangements for it, he did everything in
his power to quicken in the hearts of the Greeks a patriotism as pure
and zealous as was his own philanthropy. "To arms! to arms!" he wrote in
a proclamation issued at this time. "One simultaneous effort, and Greece
is free. Discord, the deadly foe you have had most to fear, is
conquered. The task that now remains is easy. The youth everywhere fly
to arms. The fate of the Acropolis is no longer doubtful. The Turks
surrounded, their supplies cut off, the passes occupied, and retreat
impossible, you can ensure the freedom of the classic plains of Athens,
again destined to become the seat of liberty, the sciences, and the
arts. Rest not content with such limited success. Sheathe not the sword
whilst the brutal Turk, the enemy of the progress of civilization and
improvement of the human mind, shall occupy one foot of that classic
ground which once was yours. Let the young seamen of the islands emulate
the glory that awaits the military force. Let them hasten to join the
national ships, and, if denied your independence and rights, blockade
the Hellespont, thus carrying the war into the enemy's country. Then the
fate of the cruel Sultan, the destroyer of his subjects, the tyrant
taskmaster of a Christian people, shall be sealed by the hands of the
executioners who yet obey his bloody commands. Then shall prophecy be
fulfilled, and Moslem sway be overthrown by the corruptions itself has
engendered. Then shall the sacred banner of the Cross once more wave on
the dome of Saint Sophia. Then shall the Grecian people live secure
under the protection of just laws. Then shall noble cities rise from
their ruins, and the splendour of future times rival the days that are
past."




CHAPTER XVIII.

THE SIEGE OF ATHENS.--THE DEFENDERS OF THE ACROPOLIS.--THE EFFORTS OF
GORDON AND KARAISKAKES.--LORD COCHRANE'S PLAN FOR CUTTING OFF THE
TURKISH SUPPLIES.--THE ARGUMENTS BY WHICH HE WAS INDUCED TO PROCEED
INSTEAD TO THE PHALERUM.--HIS ARRIVAL THERE.--HIS OTHER ARRANGEMENTS FOR
SERVING GREECE.--HIS FIRST MEETING WITH KARAISKAKES.--THE CONDITION OF
THE GREEK CAMP.--LORD COCHRANE'S POSITION.--HIS EFFORTS TO GIVE
IMMEDIATE RELIEF TO THE ACROPOLIS, AND THE OBSTACLES RAISED BY THE
GREEKS.--KARAISKAKES'S DELAYS, AND GENERAL CHURCH'S DIFFICULTIES.--THE
CONVENT OF SAINT SPIRIDION.--THE BATTLE OF PHALERUM.--THE CAPTURE OF
SAINT SPIRIDION.--THE MASSACRE OF THE TURKS, AND ITS CONSEQUENCES.--LORD
COCHRANE'S RENEWED EFFORTS TO SAVE THE ACROPOLIS.--THE DEATH OF
KARAISKAKES.--THE MARCH TO THE ACROPOLIS.--ITS FAILURE THROUGH THE
PERVERSITY OF THE GREEKS.--THE BATTLE OF ATHENS.--THE FALL OF THE
ACROPOLIS.

[1827.]


After the conquest of Missolonghi, by which all Western Greece was
brought under Turkish dominion, Reshid Pasha lost no time in proceeding
to drive the Greeks from Athens, their chief stronghold in the east. The
siege of the town had been begun by Omar Pasha of Negropont, with a
small Ottoman force, on the 21st of June, 1826. Reshid arrived on the
11th of July, and, after much previous fighting, stormed Athens so
vigorously on the 14th of August, that the inhabitants were forced to
abandon it. Many of them, however, took refuge in the Acropolis, where a
strong garrison was established under the tyrannical rule of Goura, and
in this fortress the defence was maintained for nearly two months. Goura
died in October, and the rivalries of the officers whom he had held in
awe, now allowed to have free exercise, threatened to make easy the
further triumph of the besiegers. The citadel must have surrendered, but
for the timely arrival of Karaiskakes and Fabvier, each with a strong
body of troops, who diverted the enemy by formidable attacks in the
rear. Karaiskakes and his force continued, with various success, to
watch and harass the enemy from without. On the 12th of December
Fabvier, by a brilliant exploit, forced his way into the Acropolis with
about six hundred men. He had intended only to give it temporary relief,
but many of the native chiefs, gladly taking advantage of the arrival of
a body for which, conjointly with the garrison already established,
there was not room in the fortress, hastily departed. Thus the
leadership of the garrison, comprising about a thousand soldiers, with
whom were four or five hundred women and children, and more than forty
Philhellenes from France, Switzerland, Germany, and Italy, devolved upon
Colonel Fabvier. The besiegers numbered about seven thousand picked
soldiers, including a regiment of cavalry veterans and a good train of
artillery. The Greek regulars and irregulars, including a corps of
Philhellenes, commanded by Captain Inglesi, who attempted to raise the
siege, varied, at different times, from two or three thousand to seven
or eight thousand.

That was the state of affairs when Lord Cochrane arrived in Greece. That
the expulsion of the Turks from Attica and the recovery of Athens was
the first great work to be attempted was clear to every one, whether
native or Philhellene, who had the welfare of Greece at heart; but
opinions varied as to the best mode of procedure. Nearly all previous
efforts had been aimed at the direct attack of the besiegers in Athens
and its neighbourhood. General Gordon had established a camp of about
three thousand men at Munychia, the hill from which, two and twenty
centuries before, Thrasybulus had gone down to deliver Athens from the
thirty tyrants; and Karaiskakes, with some two thousand five hundred
followers, was stationed at Keratsina, on the other side of the Piraeus.
But the operations of both leaders were restrained by Reshid Pasha's
establishment of a garrison in the monastery of Saint Spiridion, midway
between the two camps; and, without wiser leaders than the Greeks had
hitherto possessed, there seemed small chance of their chasing the enemy
from his strong positions. Another plan, feebly recommended and yet more
feebly attempted before Lord Cochrane's arrival, was to starve him out
by intercepting the supplies of provisions that were brought from Turkey
by way of the northern channel of the Negropont, to be sent overland
from Oropos, a well-fortified magazine on the northern shore of Attica.

Lord Cochrane saw at once that this latter course was the one most
likely to be of service, or, at any rate, the one rightly devolving upon
him, while General Church was pursuing his operations nearer to Athens;
and he was strengthened in this conviction by discussion on the subject
with General Gordon, who came for a short visit to Poros, on the 21st of
March, in his own yacht. To this end he laboured while he was waiting
for the reconciliation of parties and the official recognition of his
employment as First Admiral. "The fate of Athens," he wrote, both to
Kolokotrones and to Karaiskakes, on the 29th of March, "depends upon our
depriving the enemy of the provisions obtained by him from the north.
The general and the soldiers who first devote themselves to this object
will have the glory of raising the siege. For myself, I offer the
heartiest co-operation of the fleet, accompanied by two thousand brave
marines, and the use of all the war-steamers and transports in any port
of eastern Attica. There is not a moment to be lost." This proposal was
rejected by Kolokotrones. On the 2nd of April, Karaiskakes sent an
ambiguous acceptance of it, which he cancelled on the 13th. "We are so
mixed up with the enemy," he wrote, "that if we abandon the smallest of
our positions we must resign ourselves to the loss of all. The Turks are
so embarrassed by us that they can offer only a feeble siege to the
Acropolis. Of this I am assured by several Greeks who have lately come
from their camp. Therefore, my lord, I am deterred from assailing the
enemy from the north; and I have the boldness to assure and promise you
that, if you will aid me here, Athens will be free in a few days. With
the help of two thousand good recruits, the enemy will not be able to
resist our enthusiasm. I implore you, in the name of Greece, to assist
me as soon as possible with the means of destroying him and of saving
Athens."

That letter, and the advice of all in office, whether military or civil,
to the same effect, altered Lord Cochrane's plans. "As he," said Gordon,
who afterwards blamed him on this account, "unacquainted with the
country and the language, could not form a correct judgment on the
innumerable reports transmitted to him, it is not surprising that he was
deceived by letters written from the Acropolis, and entrusted to
soldiers who, disguised as Turks or Albanians, slipped from time to time
through the enemy's lines. In these epistles, Fabvier and the other
chiefs painted their situation in the blackest colours, carefully
concealing the fact of their having provisions for many months."[3] By
them native Greeks and foreigners long resident in the country were
deceived. Lord Cochrane, still clinging to his project for injuring the
Turks by cutting off their supplies, was constrained to defer it for the
present, and in compliance with the requests of the Government, of
General Church, and of Karaiskakes, to co-operate in the direct attack
upon the enemy in the Piraeus. "I now agree with you," he wrote to the
latter, on the 14th of April, "that the time is past when a movement in
the rear of the Turks, and the cutting off of their provisions, could
have the effect of saving the Acropolis, and I see clearly the justice
of your observation that a decisive blow must be struck at once against
the enemy. The eyes of Europe are turned towards Greece, and on the
success or failure of the measures now to be adopted depends the support
of your glorious cause, or its abandonment in despair."

  [3] Gordon, vol. ii., p. 386. As Gordon was with Lord Cochrane at the
  time, and on intimate relations with him, it is strange, unless he
  himself, with far less excuse, shared the error for which he blamed him,
  that he did not advise him to pursue his former plan. Compare Trikoupes,
  vol. iv., p. 137, who blames and involuntarily acquits Lord Cochrane
  almost in the same breath.

Something was done by Lord Cochrane at once, however, towards the
fulfilment of his first design. He despatched Captain Abney Hastings,
with the _Karteria_ and five other vessels, to the Gulf of Volo and the
Channel of Negropont, with orders to seize as many Turkish
provision-ships as he could there find within the next fourteen days.
One expedition was very successful. Off Volo, on the 20th of April,
Hastings found eight transports protected by the guns of the fort. He
silenced the guns, captured five of the vessels, and destroyed the other
three. He then passed down the channel, and near Tricheri fell in with a
Turkish brig-of-war, which, after some skilful fighting, he destroyed by
shells that exploded her powder magazine. After that he proceeded to
Kumi, where he captured a store of grain, and reached Poros within the
time appointed.

In the meanwhile Lord Cochrane had gone to the Bay of Athens as soon as
he could complete his arrangements for the present and future employment
of the Greek shipping. "Four of the largest brigs at Poros are in
process of equipment," he wrote to the Government on the 16th of April,
"and five of the fastest small sailing vessels of Spetzas, and eight
transports, with a thousand men, are ready at Hydra to proceed on
service. The frigate _Hellas_ is victualled for two months, four
gun-boats have been ordered to be built, and fireships are in progress
in addition to those which were already fitted out. The expenses of
these preparations have been, or will be, defrayed out of the funds in
my possession. In addition to these disbursements, a very considerable
sum, out of the money destined for the naval service, has been advanced
by me for military purposes. I consider that the fate of Greece depends,
in a great measure, on pecuniary aid from the rest of Europe, and such
aid on the probability of ultimate success; but assuredly it will not be
afforded if Greece proves unable or unwilling to exert herself against
the handful of sickly and enfeebled Turks who continue to besiege the
Acropolis of Athens."

On the 17th of April, Lord Cochrane passed from Poros to Salamis in the
_Hellas_, attended by twelve brigs and schooners from Hydra and Spetzas.
In his pay were a thousand Hydriots, two hundred Cretans, and a corps of
Roumeliots. On the same day, General Church embarked with three thousand
soldiers collected in the Morea, under Gennaios Kolokotrones,
Chrisanthos Sessini, and others. These new supplies, with the troops
already at Keratsina and Munychia, composed a force of about ten
thousand men.

Five days were spent in organising this force, over which Sir Richard
Church, though nominally generalissimo, had very little real command.
The delay and the want of discipline which caused it were alike annoying
to Lord Cochrane, whose little fleet was anchored in the small Bay of
Phalerum, his Hydriot recruits, under Major Gordon Urquhart, being
established on the adjoining shore. On the 18th he received a four
hours' visit on board the _Hellas_ from Karaiskakes, a tall, bony,
athletic man, small-featured, and swarthy, with flashing eyes, and a
lively tongue, about forty years of age. On the 19th he and General
Church went to inspect the camp of the famous Greek leader at Keratsina.
It gave but slight evidence of military organization, and both officers
and men appeared to Lord Cochrane more willing to talk than to fight.
His presence among them, however, stirred up a new and fitful
enthusiasm. On this occasion he brought with him a large blue and white
flag, with an owl, the national emblem of Greece, painted on the centre,
which had been conveyed from Marseilles. The flag was unfurled in the
presence of seven thousand Greek soldiers, within sight of the Turkish
camp. Through his interpreter, Lord Cochrane briefly addressed the
soldiers, urging them, for love of their country, and for their own
honour and welfare, to unite in a prompt and vigorous attack on the
enemy. Then, firmly planting the flag in the ground, he exclaimed,
"Soldiers, whoever of you will lodge this flag on the summit of the
Acropolis, shall receive from me, as a reward of his bravery, a thousand
dollars, and ten times that sum shall be my share of the recompense to
the force that accompanies him!" Great applause, of course, followed
that announcement, but not much more than applause.

Lord Cochrane's popularity with the troops and their leaders, for the
time at any rate, was unbounded. Karaiskakes, Niketas, Zavella, Notaras,
Makriyannes, Gennaios Kolokotrones, and all the other captains vied with
one another in offering fulsome adulation to him, and pledging
themselves to yield implicit obedience to his instructions. By word,
indeed, they were more submissive than he wished. He had to remind them
that he was admiral of the fleet, not generalissimo on land, and that
the latter office was held by Sir Richard Church. Unfortunately,
Karaiskakes and his followers were, from the first, jealous of General
Church; and General Church, accustomed only to the management of a small
disciplined band, was unequal to the troublesome duties appertaining to
him as controller of a heterogeneous crowd of irregular soldiers, most
of them trained as brigands, and accustomed to the half-lawless rule of
their own petty officers. Hardly a day passed in which he did not
complain bitterly to Lord Cochrane of the obstructions thrown in his
way; and Lord Cochrane had to take upon himself the thankless functions
of a mediator between a good-hearted commander-in-chief and his
disaffected subordinates.

This state of things would at any time have been irksome to him. It was
especially so in the condition of affairs represented to him. Each day
fresh reports were brought of the desperate state of the Acropolis. "The
affairs of the fortress of Athens," we read in one document, signed by
seven leaders of the besieged, and dated the 22nd of April, "have
arrived at a very critical height, and no longer any remedy is expected
from within, and therefore the besieged are obliged to address
themselves to the Government of Greece and to the commanders of her
forces, and to urge them to adopt the best, the speediest, and the most
efficient measures to relieve the citadel. The Government and the
commanders have always replied with promises of the most positive kind
to raise the siege in a very few days. We can no longer believe their
word. To give you further intelligence, we send now five men, who will
tell you verbally what we cannot describe. If, however, they do not
persuade you, we tell you this is our last letter. We will wait five
days longer, and we can hold out no more. We have been brothers, and
remain so during dearth, sickness, and all evils. Our nature is like
that of all men: we can suffer no more than others. We are neither
angels nor workers of miracles, to raise the dead, or do impossible
things. If any evil should happen, we are not to blame, nor has God to
condemn us in anything." The bearers of this letter, and others who
brought a like report, were carefully examined by Lord Cochrane, and by
them he was solemnly assured that the garrison of the Acropolis,
destitute of provisions and every other necessary, could not possibly
hold out more than five days longer.

He and all others were deceived; but he alone thoroughly felt the urgent
need of instant action. "As I perceive the ruin of Greece," he wrote to
Karaiskakes on the 23rd of April, "in the delay now taking place, and as
I have every reason to believe that intrigues are carrying on by persons
of desperate fortune and worthless character, with a view to promote
their private ends, they not being aware that the subjection of Greece
to a foreign power will ultimately destroy the hopes which they
entertain, I take the liberty of urging, as an officer who has some
character to lose in this affair, that your excellency should caution
the officers of your army against the vain belief that intrigues at the
present moment can produce any other effect than the ruin of themselves
and their country. The education which my countrymen, in common with
myself, have received, leads to an attachment to the cause of Greece
amounting to enthusiasm, and this feeling cannot but be increased by
viewing the monuments of her ancient grandeur. I am ready to do my
utmost to promote the interests of your country, but I am by no means
willing to allow myself to be made the puppet of intriguers. I shall put
an end to intrigue in the navy or I shall quit it, and I trust your
excellency will excuse me if I adopt the same resolutions respecting the
army, if you yourself cannot put it down. I have been but a short time
in Greece, but have taken effectual measures to obtain that sort of
information which is necessary for my guidance. This has led me to the
resolution to act by myself and for Greece, so far as I can, whenever I
find that others are either disinclined or unable to co-operate. I have
moved the transports close to the Phalerum in order that they may be
more conveniently situated when I shall learn the determination of your
excellency and the officers in your camp. If that determination is to
relieve Athens the night of the 26th is passed, the marines whom I have
hired, paid, and victualled, shall co-operate; if not, I shall try to
render them serviceable in some other quarter, and I will denounce to
the world as traitors to their country those intriguers who are the
cause of the captivity and perhaps annihilation of the garrison in the
Acropolis. My advice to your excellency is, that passing the tambourias
by night, without firing a shot, you join our troops in the olive-grove,
where I will take care they shall meet your excellency, if such is your
pleasure. I have been anxious that the glory of relieving Athens should
accrue to a Greek, and especially to your excellency. That object I am
ready to promote by every means in my power. The friendly manner in
which we the other day met will cause me to regret, if in my next letter
I shall be obliged to bid your excellency adieu for ever."

That letter to Karaiskakes was followed by one, written on the 24th, to
General Church. "In forty-eight hours," wrote Lord Cochrane, "the
question of relieving Athens will be at a close. I have told Karaiskakes
what I think of the state of affairs, and have made up my mind to act
accordingly; taking upon myself all the responsibility of not looking
longer on tambouria disputes whilst it seems resolved by the Greeks
themselves not to march to the relief of Athens. I have not sent the
transports to Attica to raise the miserable inhabitants at this hour,
when too late for them to be of the least use in relieving the
Acropolis. If I had done so, I should have the load on my conscience of
causing their heads to be struck off. I can assure you, Sir Richard,
that Colonel Gordon and myself laboured long ago to prevail on
Karaiskakes to do this, but he resisted every application, for reasons
which it will be well if he can satisfactorily explain hereafter. If
your men will not come on, and Karaiskakes's men will not in the night
pass those miserable tambourias, which in that case are no impediment,
what is the use of my detaining the squadron here? I have viewed the
bugbear of a convent this day from opposite sides, and it is no more in
Karaiskakes's way than the church of Poros.

"Since writing the above," Lord Cochrane added, "I have received your
note requesting that six hundred men shall be transported hence to
Karaiskakes's head-quarters in the rear. The naval funds have been
expended and our funds exhausted in bringing forces nearer to the enemy.
I am sure if you reflect on this demand of his, and that Karaiskakes's
head-quarters are twice as far from Athens as the Phalerum, you will be
of the opinion that it would be better to bring an equal number, or even
the whole of Karaiskakes's force here, and endeavour immediately to do
something effectual to save Fabvier and the garrison from the inevitable
destruction consequent on the present mode of proceeding. If Karaiskakes
wants more men he wants them to take tambourias, and not to march past
them as he ought, for his present position is of no use whatever. Do
cause some rational mode of proceeding to be adopted, or let us give it
up; for we are now only in the way by occasioning jealousy and promoting
the vilest intrigues."

The "bugbear of a convent," which Karaiskakes wished first to capture,
was the monastery of Saint Spiridion, occupied by a few scores of Turks,
who from it overlooked the Greek encampments on each side, the one at
Piraeus, the other at Munychia, with a distant view of Lord Cochrane's
station at Phalerum and of Sir Richard Church's on the other side.
Finding that Karaiskakes would not join with Church and press on to
Athens, at a distance of about seven miles, Lord Cochrane had urged the
co-operation of all the forces at Cape Colias, whence the way to Athens
was only about five miles long. Karaiskakes, however, refused this plan
also. He maintained that the only safe course was to preserve his
position and strengthen it by the formation of innumerable small
circular earthworks, known as tambourias, within which the soldiers
could crouch by day and lie securely on the bare ground at night. In
this way he hoped to starve out the garrison at Saint Spiridion, the
capture of which he deemed essential before any formidable attempt was
made upon the main body of the Turkish camp, in Athens and around it,
and especially under the walls of the Acropolis. In vain Lord Cochrane
urged that this mode of warfare, tardy and expensive enough at the best
of times, was cruelly reprehensible when they considered the wretched
state in which the garrison of the Acropolis was supposed to be, and the
prospect of its speedy evacuation. Karaiskakes refused to move,
answering each appeal by unreasonable demands upon Lord Cochrane for
supplies of ammunition and provisions, which it was no part of his duty
to supply out of the residue of the insignificant sum of 8,000l.
supplied to him out of the Greek loan for naval purposes.[4] It may be
that Karaiskakes--a bold and shrewd man--was not personally responsible
for his inactivity. His army was little more than a commonwealth of
small bands, of which each leader claimed an authoritative share in all
deliberations, and owed, even to him, only a nominal subjection. But if
we acquit him individually of cowardice, we only throw the greater blame
on the Greek force as a whole. That it was blameworthy is clear. "Your
lordship," wrote Sir Richard Church in answer to the letter just quoted,
"is not aware of all the difficulties I had to encounter in passing our
troops who had all struck for pay. Not one would move. However, that
difficulty is now nearly over and the greater part are passing to the
camp at this moment."

  [4] Trikoupes, Gordon, Finlay, and all the other authorities, say that
  Lord Cochrane had 20,000l. He had only been supplied with 8,000l; and
  nearly all this sum had been already disposed of in fitting out the
  fleet at Poros, and paying the seamen's wages.

Unexpected boldness was forced upon them on the 25th of April. "I am now
in a position," wrote Lord Cochrane to General Church at eight o'clock
in the morning from the Piraeus, "to carry you all over to the rear of
the enemy, if Karaiskakes's army have the courage to walk to this point,
which is in their own possession, in order to land on the opposite shore
at two hundred yards distance, and whereon is not a living soul. I can
make such a diversion by means of the seamen at night as would enable
Karaiskakes's army to move on by land towards the Phalerum, whilst those
on the Phalerum, with the exception of a few, might take up a position
near Athens or in the town. I can embark you and yours, and leave
Karaiskakes's men without food, taking all the provisions to the
advanced post, leaving him to starve or come on."

That desperate expedient was averted. Two or three hours after
suggesting it, Lord Cochrane was superintending the debarkation of some
thirty soldiers, under cover of two gunboats. A party of Ottomans,
seeing the operation, hurried down with the intention of harassing the
new comers. Lord Cochrane's Hydriots, however, rushed to the rescue.
Other Turkish troops came up, to be met by other Greeks, and the battle
became general. Lord Cochrane, with nothing but his telescope in his
hand, gathered the Christian troops round him, and, with encouraging
words, led them on in an orderly attack upon the entrenchments about the
monastery of Saint Spiridion. Within an hour, nine entrenchments were in
the hands of the Greeks, who lost only eight men. Sixty Turks were
slain, and then their comrades fled, most of them hurrying up to the
camp of Athens, a few betaking themselves to the convent.

"The Greeks," wrote Lord Cochrane to the Government, "have this day done
as their forefathers were wont to do. Henceforth commences a new era in
the system of modern Grecian warfare. If every one behaves to-morrow as
all, without exception, have behaved to-day, the siege of the Acropolis
will be raised and the liberty of Greece secured."

By this success the Turks, with exception of the garrison in the
convent, were driven back to the neighbourhood of Athens, and
Karaiskakes was encouraged to remove his camp from Keratsina to the
Piraeus. At a council of war held the same evening Lord Cochrane urged a
sudden and united attack upon the Turkish camp on the morrow.
Karaiskakes, however, declined to move a step further until the
monastery was captured, and, as General Church agreed with this view,
Lord Cochrane assented to it.

Early next morning the bombardment of the monastery was begun. The
_Hellas_, commanded by Miaoulis, discharged her heavy guns upon it
during several hours, with such effect that it seemed to be only a mass
of ruins. It was feebly invested by Karaiskakes on land. But its
garrison held out with excellent bravery. Thrice the Greeks tried to
storm it; but thrice they were driven back.

In the evening the Turks solicited an armistice, and offered to
capitulate on condition that they should be allowed to retire with all
their arms and properties: and this proposal Karaiskakes was inclined to
accept. Lord Cochrane, however, contended that they should have nothing
but bare life. While this was being discussed, the Turks perfidiously
assassinated a Greek messenger sent to treat with them, and fired upon a
boat in which Lord Cochrane's secretary, Mr. Edward Masson, was carrying
the flag of truce. Thereupon, the Chief Admiral refused to hear any more
of a compromise. Returning to his ship, he ordered the bombardment of
the convent to be resumed, and besought Karaiskakes to continue storming
it by land.

This was done throughout the 27th, but unsuccessfully, because
unwillingly. The Greeks asserted that the Turkish garrison was utterly
without provisions and water. Lord Cochrane urged that, if it was so, a
small detachment of the Greek army and the ships of war would suffice
for its investment, while the main force marched boldly on to Athens
before the terror inspired by its recent achievements had died out. He
reproached them with cowardice, and threatened to leave them unless they
took prompt measures for completing their triumph. "The services of the
navy," he wrote to Karaiskakes, "are immediately required for other
purposes than those of attending upon an inactive army. My duty I am
determined to execute in all possible ways in which my services can
benefit Greece. I shall therefore be gratified if, in reply to this
letter, you will inform me if it is in your power to make the army
advance, and if that advance will take place before to-morrow night. It
will give me the greatest pleasure to co-operate with you in all manner
of ways, but my desire to that effect is rendered null if those under
your orders will not conform to your wishes or obey your commands."

To the same effect Lord Cochrane wrote, on the following morning, to
General Church. "The convent and its walls," he said, "have been
levelled to the ground. The rubbish alone remains on the southern side
towards the shipping; and it appears that not more than one hundred of
those it contained, or who fled within its walls for safety, now remain
to oppose, or assault, or threaten, the rear of the Greek army, should
you be able to prevail on its leaders to advance. I should remind those
leaders that, independently of the army, I have full fifteen hundred men
under my command, a thousand of whom, being on shore now at this port,
are more than sufficient to blockade these ruins or destroy all within;
which last event might have taken place yesterday had it not been that
the seamen were removed from the positions which they had stormed and
taken, in the neighbourhood of the convent, and soldiers placed in their
stead--a circumstance which seems to have given them offence, so that
they leave the storming of the ruins of the convent to those thus
placed, as they say, in the post of honour. These feelings, in such
minds--however proper the proceedings may have been in a military point
of view--I cannot prevent or remove. Time, provisions, and money, are
wasting in inaction. The enemy is concentrating troops and fortifying
positions around Athens, each of which positions will be a pretext for
delay; even were I not aware that abundant excuses of other kinds will
not be wanting--such as the arrival of a few hundred cavalry from
Negropont or the like; so that I really begin to despair of one step
being made in advance for the relief of the Acropolis. I know the
difficulties of your situation, and I fear that they are more than even
your energy can surmount. When you shall have done your utmost towards
the end we have in view, I shall make one effort for the safety of the
unfortunate women and children who are threatened with immediate
destruction or perpetual slavery. Pray let me have a decisive reply as
to what is to be done, and when."

General Church's reply is instructive. "I have read your letter with
great attention," he wrote, "and fully enter into your view of affairs.
The Hydriots are unquestionably the best to storm, if anybody will
storm. The soldiers that they say have taken their post were placed to
co-operate in a general assault, and I had made an arrangement with a
chief who certainly displayed considerable courage the other day. I gave
him directions to collect a band, or forlorn hope, of volunteers to lead
with, and he is to have five hundred dollars for himself and five
hundred for his band. Had it not rained--however ridiculous it may seem
to say so--I am sure that a storming party would have advanced yesterday
evening, and I hope it will do so to-day. In fact, the rain yesterday
almost dispersed the whole camp, and many of our outposts were quite
abandoned. If the Hydriots will advance, I will order the others away
immediately. You have no idea of my anxiety to move on, and I cannot
express it. Karaiskakes is at this moment going round his outposts. As
soon as he returns, I shall send for him and combine with him, _bon gre
mal gre_, an advance for to-night or to-morrow. I will let you know as
soon as we have had our conference. I think, my lord, that if the
weather clears up, we shall be able still to storm, and perhaps a little
firing again would have the effect of rousing the fellows."

Soldiers who could only fight in fine weather were hardly fit to rescue
Greece in the heaviest pressure of her misfortunes. On the previous
night something like a mutiny had been occasioned by Lord Cochrane's
complaints at their inactivity. Even Karaiskakes sympathised with his
captains. "We shall not go well with these English," he said; "I fear
they will ruin us by their impatience. They cannot restrain themselves.
But we must make the best we can of them." Sir Richard Church, fired
with Lord Cochrane's ardour, would not be made the best of, according to
the views of Karaiskakes and his followers. The letter from him last
quoted was followed within an hour by a brief one:--"My lord, I have the
honour to inform you that I have given over the command to General
Karaiskakes."

Karaiskakes and the Greek officers were thus left, at about ten o'clock
in the morning of the 28th, to work out their own devices. At eleven,
Lord Cochrane received orders to cease the firing which he had reopened
from the guns of the _Hellas_. The movements which, through his
telescope, he saw in process within the convent walls and at its gate
induced him to send strict orders to Major Urquhart to withdraw his
Hydriot marines from their post near the convent, and station them on
the summit of Munychia.

The Turks had again sent offers of capitulation, and Karaiskakes, now
uncontrolled by Lord Cochrane or General Church, and in contempt of his
positive assertion, made two days before, that the garrison had not a
ration of provisions left and could easily be starved into utter
submission, had acceded to their terms. It was agreed that they were to
be allowed to surrender with all the honours of war. Bearing their arms
and all their property, they were to pass unmolested into the Turkish
camp on the hills. Karaiskakes must be blamed for this excess of
generosity; but, to his credit be it stated, that, having agreed to the
capitulation, he took all reasonable care to have it honourably
observed. Along the road leading from the gate of the convent to the
fortifications on the hills he ranged soldiers on either side, in order
that the Turks might be protected from the crowd of less disciplined
soldiers. All looked well as the two hundred and seventy men, women, and
children who had been locked within the shattered building passed out of
it and began their march. But no sooner was the convent evacuated than a
swarm of Greeks rushed into it, each hoping to seize the largest share
of the booty which they expected to find. They found nothing, and then
angrily rushed out again to inform their comrades of their
disappointment.

Lord Cochrane watched their proceedings from the deck of the _Unicorn_,
General Gordon and Mr. Finlay, who was then serving as a volunteer on
Gordon's staff, being by his side. "All those men will be murdered!"
exclaimed Mr. Finlay, pointing to the retreating Turks. Lord Cochrane,
not yet initiated in all the depths of Greek treachery, turned in horror
to General Gordon and said, "Do you hear what he says?" "My lord,"
answered Gordon, "I fear it is too true."[5]

  [5] Finlay, vol. ii., p. 148.

And so it proved. A Greek soldier, pushing through the guard, snatched
at the sword of one of the Turks passing along the line. The Turk
resisted, and a scuffle followed. Two or three other Turks raised their
muskets and fired. A score of Greeks at once retaliated. A shadow of an
excuse was thus afforded to the Christians for wreaking vengeance for
all the ills they had endured from the enemy, and for giving vent to
their anger at finding no prizes in the deserted convent. A horrible
massacre ensued. Two hundred or more Turks were murdered. Less than
seventy escaped. "Forgive me, as I forgive you," shouted Karaiskakes to
the Moslems, after vainly trying to stay the slaughter; "I can do
nothing more for you."

"Islanders," wrote Lord Cochrane, in a proclamation to his Hydriot
force, "I was no party to the capitulation this day. Fearing that some
outrage might be committed, I sent you an order to retire; and I glory
in the consciousness that I have saved you as well as myself from being
inculpated in the most horrid scene I ever beheld,--a scene which
freezes my blood, and which cannot be palliated by any barbarities which
the Turks have committed on you. I send you the thousand dollars which I
promised should be distributed, as a reward for your valour and for your
obedience to my directions, which you will ever find lead to the path of
honour and humanity and the duty we owe to your country."

Utter confusion among the Greeks resulted, for a time, from the
barbarous massacre of Saint Spiridion. The soldiers quarrelled and
fought over the blood-stained spoil. The officers were occupied with
mutual recriminations and excuses regarding their several shares in the
atrocity. Karaiskakes found himself unable to establish order, and had
to entreat Sir Richard Church to take back his surrendered authority.

To this General Church assented on the promise that, if he did so, he
should be aided in bringing the chief wrong-doers to justice. Indeed,
both he and Lord Cochrane hoped, for a little while, that their very
misconduct, filling the Greeks with shame and penitence, would incline
them to listen to the counsels in which they both saw the only chance of
safety to the garrison of the Acropolis. "The destinies of Greece,"
wrote Lord Cochrane to Karaiskakes, on the 29th of April, "the fate of
your army, and the character of its chiefs, are now wholly in the hands
of your excellency. You and you alone will be held responsible for all
that shall happen. The hour of clemency for Greece is past; the sword
alone can decide the contest. Courage is a characteristic of men who
deserve to be free. Let then the conduct of a few atrocious individuals
yesterday be effaced by a march direct to Athens, at least to relieve
the women and children now doomed to destruction, if prompt exertions be
not made to save them. Your excellency has hitherto treated my friendly
advice in a manner which I did not anticipate; but the world will judge
between the course you have taken and that which I wished you, for the
benefit of your country, to pursue. I shall wait three days for your
excellency's reply, when it will be my duty, if the fortress be not
relieved, to attend exclusively to naval affairs. I hope you will
reflect on the glory you may yet attain by saving your country, and on
the ruinous consequences of persevering in inaction until the last
resources of war shall be exhausted."

Karaiskakes's only answer was that the army was in urgent need of spades
and shovels, with which he hoped that Lord Cochrane would supply him, as
without those means of making fresh tambourias he could not move from
his encampment. Lord Cochrane was reasonably indignant. "I confess," he
wrote in reply, "that I am now in despair of your making any movement
for the relief of the Acropolis, because I have now ascertained that,
all the obstacles which first presented themselves to your excellency
being overcome, others successively present themselves, to put off the
day of your march to the Acropolis. I have made a diversion here this
day in favour of your excellency, which, by all the rules of military
tactics, must increase the relative strength of your army and facilitate
its march. My time and attention must now be devoted to naval matters,
and unless you advance this evening, I shall have deeply and bitterly to
regret, for the sake of Greece, that I ever put faith in anything being
accomplished by individuals to whom so many difficulties, which my
experience has taught me to be imaginary, present themselves. I recall
to your excellency's recollection your promises and assurances, and I
call upon you to make some effort to save your country from inevitable
ruin. I solemnly declare that it is my opinion that a thousand men who
would obey orders and do their duty are more than are necessary to
perform the task at which your excellency hesitates. I shall be
oppressed with grief if, after the scene of yesterday, I am compelled to
return, first, to the seat of Government, and next to Europe, without
having witnessed any deed that can tend to obliterate the stain thereby
affixed on the Grecian people."

"I am making my last effort," wrote Lord Cochrane to Dr. Gosse, "to get
Karaiskakes to advance. The monastery is taken, its defenders are
destroyed, and now the sheepfold on the other side of the Phalerum is
the obstacle. We want mortars, shells, and fuses, shoes for the seamen,
and food for the mob denominated falsely the army of Greece."

The letter to Karaiskakes had some effect. On the 30th of April, General
Church wrote to say that he had persuaded the Greek captains to agree
unanimously to an immediate movement against Athens. Two thousand men
were to go, during the following night, by water to the neighbourhood of
Cape Colias, and thence march stealthily to a hill about a mile south of
Athens, which they hoped to seize and secure under cover of the
darkness. During the next evening, a force about twice as large was to
join them by the same route, and all were to do their best to drive the
Turks from their encampments round the Acropolis. This was Lord
Cochrane's plan; and there can be no doubt that it would have been
successful had the Greeks acted upon it and done their duty.

Unfortunately they did neither. Having promised overnight, they found
reasons in the morning for breaking their promises. Nothing was done on
the 1st of May, and Lord Cochrane, tired of their excuses for
procrastination, paid a brief visit to the authorities at Poros. The
result was, that he thought of going without the Greek leaders. "I have
seen the Government," he wrote to Sir Richard Church on the 2nd, "and
prepared them for the worst, should things go on as they have hitherto
done. They are incapable of applying any remedy. Therefore, the more
credit will be due to you if you shall be enabled to save the garrison
of the Acropolis; in which endeavour count on my utmost exertions and
most unlimited co-operation. I hope now you will be able to act without
Karaiskakes. In addition to your own people, I can provide two thousand
marines, seamen, and volunteers. With these, if you land at night to the
eastward, you may be in the neighbourhood of Athens in two hours; and
then there is the garrison of fifteen hundred in addition to co-operate,
making in the whole a force of nearly five thousand, without taking a
soldier from Karaiskakes's tambourias. If, however, you judge well to
have volunteers from Karaiskakes's camp, I shall offer 200,000 piastres
amongst all who will accompany you or meet you at Athens; by which means
I have little doubt you will find Karaiskakes deserted, and the whole
mob at the gates of Athens. All the vessels are at your service."

Sir Richard Church feared to undertake the exploit without the
co-operation of Karaiskakes, and, on again consulting him, he was
informed that a fresh supply of entrenching tools was necessary. Lord
Cochrane immediately sent messengers to procure them, but was none the
less annoyed at what seemed to him an unnecessary excuse, and again
threatened to take his ships where they could do good work for Greece.
"You have done everything in your power," wrote Sir Richard to him on
the 3rd of May, "and so have I. The soldiers will not embark without the
entrenching tools. All we could collect do not amount to two hundred and
fifty. I would have gone without one, but no one will follow me. I
cannot say more; but to-morrow we may be more fortunate. I cannot say to
you stay or otherwise. If you go, I cannot deplore it more than
yourself."

Lord Cochrane consented to wait till the morrow, and on the morrow an
incident occurred which caused a little further delay. On the 4th of May
a small body of Greeks, chiefly Hydriots, went on a skirmishing
expedition. At first they were successful, and they had nearly won a
redoubt, when a large force of Turks suddenly assailed them on the
flank, and drove them back to Phalerum with a loss of nearly a hundred
men. Karaiskakes, hearing of this reverse, hurried to the rescue, and
with the bravery which was never wanting to him when in actual battle,
sought to rally the fugitives. He was on the point of leading them back,
when a ball from a pistol struck him in the belly. He was conveyed, in a
dying state, to General Church's schooner. Regret at his previous
vacillations seems to have filled his mind. "Where is Cochrane? Bring
Cochrane to me!" he exclaimed over and over again. Lord Cochrane soon
arrived. Karaiskakes, on seeing him, murmured repeated thanks to him for
his forbearance towards himself and his devotion to the cause of the
Greeks. In his eagerness, he seized the interpreter, Mr. Masson, by the
beard, and, pointing towards Cape Colias, said, with all the strength he
could muster, "Tell them to be sure to land the division over there
to-morrow." Then, not doubting that the expedition would be successful,
he uttered solemn thanks to Heaven that he was dying in the moment of
victory. Then he made his will--a soldier's will. "I leave my sword and
my gun to my son. Tell him to remember they belonged to Karaiskakes." He
had little else to leave, having always been free from the avarice by
which many of his countrymen were disgraced. He died in the night, and
in him Greece lost the worthiest of her native warriors. His faults were
the faults of his nation. Many of his virtues were his own. Had his
followers been as brave and honest as he was in his best moments, he
might have led them on to easy victory. But they wavered and
procrastinated, and, in listening to their excuses, he lost his chance
of triumph and subjected himself to blame, for which his brave death
only half atoned.

On the evening of the 4th, Lord Cochrane assembled the Greek captains at
Munychia, and telling them of their leader's dying message, asked
whether they were ready to obey it. For some time they made no answer.
At length, on the question being repeated, they replied that they
thought they had only been brought thither to hear from the Admiral
words of consolation for the loss they had sustained in the death of the
brave and wise Karaiskakes. Being asked a third time whether they would
obey the dying injunction of the leader for whom they now mourned so
much, they answered that they were not ready, that the army was in
disorder, that some of them were occupied in burying the slain, that
some were tending the wounded, and that all desired to stay near their
chief as long as the soul was in his body, and to have at any rate the
opportunity of kissing his body before its burial.

With some bitterness, Lord Cochrane replied that such an excess of grief
was inopportune, and that their love for Karaiskakes would be best shown
in obeying his last command. He added that, if they really refused to go
to the rescue of the Acropolis, they would not need his presence on the
coast and could not complain of his going to serve Greece elsewhere.
Having said that, he returned to his ship.

He had not been long on board, however, when a messenger followed him
with intelligence that the army would adopt his plan and be ready,
without fail, to proceed to the Acropolis on the following evening.
There was no further procrastination, and throughout the next day
preparations were being made for what one historian of the Greek
Revolution calls "a whim,"[6] and another "an insane scheme."[7]

  [6] Trikoupes, vol. iv., p. 152.

  [7] Gordon, vol. ii., p. 392.

"The scheme," says one who was in close attendance on Lord Cochrane all
through this time, Mr. Edward Masson, "was anything but insane. It was
one of the most sober, safe, and practicable plans ever formed. The
first and fundamental condition on which Lord Cochrane consented to
co-operate in any plan of landing troops at Cape Colias was, that the
troops landed should not expose themselves to an attack of cavalry in
the plains, but should, on being landed, proceed by a night march, in
compact order, and without halting, to a specified rocky height beyond
the temple of Jupiter Olympus, a position which, it was admitted by all,
they could hold with perfect safety during the day. From this position,
the leaders were to try to communicate, by signals or otherwise, with
the garrison, and in concert with it, act as circumstances might
dictate. Should the garrison resolve to make a sortie, the main body of
the Greek army advancing simultaneously from the Phalerum, it was
confidently hoped that the combined attack on the enemy would prove
victorious; or, at least, would be so far successful, as to enable the
Greeks to save the garrison and bring away the families. The great
characteristic of the plan was, that nothing should be risked in
reference to the enemy's cavalry, and that if the detachment should find
they could accomplish nothing, they should, on the following night,
return as they went, in safety, and be embarked for the Phalerum."

Unfortunately, the two main points on which Lord Cochrane had insisted
were neglected, and thereby what must otherwise have been a brilliant
victory was turned into a miserable defeat. He had insisted upon the
movement from Cape Colias being aided by the march of the main body of
the army direct from the Piraeus to the hills, thus diverting the
attention of many of the Turks while the advancing party and the
garrison were uniting; but Zavella, to whom this part of the work had
been entrusted, never moved at all. He had urged yet more strongly that
the preparations for the advance should be so hastened as that all the
ground should be travelled over during the night-time, while the Turks
were in ignorance of it; but instead of that, the Greeks, though they
were embarked at Phalerum by midnight, and landed at Cape Colias before
two o'clock in the morning, loitered near the shore till daylight, so
that their whole enterprise was exposed to the enemy. The critics who
have laid the blame of the disaster on Lord Cochrane have neglected to
show how these circumstances caused the failure of the enterprise.

The story of the disaster of the 6th of May will be best told in the
words of an eye-witness. "About three thousand soldiers," said Dr.
Gosse, in a letter written to M. Eynard on the 23rd, "were embarked in
the night between the 5th and the 6th of May, in a clear moonlight, and
in the most perfect order, and promptly landed on the other shore. Up to
that time everything favoured our enterprise; but the treason and
negligence of the chiefs, and the indolence of some of the soldiers,
altogether destroyed it. Instead of marching directly to Athens during
the night, they employed themselves in constructing redoubt after
redoubt, as bad as they were useless, of the sort called by them
tambourias. We counted a dozen. Only the Suliots, the Candiots,
commanded by Demetrius Kalerdji, two hundred regular troops, under the
orders of Inglesi and D'aujourd'hui, and twenty-two Philhellenes, went
in advance. Without any hindrance, they reached within cannon-shot of
the Acropolis, towards Philippapus, so that, as I have heard, they could
even speak with the besieged; but, having received no orders to enter,
they waited until the day rendered their position hazardous. The enemy
thus had time to ascertain their weakness and to send against them eight
hundred horsemen. Thrice these troops were repulsed. Vasso and Notaras,
however, who covered the right flank, abandoned their posts, as they had
done in the affair of the unfortunate Bourbakes, and thereby they caused
confusion among the troops in the centre. The latter defended themselves
with renewed valour, but yielded at last to the sabres of the Dehli
cavalry. Then was exhibited such a panic as cannot be described. The
soldiers who occupied the redoubts in the rear, and near to the place of
debarkation, began to flee almost at the same time as those of Vasso,
and threw themselves into the sea at the risk of being drowned. I was at
this time with Lord Cochrane, who did not wish to mix himself up with
the affair, when the sudden flight forced us at once to rejoin our boat,
and even this was not done without great difficulty. General Church was
also on the shore, and he too was only saved by the sloop which was
waiting for him. The Turkish cavalry, after having killed or captured
all the advanced party, rushed into the plain and made terrible havoc
among the Greeks. Seven hundred of them were killed; and two hundred and
forty were taken prisoners. The rest, numbering about two thousand,
rushed down towards the sea, and would soon have been all destroyed by
the Turkish guns placed on the hills if the fire from the vessels off
the coast had not kept the enemy at a respectful distance. They passed
the day in a terrible uncertainty, but were sustained by the courage of
certain chiefs, especially of Nicolo Serva, a Suliot captain; and in the
following night they were embarked and carried back to Phalerum. While
this portion of the army was being thus troubled, the Greeks, under the
orders of Kisso Zavella, remained inactive. That chief quietly smoked
his pipe, and when implored to march, was content to answer coldly,
'When they pay me I will go.' The troops of Kolokotrones the younger,
and of Sessinis, deserted in the direction of Livonia. The Turks, taking
advantage of the disorganized condition of the Greeks, attacked the
Phalerum on the night of the 6th, but were repulsed."

Lord Cochrane's account of the battle sent to the Government on the 7th
of May, though more general, supplies some other details. "The plan
concocted previous to the death of General Karaiskakes," he said, "was
carried into effect on the 6th, by his excellency General Church, with
this difference in the execution of the service, that his excellency and
myself were anxious that a rapid march should be made from the place of
debarkation direct to Athens, by a body of four thousand men, in order
to return with the women and children and the wounded, whereas the
officers of the army insisted upon entrenchments being made in the line
of their progress--an operation which required so much time as to
preclude the possibility of effecting the object surprised and
unopposed. The redoubts were in progress of construction, and the work
continued with unremitting labour until about nine o'clock in the
morning, when the enemy's cavalry, having collected from all quarters,
broke in upon the unfinished redoubts and vigorously attacked those who
had advanced the furthest, and who, from the number of subdivisions
left, according to the custom of the country, in these redoubts during
their progress, had become so weakened as to be incapable of making
effectual resistance. The loss on our side has been very considerable. I
had to lament this day that the Greeks still continue their aversion to
that regularity of movement and honesty of action which constitute the
strength of armies, and I grieve to see great bravery rendered useless
to their country and dangerous to themselves, and wasted in desultory
and unsupported personal efforts. The use of the bayonet and very slight
military instruction would have saved most of those who fell on this
occasion, and would have rendered unnecessary those redoubts which delay
the progress of your arms, and destroy more men in insignificant
enterprises which tend to no result, than would be required for the
deliverance of your country. The affairs of Greece require energy, and
that remedy be at once applied to whatever impedes the progress of
affairs."

Lord Cochrane testified to the excellent soldiership of the Turkish
horsemen. With sabres and short muskets, they dashed in and out of the
crowd of retreating Greeks, who, having no bayonets and no weapons
adapted for close fighting, were utterly defenceless. He himself, having
landed with Dr. Gosse to watch the operations from the shore, was so
hard pressed by these formidable antagonists that he was only rescued by
his own bravery and the daring of Dr. Gosse, who retained possession of
the boat which was waiting for him on the shore until his chief had time
to force his way back to it through the crowd of fighting Turks and
Greeks and through the waves beating up to his neck. It was only when he
was again on board the _Hellas_, and able to direct the firing of the
guns, that the Turks were driven back, and the remnant of the Greek
force was allowed to collect and prepare for the return to Phalerum.

The fall of the Acropolis soon followed this terrible defeat. By it the
Greeks were utterly disorganized. Lord Cochrane, finding it impossible
to persuade them to another attempt, returned to Poros with the fleet on
the 10th of May. Sir Richard Church remained at Munychia, his army being
every hour reduced by desertions, till the 27th, when he and the two
thousand starving men who were left to him abandoned their position.
Fabvier and the garrison, through the intervention of the French Captain
Le Blanc and Admiral De Rigny, capitulated on the 5th of June. It was
then found that the Acropolis still contained stores of food and
ammunition sufficient for four months' use, and that their reports of
destitution had been deliberate falsehoods, intended only to force their
friends outside to come speedily to their relief.

Those falsehoods had been particularly mischievous. By them, as has been
shown, Lord Cochrane was induced to listen to the entreaties of
Karaiskakes and the Government, and take his ships to Phalerum, instead
of carrying out his plan of stopping the Turkish supplies in the
Negropont and at Oropos. Had that plan been adhered to, it seems as if a
very different issue might easily have been brought about.

The work on which he had been engaged having terminated so
unfortunately, Lord Cochrane was much blamed for it by critics who had
private reasons for being jealous. We have shown, however, that he only
entered upon that work at the request of men whose power and influence
he could not gainsay; that, having undertaken it, he set himself
shrewdly and earnestly to render it successful; and that the failure was
occasioned, not by adoption of his plans, but by their perversion or
rejection. If he erred, he erred only in expecting too much patriotism
and valour from the people whom he was doing his utmost to serve.

If anything further need be said in explanation and defence of Lord
Cochrane's position up to this time, it will be best done by quoting
part of a letter addressed to M. Eynard on the 27th of May, in which he
concisely repeated the whole story. "On my arrival in Greece," he wrote,
"I found that the authority was claimed by two factions, that nothing
like a navy existed, and that a number of individuals called an army
were collected to raise the siege of Athens,--but wholly deficient in
military talent on the part of the commanders, or in obedience and
discipline on the part of the troops. As soon as I had accepted my
commission, I commenced active exertions to save the Acropolis. I
advised Karaiskakes to embark and land to the southward and eastward of
the Phalerum, and, marching direct to the Acropolis, bring out the women
and children. But my counsel was in vain, as he had no idea of any
combined naval and military movement, nor indeed of any military plan,
except that of advancing by slow steps, after the manner of the Turks,
who construct little fortifications, called tambourias, at every few
hundred yards, which are again opposed by others of the adverse party;
and, as neither army attacks these forts by active force, the whole,
after a few hours, are brought to a stand, and the result of the contest
depends on who can the longest continue to furnish pay and provisions.
Such was the state of the military contest when General Church took the
command. The battle at Phalerum, though brilliant, was accidental, and,
not being followed up, was productive of no result. Karaiskakes fell,
and General Church embarked the troops in order to execute the movement
that ought to have taken place a month before. The moment was more
inauspicious than we were aware of; for the Turkish commander had that
very night been joined by a large body of cavalry and a number of
infantry from Negropont and elsewhere. This, however, would not have
proved decisive, had not General Church, with a view to conciliate the
officers under his command, and indeed in order to induce them to embark
at all upon the expedition, conformed to their absurd views of military
movement, and permitted them to carry entrenching tools to form their
usual numerous positions on the line of their route, the construction of
which wholly defeated the intention of surprise, and enabled the enemy
to surround their advanced guard or van, weakened by the division of the
troops into fourteen garrisons left in a line in their advance, whereas
the whole body might, with perfect safety and in two hours, have reached
the Acropolis. The slaughter which the Turks made in the advanced posts
of the Greeks was horrible, and the panic which took possession of those
who remained on the Phalerum, at three leagues' distance from the scene
of action, was as disgraceful as the conduct of their chief, Zavella,
who made no movement even to create a diversion, but sat coolly looking
at the slaughter of his countrymen. With six thousand men under his
command he remained totally inactive. This expedition to Athens cost
upwards of twenty-five thousand dollars of the naval money and destroyed
most of our provisions. At the same time, I believed it to be my duty to
act as I did, and I have not since regretted any step that I took,
because, if Fabvier and the garrison fall into the hands of the Turks
and are destroyed, I shall at least have the consolation of knowing that
my utmost efforts were made to avert their fate."




CHAPTER XIX.

LORD COCHRANE'S RETURN TO POROS.--HIS ATTEMPTS TO ORGANIZE AN EFFICIENT
GREEK NAVY.--THE WANT OF FUNDS AND THE APATHY OF THE GREEKS.--HIS LETTER
TO THE PSARIANS, AND HIS VISITS TO HYDRA AND SPETZAS.--HIS CRUISE ROUND
THE MOREA.--HIS FIRST ENGAGEMENT WITH THE TURKS.--THE DISORGANIZATION OF
HIS GREEK SAILORS.--HIS CAPTURE OF A VESSEL BEARING THE BRITISH FLAG,
LADEN WITH GREEK PRISONERS.--SEIZURE OF PART OF RESHID PASHA'S
HAREM.--IBRAHIM PASHA'S NARROW ESCAPE.--LORD COCHRANE'S FURTHER
DIFFICULTIES.--HIS EXPEDITION TO ALEXANDRIA.--ITS FAILURE THROUGH THE
COWARDICE OF HIS SEAMEN.--HIS TWO LETTERS TO THE PASHA OF EGYPT.--HIS
RETURN TO POROS.--FURTHER EFFORTS TO IMPROVE THE NAVY.--HIS VISIT TO
SYRA.--THE TROUBLES OF THE GREEK GOVERNMENT.--LORD COCHRANE'S VISIT TO
NAVARINO.--HIS DEFEAT OF A TURKISH SQUADRON.

[1827.]


Before arriving in Greece, Lord Cochrane bad been informed by Captain
Abney Hastings and other experienced Philhellenes of the inefficiency of
the navy, and a very short stay at Poros served to convince him of the
truth of the information. On the 17th of April he obtained from the
National Assembly a decree authorizing the organization of a better
national fleet, and, before proceeding to join in the efforts for the
relief of the Acropolis, he did all that was possible towards the
achievement of this object, making such arrangements as would prevent
any hindrance thereto arising from his temporary absence on the most
pressing work that devolved upon him. Having sent Captain Hastings with
all the available ships on the expedition to the Negropont which has
already been described, he established at Poros the centre of the
administration of the fleet, entrusting its direction to Dr. Gosse, as
Commissary-General. He then visited Hydra, Spetzas, and other islands,
and left in each directions for the inspection of all the ships there
stationed, in order that, according to the national decrees, the best of
them might be bought up by the Government, on equitable terms, and
converted into vessels of war at Poros. During his stay near the Piraeus
he was in almost daily correspondence with Dr. Grosse and Emanuel
Tombazes respecting the purchase of stores, the construction of
gunboats, and every other essential to the fulfilment of his purpose. He
sent Jakomaki Tombazes, the elder of the two brothers, to look out near
Candia for a new corvette which had just been built at Leghorn for the
Pasha of Egypt. All other means in his power were adopted by him for
augmenting the naval strength of Greece, and fitting it to oppose the
force of her enemies so soon as he was able to devote himself
exclusively to that work.

This he did promptly and zealously immediately after the failure of the
expedition in favour of the garrison of the Acropolis. "Brave officers
and soldiers and seamen of the military and naval services," he wrote in
a proclamation issued on the 7th of May, "a defeat of the enemy's naval
force will tenfold repay the check which was sustained in yesterday's
attempt to relieve the Acropolis. Let every man maintain his post as
duty to his country demands, and in a few days I trust you will find
your affairs not only retrieved but secured on a permanent base."

That trust was not fulfilled. The Greeks proved themselves on sea as
well as on land unable to fight worthily, and with enough real
patriotism, for the liberty of their country. But honour must not on
that account be withheld from the man who used all his large experience
and larger philanthropy in trying to put them in the way of victory.

Lord Cochrane returned to Poros on the 10th of May, after an absence of
just three weeks. He lost no time in rendering to the Government, then
located in that island, a personal account of his recent proceedings,
and in doing his utmost to persuade the Greeks to aid him in the new
exploits on which he hoped to enter with better prospect of success. An
address to the Psarians, dated the 11th of May, will serve as a specimen
of many documents of the same nature. "It was my intention yesterday,"
he said, "to have paid my respects to you, in order personally to have
made known to you the circumstances in which the naval service is placed
and the state and preparations of the enemy, and to have called on you
to show an example to the other islanders, on whose exertions now depend
the liberties and fate of their country. The abandonment of the
schooner, in which I have hitherto been embarked by all her seamen,
prevented me from fulfilling my intention, and the certain intelligence
received this morning that the Turkish fleet from Constantinople passed
Syra the day before yesterday, to join the Egyptian fleet, compels me
now to recommend you by writing, instead of by word of mouth, to save
your country and yourselves by prompt and energetic exertions. The money
I brought here with me, being the proceeds of subscriptions made
throughout Europe for your cause, has unfortunately been nearly consumed
in fruitless endeavours to save the capital of Greece by means of an
irregular and unmanageable body of men, who will neither receive
instruction nor listen to advice. I hope that the brave seamen who
understand their duty will listen to my recommendation through you that
they should at once step forward to save their families from oppression
and slavery, and the name of their country from being struck out of the
list of independent nations. By one glorious effort Greece may be free;
but if she remain in her present state of apathy all hope must be
abandoned. I call upon you now to stand forward in defence of your
religion and all that is valuable to man. I send you a thousand dollars,
which is all that I can spare. Those who will equip their ships may
depend on repayment out of the first money that shall be remitted to me
for the public service of Greece."

As that letter implies, Lord Cochrane had to begin his reconstruction of
the Greek navy--now the only remaining resource of the nation in its
hope of working out and assuring its independence by effort of its
own--almost without funds. The small sum of 8000l. which he had brought
with him, as well as the money collected by the European committees and
transmitted to the Philhellenic Committee in Greece, composed of Colonel
Heydeck, Dr. Bailli, and Dr. Gosse, was nearly exhausted, and the
bankrupt Government was unable to provide him with any adequate
resources for carrying on his work. It had authorized him to buy ships
and stores and to employ labourers and seamen, and expected him to do
all without stint, but gave him no money for the purpose. In lieu it
authorized him to borrow upon the security of all the future revenue to
be derived from the islands; and every effort to utilize this mortgage
was made by his agent Dr. Gosse, but with very poor success. The credit
of the Greek Government was so low that the prospects of any
considerable revenue in the depressed state of commerce--likely to be
yet more depressed by the steady advances made by the Turks in regaining
their dominion over the insurgents--deterred capitalists from staking
their money thereupon. Lord Cochrane, as we shall see, had to apply half
his energies in performing the work of a financier, never anticipated by
him, and certainly not proper to his functions as First Admiral; and,
the result of all being feeble, his legitimate duties were grievously
crippled.

Money being absolutely needed, however, he did his best to procure it,
and with this view, as well as in order to make personal acquaintance
with the principal ports, and the ships and sailors contained in them,
he left Poros, three days after returning to it, on a tour among the
other important islands.

Starting on Sunday, the 13th of May, he reached Hydra on the following
morning. There, in the house of the brothers Konduriottes, its richest
and most influential inhabitants, he met several other leading primates,
and prevailed on them to take upon themselves the outfit of several
brigs and brulottes, the cost of which he had at present no means of
paying. Having, on the 15th, passed on to Spetzas, Lord Cochrane had a
similar interview with its chief residents. "I have been highly
gratified," he wrote on the 16th to the elder Konduriottes, "by the
spirit here manifested in following the noble example which you have
set, and I have no doubt but a sufficient force will be immediately
equipped to cut off all the resources by which the army of Reshid Pasha
is maintained, and so destroy that army even more effectually than by
the sword. The utmost promptitude, however, is necessary. One day's
delay may permit several weeks' provisions and stores to enter the
Negropont."

Promptitude was not easy, in spite of the favourable promises of the
primates. "Strange as it may appear to you," said Lord Cochrane, in a
letter to his friend, M. Eynard, "it is yet a fact that, out of the
thousands of seamen idle and starving at Hydra, Spetzas, and Egina, not
a man will enter the service of his country without being paid in
advance; nor will they engage to prolong their service beyond a month,
so that the labour of disciplining a crew is interminable. Were there
funds to increase the pay for each month, the sailors would remain, and
there might be some hope of getting a ship in order. At the present
moment there are no individuals in Greece who are instructed in their
duties as officers in ships of war." "I see no termination to the
obstacles," he wrote to Dr. Gosse on the 17th, "which present themselves
at every step I advance. Neither the Hydriots nor the Psarians, nor the
Spetziots, nor the Poriots, will embark in this frigate, which is thus
useless to Greece, if not prejudicial, because her maintenance is an
expense without benefit. I wish I could do a thousand things which I am
compelled to neglect, by reason of the difficulties and want of
assistance of all kinds. You, my good friend, are my only aid."

At Spetzas, and in its neighbourhood, Lord Cochrane remained four days,
directing the arrangements to be made in organizing a fleet strong
enough to go against the enemy's shipping, and, while waiting for that,
in appointing two minor expeditions upon services that were urgent. On
the 18th of May, he sent Admiral Saktoures with ten brigs and four
fireships to cruise about the Negropont and capture as much as he could
of the stores sent through that channel from Constantinople for the use
of the Turkish army in Attica. On the following day he went himself in
the _Hellas_, attended by the _Karteria_, under Captain Abney Hastings,
in the direction of Cape Clarenza, the north-westernmost point of the
Morea, opposite to Zante.[8]

  [8] "The admiral," says Gordon, "weighed with the _Hellas_ and
  _Karteria_ alone, leaving the rest of his squadron to draw pay and
  rations at Porto Kheli" (vol. ii., p. 415). The fact was that all the
  rest of his squadron that was fit for service was sent to the Negropont;
  and Lord Cochrane left directions that the other vessels, as soon as
  there were men to be rationed and funds for paying them, should follow
  him to Clarenza. But they only came to run away.

Castle Tornese, there situated, was being besieged by the Turks, and
Lord Cochrane hoped to be in time to avert its capture. In this he
failed. Arriving on the 22nd of May, he found that the castle had
capitulated a few hours before. All he could do was to chase two Turkish
frigates which he found on the coast. "We fired into them," he said,
"but our guns were ill-directed, and the noise and confusion on board
this ship was excessive, which prevented my choosing to attack them
again, though they did us not the slightest injury, because I am
desirous that the _Hellas_ shall be in somewhat better order before I
voluntarily attack an enemy who may take advantage of the impossibility
of causing my orders to be obeyed, and so leave the fate of the ship to
the conduct of a rabble."

One capture, however, the _Hellas_ was able to make on the following
day. She fell in with a vessel, manned by Turks and Ionian Islanders,
bearing the British flag, loaded with captives, chiefly women and
children, just taken in the Castle Tornese. Lord Cochrane seized her,
and sent her, with a reasonably indignant letter, to the Lord High
Commissioner at Corfu. "If I do not attempt to express my feelings in
addressing you," he said, "it is because I am aware that the terms I
should employ would fall far short of the sensations that will arise in
the breast of every honourable man throughout the civilized world, and
the degradation which every Englishman will experience, on learning that
the flag of England, first prostituted by supplying the traffickers in
Christian slaves with all the necessaries for their horrid purposes, is
now further debased by a traffic in the slaves themselves. I send you an
Ionian vessel, full of women violated in their persons, and who, with
their children, had been reduced to slavery, in order that the British
public and the world may ascertain whether these unfortunate people will
be protected by the decision of an Ionian tribunal. If there were any
hope that the people in the Ionian Islands would abandon their infamous
dealings otherwise than by force, I should ask your excellency to issue
an order upon the subject. I beg, however, to signify that I am ready to
co-operate with the admiral and officers of the British naval service in
the Mediterranean in enforcing obedience to the laws of justice and
humanity, and putting down the Ionian trade in slaves, as well as the
piracies which have originated chiefly in the total contempt shown by
the Ionian people and others for the laws of nations and the principles
of justice during the contest between Greeks and Turks. I also put at
your disposal the Turks found on board the Ionian boat, not considering
them as prisoners of war, but as men apprehended in violating the laws
of civilized nations and insulting the feelings of Christendom." "Since
writing the above," it was added in a postscript, "I have experienced
considerable difficulty in restraining the fury of the Greeks from
bursting forth upon the violators of their countrywomen. From what I
foresee, I also feel it my duty to warn you that, should the
transportation of Christian captives by neutrals be continued, I cannot
answer for the safety of Ionians found so employed by the other vessels
of the Greek squadron."

A formal acknowledgment of that letter was all the answer received by
Lord Cochrane.

On the 24th of May, when near Missolonghi, he made another capture--a
Turkish brig, with eight guns, bearing Austrian colours, which was
proceeding from Previsa to Navarino. In her, besides a good store of
flour and gunpowder, were found some Turkish officials and several
members of Reshid Pasha's harem. The alarm of these prisoners was very
great at first; but they were treated with courtesy, and landed, with
all their personal properties, at the first convenient halting-place,
the brig and its cargo being retained as prizes. Reshid Pasha, in return
for the generous treatment shown to his attendants, afterwards released
a hundred Greek prisoners without ransom.

Another curious incident occurred at this time. Several small Turkish
merchant-vessels passed Lord Cochrane's ship during his stay near
Missolonghi, but he abstained from capturing them, deeming it unworthy
to interfere with such small crafts, devoted, as it was supposed, only
to trading purposes. He was afterwards informed that in one of them
Ibrahim Pasha himself had been concealed. Had the Egyptian leader been
thus made prisoner, the future course of the war might have been
altogether changed.

Lord Cochrane had gone into the Gulf of Patras in hope of meeting with
Captain Hastings, from whom he had parted soon after leaving Spetzas;
but the _Karteria_ had been disabled by a squall, which took away both
her masts, and so had to return to Poros; and with the ill-manned
_Hellas_ alone Lord Cochrane did not deem it prudent, as he had wished,
to attack Navarino, whither the besiegers of the Castle Tornese had
gone, and where twelve Egyptian frigates, twenty corvettes, and forty or
fifty smaller vessels were for some time lying. Several of these came
out to take on board the Ottoman troops who had done their work at Cape
Clarenza, and Lord Cochrane, on the 1st of June, remained for several
hours within sight of them, ready and hoping to be attacked. No fight
being offered, however, he did not choose to run the risk of going
single-handed into their midst. He accordingly contented himself with
surveying the coast, and forming his own judgment as to the relative
value of its ports and harbours, as he sailed back in the direction of
Poros.

To Poros itself Lord Cochrane did not venture to proceed. "I have
written for all the Greek vessels that are ready, including the
fireships and explosion-vessels, to join me," he said in a letter to Dr.
Gosse, written on the 7th of June, off Cerigo; "I remain at sea with
this frigate, lest the whole of her crew should desert, according to
custom, were I to pay a visit to Poros." The want of zeal which he thus
perceived in his seamen was shared by nearly all their countrymen. All
wished him to serve them, but very few made any patriotic effort to aid
him in the service. His most active supporter was Captain Abney
Hastings; and Captain Abney Hastings complained yet more loudly than did
his superior of the indolence and bad conduct of the Greeks. "I had the
honour to receive your order of the 7th, enjoining me to repair to your
lordship without delay, if ready for sea," he wrote on the 9th, from
Spetzas; "a variety of circumstances, unavoidable in a country deprived
of even the shadow of organization, has prevented me from being yet
ready to sail. The majority and best of my crew have left me, and I must
look for others."

Hastings and all his other officers wrote over and over again to Lord
Cochrane, asking for stores of all sorts, and for money with which to
pay the wages of their crews. But Lord Cochrane was still almost without
funds. Only from Konduriottes, and the other island primates, could he
procure scanty supplies with which to carry on his work--or rather, to
prevent that work from being altogether abandoned. "I have the honour,"
he wrote to the Government, "to represent to your excellencies that I
find it impossible to realise the credit which you assigned to me on the
revenues of the islands, and that insurmountable obstacles prevent my
acting as affairs require. The _Hellas_ even is idle for want of
supplies. Each day, each event, increases my conviction that, without
strong and special efforts, without a prompt and disinterested
co-operation of all its citizens, Greece must of necessity be overcome.
Isolated as I am, I am useless to them. Supported by their patriotism
and zeal, I could fight for their independence. The islands of the
Archipelago are willing to aid our efforts, but they claim from me in
return a guarantee for the safety of their goods and for the regular
administration of their imposts. I await your excellencies' instructions
for promptly answering their demand; for the resources of the western
nations are drained; European charity is wearied. The islands alone
offer us the means of maintaining the naval forces, and of resisting, if
it be possible--if it be not too late--the vigorous preparations of our
enemy. We must act promptly or abandon everything." The Government only
answered by urging its chief admiral to lose no time in securing the
independence of Greece.

This, in spite of the difficulties thrown in his way, he set himself
heartily to attempt. Two courses were now open to him. Reshid Pasha,
having taken possession of the Acropolis, and thus completed the capture
of Athens, had laid siege to Corinth; and Sir Richard Church, with a
weak and vacillating body which went by the name of an army--the
remnants of that which had proved so useless in the neighbourhood of the
Piraeus--was vainly trying to raise the siege. By him and by the
Government Lord Cochrane was urged to muster as large a fleet as
possible in the Bay of Corinth, and to co-operate with the land forces
by blockading the besiegers, after the method that had failed at Athens.
Experience convinced him that such action would be useless; whereas from
modification of the plan which he had in the former instance been
induced to abandon he hoped much. He knew that a large Egyptian force
was being prepared at Alexandria, to be employed first in aiding the
siege of Corinth, and afterwards in completing the conquest of all
Greece. If only he could train the Greeks to act under his bold
leadership, as he had trained the Chilians and Brazilians, he trusted
that, by one daring movement, he could seize Alexandria as he had seized
Valdivia and Maranham. And to this project he zealously addressed
himself, deeming it sufficient to send a small force to blockade the
gulfs of Patras and Corinth, and leaving Dr. Gosse as his agent in
command of naval affairs at home, with special orders to visit the
various islands, and, in accordance with authority received from the
Government, to collect the revenues of each, in order that the necessary
expenses of the fleet might be met.

He collected all the vessels he could muster in the neighbourhood of
Cape Saint Angelo. His force consisted, besides the _Hellas_, of one
corvette, the _Sauveur_, which he had brought from Marseilles, commanded
by Captain Thomas, of fourteen Greek brigs and of eight brulots or
fireships. With these he started for Alexandria on the 11th of June, the
_Hellas_ having often to slacken speed in order that the slower Greek
vessels might be kept in attendance. Candia was passed on the 13th, and
Alexandria was sighted at five o'clock in the morning of the 15th. Lord
Cochrane stood out to sea so that he might not be discovered, and spent
the day in putting his fleet in order, preparing an explosion-vessel,
and arranging for the work of the morrow. "Brave officers and seamen,"
he said, in an address to his followers, "one decisive blow, and Greece
is free. The port of Alexandria, the centre of all the evil that has
befallen you, now contains within its narrow bounds numerous ships of
war and a multitude of vessels laden with provisions, stores, and
troops, intended to effect your total ruin. The wind is fair for us, and
our enterprise unsuspected. Brave brulotteers, resolve by one moment of
active exertion to annihilate the power of the satrap. Then shall the
siege of Athens be raised in Egypt; then shall the armies of Ibrahim and
Reshid be deprived of subsistence, and their garrisons perish of hunger,
whilst the brave inhabitants of continental Greece and the islanders,
freed from impending danger, will fly to arms, and, by one simultaneous
movement, throw off the barbarian yoke. Date the return of happy days
and the liberty and security of Greece from your present exhibition of
valour. The emancipation of Egypt and the downfall of the satrap are
also inevitable consequences; for the war is concentrated in one point
of action and of time."

That spirited address was ineffectual, and Lord Cochrane's bold plan for
seizing Alexandria was prevented by the cowardice and disorganization of
the Greeks whom he was labouring to serve. They could hardly be
persuaded on the 16th to follow the _Hellas_ and the _Sauveur_, all
bearing Austrian colours, as far as the entrance to Alexandria, and when
twenty large Egyptian vessels were found to be there lying at harbour,
they lost heart altogether. Lord Cochrane knew from past experience
that, with proper support from his subordinates, he could easily capture
or disperse the enemy's shipping. He had made arrangements for attacking
them with the fireships and his explosion-vessel. But nearly all the
crews refused to serve. Kanaris alone among the Greeks was brave. Having
command of the fireships, he induced the sailors of two of them to bear
down upon the enemy, and at about eight o'clock in the evening one
man-of-war was burnt. So great was the effect of this small success that
the other ships of the enemy prepared to escape, and great numbers of
the inhabitants of Alexandria hurried out of the town and sought a
hiding in the adjoining villages. Seeing the Egyptian ships making ready
for flight, however, the Greeks supposed that they were coming out to
attack them, and themselves immediately turned sail, heedless alike of
their own honour and of Lord Cochrane's assurances that a splendid
victory was easy to them. All the night was vainly spent by the _Hellas_
and the _Sauveur_ in futile efforts to collect them, and on the morning
of the 18th they were found to be dispersed far out at sea over an area
of more than twenty miles.

In despite of his feeble allies, Lord Cochrane would have gone boldly
into port and attacked the enemy. But his own Greek sailors were as
timid as their comrades; and after a whole day spent in reconnoitring
the enemy, whose force of twenty-five sail dared not offer battle, but
had gained courage enough to abstain from actual flight, he was
compelled, on the 19th, also to put out to sea and to spend two other
days in signalling the brigs and fireships to join him. Not till the
afternoon of the 20th, by which time he had pursued his allies to a
distance eighty miles from Alexandria, was he able to bring them into
any sort of order, and then the bitter conviction was forced upon him
that further prosecution of his plan, for the present at any rate, was
useless.

The scanty store of provisions that had been sent with the fleet,
moreover, was nearly exhausted, and thus a new difficulty arose. Lord
Cochrane sent the most useless of his vessels back to Poros for a fresh
supply, and with an earnest entreaty that some efficient reinforcements
might also be forwarded to him, announcing his intention of waiting in
the neighbourhood in hopes of achieving some better success. "Your
excellencies may rest assured," he said in his letter to the Government,
"that our visit to Alexandria will have a powerful effect in paralysing
the equipment of an expedition, and I have every reason to conclude that
the example made before their eyes of the brig-of-war will deter any of
the numerous neutral vessels from engaging as transports in the
expedition equipping by the Pasha. The sensation created must indeed
have been powerful as two neutral vessels of war made the signal for
pilots before we weighed anchor on the morning of the 17th, under the
impression, no doubt, that a more effectual attack would shortly be
attempted. I am going to make a short tour, with a view, as far as I am
enabled with the inadequate means at my disposal, to distract and
paralyse the enemy."

In accordance with that purpose, being already near Cyprus, Lord
Cochrane conducted his fleet a little further north, and anchored, on
the 23rd of June, off Phineka, in Asia Minor, where, after a brief fight
with the Turks, he effected a landing, and received some much-needed
food and water. Thence he addressed letters, urging the prompt despatch
of the necessary stores and vessels, to the Government, to the primates
of Hydra, and to Dr. Gosse.

From this halting-place, also, he sent a noteworthy letter to Mahomet
Ali, the Pasha of Egypt, a supplement to one which he had addressed to
him nearly a year before, when he was on his way to enter the service of
the Greeks.

"Your employing foreigners in your military and naval service," he had
said in the former letter, which will be best quoted in this place, "the
privilege which you claim and exercise of building and equipping
ships-of-war in neutral states, and of purchasing steam-vessels and
hiring transports under neutral flags, for hostile purposes, and to
transport to slavery a people whom the Ottoman arms have never yet been
able wholly to subdue, warrant a belief, whatever your sentiments may
be, that the civilized, educated, and liberal portion of mankind will be
gratified that succours similar to those which you, unfortunately, have
hitherto obtained from these states are now about to be afforded to the
brave, the oppressed, and suffering Greeks. Nor will the advantage
derived be wholly theirs; for, until you shall cease or be forced to
abandon your inhuman traffic in Christian slaves and the commission of
cruelties which stain the character of man, your subjects must
inevitably continue barbarians,--a state from which it would be a source
of great gratification to contribute to release them. It is true that
the Christian world has not of late contended in arms with those of your
faith on points of religion. It has, however, not fallen into a state of
apathy so great as to see unheeded the perpetration of those enormities
which you are daily committing on Christians,--a sentiment with which no
feeling of animosity towards you or towards your people is combined. On
the contrary, it desires to render you every good service consistent
with that duty paramount to all others, namely, to wipe out the stain
from the civilized world of unfeelingly and inhumanly co-operating to
exterminate, enslave, and transport to bondage a whole Christian
people--and such a people--the descendants of those Greeks whose genius
laid the chief foundation of literature, the sciences, and the arts; who
reared those noble monuments and edifices which time and the more
destructive barbarian hand have yet failed to destroy, and which,
compared with the wretched hovels of your hordes, may better point out
to you the elevation they attained, and the prostrate state in which
your people are--owing, alas! to the baneful effects of bigotry and
despotic sway. Surely, surely there is ample field for the exercise of
your energies at home, in encouraging industry, the arts and sciences,
in promoting the civilization of your people, and in enacting equitable
laws for the security of persons and property--on which bases the
national prosperity of all countries must rest. But should your
ambition, not content with bestowing blessings like these on your native
land, lead you to soar almost above mortal acts, distant oceans would
unite, and the extremities of the globe approach at your command.[9]
Thus might your name be rendered immortal, and Egypt become again the
emporium of commerce, and one of the richest and happiest nations upon
earth. How infinitely great the glory from such acts! How despicable the
fame of a tyrant conqueror, the ruler of slaves! It would be pleasing to
support you as the author of great and good works, but it is shameful to
permit your present proceedings, and dastardly to leave the unfeeling
apostate sons of neutral and Christian nations unopposed, aiding to
perpetuate barbarism for horrid gain, drawn from the price of Christians
torn from their homes and sold as slaves in foreign lands. Against these
atrocious men, my companions and myself, casting the gauntlet down, will
contend, in the hope that they and you may perceive your true interests
and your great error, and pursue a different course before it shall be
too late. Quit the classic sacred soil of Greece, let the flayings, and
burnings, and impalings of that people cease, and oh! shocking to
humanity, the ripping up of pregnant women, and the hewing up of their
infant babes, and other acts yet worse than these--too horrid to relate.
Release the Christian slaves; pursue an honourable and enlightened path,
and we become friends to aid you in your pursuits--but should the
present course be continued, let the bands of cruel assassins in your
employ count on our opposition; count, too, on our neutralizing the
effects of every vessel procured or bought from Christian states. 'Hear
the voice of the Lord, ye rulers,' in the prophecy now to be fulfilled.
'Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help and stay.' 'When the Lord
shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that
is holpen shall fall down, and they shall all fall together.' Instead of
filling brim full the cup of bitterness, of which you yourself must
ultimately drink, how admirably might you not employ your people, and
your treasure--the waste whereof is rearing to you a barbarian successor
to prolong the bondage of Egypt. The Christian prayer of those called to
rescue their suffering brethren is that, conforming yourself to the
dictates of reason and humanity, you may live long to benefit mankind;
and as you are more enlightened than your predecessors, so may you
become more humane and just."

  [9] It is singular that at this early date Lord Cochrane should thus
  have advised and prognosticated the construction of the Suez Canal.

The second letter was more brief. "The discrimination of your Highness,"
Lord Cochrane now wrote, "enables you to judge between those who offer
advice to promote personal objects and those who disinterestedly desire
the welfare of mankind. Egypt may become great by the attention of her
rulers to her internal concerns, but not by war and foreign conquest,
and assuredly not by the conquest of that people with whom your Highness
is now engaged in hostilities, not only on account of the impossibility
of reducing them to subjection but because the whole of Europe is
directly or indirectly engaged in their support. I beg your Highness to
be assured that, if I present myself to your consideration in a more
conspicuous point of view than others, it is only because the habits of
my life have enabled me to be openly instrumental in the protection of a
Christian people whom you attack, and not because I feel animosity
against your Highness, nor because I desire the overthrow of the lawful
power of your Highness. Should your Highness, however, listen to
interested counsellors, or to those who hope to gain by adulation, and
continue the present unjust and sanguinary contest, I take leave once
more to warn you that the first visit I have had the honour of paying
you shall not be the last, and that it is not in the power of your
Highness to prevent the destruction of your ships destined for the
invasion of Greece, nor to defeat my intention to block up the port of
Alexandria. I had the honour to address your Highness twelve months ago;
but have thought proper to repeat once more the honest advice I then
expressed, in order that your Highness may acquit me when, in the hour
of adversity, you have to regret that you have not listened to the voice
of truth."

Lord Cochrane's threats could not be enforced. Off the coast of Asia
Minor and among the southern islands of the Archipelago he waited for
more than a week. But no adequate reinforcements or supplies of
provisions arrived. The disorganised fleet became more and more
unmanageable. One vessel after another deserted, and those that remained
in nominal attendance on the flag-ship could not be brought under
control. Lord Cochrane, who had made skilful sailors and brave warriors
of enervated Chilians and Brazilians, found the Greeks utterly
unmanageable. Up to the 2nd of July he tried vainly to bring them into
order, and only succeeded in pursuing them from island to island until,
on that day, they had drawn him back to the neighbourhood of Hydra.
There they all dispersed, and with a heavy heart he anchored at Poros on
the 4th. The _Hellas_ was immediately deserted by her crew. Another
month had been wasted and another bold project for the assistance of
Greece had been spoiled by the want of patriotism which, exhibited first
and most flagrantly by the leaders, was now rapidly pervading all
classes of the Greeks.

An amusing instance of the worthlessness of the Greek sailors, whom,
from first to last, he tried to make useful, may here be given. On one
occasion, following his invariable habit of taking every possible
occasion of trying to win the confidence and friendship of those under
him, he was exhibiting a magic lantern to the crew of the _Hellas_. At
many of the dissolving views they manifested a childish delight, but at
length one unfortunate picture was brought before them. It depicted a
Greek running from the pursuit of a Turk, and then melted into a view of
the Turk cutting off his captive's head. At that sight every Greek on
board took fright. Some ran into the hold of the ship, others jumped
overboard, and many hours had to be spent in bringing them together
again and dispelling their frivolous and superstitious fears.

Lord Cochrane, however, though disheartened, still sought, with unabated
zeal, to render to Greece such help as became his name and character.
But he saw that this could not be done without a thorough reform in
naval affairs; and this, often urged by him before, he lost no time in
urging again. "The crew of the _Hellas_," he wrote to the effete
Government on the very day of his return, "having, according to their
usual practice, abandoned the vessel on her arrival in port, it is
essential that others should be enlisted to serve in the frigate without
delay. It is further essential that the individuals so enlisted shall
engage to serve during a period of not less than six months, and that
they shall be young men who will conform to the rules and regulations by
which the ships-of-war of other states are governed. It is quite
impossible to conduct a large ship-of-war amidst the noise and confusion
which I have witnessed during the two months that have elapsed since my
flag was hoisted on board this ship, and equally impossible to induce
monthly crews to conform to habits of order and regularity. Under these
circumstances, I enclose you a proclamation, stating the pay and
advantages which will accrue to such individuals. I should prefer that
the enlistment should take place under such respectable young men as
propose to obtain rank in the national marine, and who can be in some
degree responsible for the good conduct of the individuals who accompany
them, each individual qualified for, and aspiring to, the rank of
lieutenant being accompanied by sixty young seamen, the second
lieutenants to be each accompanied by thirty. For this ship five of the
first class and eight of the second are required." The proclamation
which Lord Cochrane submitted to the Government detailed his plan for
ensuring, or at any rate making possible, honest and hearty service in
seafaring.

"I wish I could inform your excellencies," he said in another letter
written two days later, "that the obstacles, however great, which
presented themselves in the course of the naval service were all I had
to contend with. The jealousies among the islanders, even the most
enlightened, embarrassed me exceedingly; and these, I regret to say,
cannot be alleviated by having recourse to your advice or authority, at
the distance at which you are placed, without a correspondence so
voluminous that I should occupy too much of your attention. I must,
therefore, act according to my own responsibility; and in so doing I am
aware that some may be displeased, and probably no one will be
satisfied."

Nearly all the month of July, indeed, was spent by Lord Cochrane in
zealous efforts to render the Greek navy more efficient. For this two
things were needed--that the officers and crews should be honest and
intelligent, and that there should be money enough in hand for paying
their wages, for fitting out proper vessels, and for supplying the
requisite stores and provisions. For the first object proclamations were
issued, letters were written, and agents were sent into various parts of
Greece and her islands. For the second, Lord Cochrane went personally to
the assistance of Dr. Gosse, who, as Commissary-General of the Fleet,
had been attempting to collect the revenues of the islands which, by
order of the Government, had been assigned to naval uses. He succeeded
to some extent in this, and also in quickening the latent patriotism of
the people whom he visited.

His most important visit was to Syra, where, as will be seen from the
letter which he addressed to the Government on the 13th of July, he was
obliged to resort to strong measures for securing the good end he had in
view. "I have the honour to inform your excellencies," he wrote, "that,
a new crew having been procured for the _Hellas_ with less delay than I
anticipated, by reason of the pay having been increased one-third in
amount, I proceeded to Syra, taking with me several of the principal
inhabitants of the three maritime islands, who expressed to me, by
letter, their anxiety to have an opportunity of promoting a loan on the
credit of the revenues of the islands, which your excellencies had
authorised me, jointly with others, to collect. I have now the pleasure
to inform you that when I left Syra yesterday everything seemed to
promise a favourable result; but in order to attain this important
object it became necessary that I should take upon myself the
responsibility of intimating to the prefect of police, who had assumed
despotic authority, that it was essential to the public good that the
magistrates should resume the functions that they exercised previous to
his arrival. I am convinced that your excellencies will perceive as
clearly as I do, that it will be impossible to preserve harmony amongst
the islanders, if strangers are sent to exercise over the natives an
authority that is not acceptable to them. Indeed, the character of these
natives demands at all times prudence and circumspection on the part of
the Government."

Unfortunately, the miserable triumvirate to which the direction of Greek
affairs had been assigned until the arrival of Count Capodistrias was
wholly wanting in prudence and circumspection. After vainly trying to
maintain a show of authority, and to use it to their own aggrandisement
at Damala and at Poros, they had, on the 4th of July, removed to
Nauplia. There, however, they only found themselves more embarrassed
than ever. While the last hopes of Greek independence, to be secured and
maintained by Greeks themselves, were rapidly dying out, the leaders
were amusing themselves and gratifying their petty jealousies and
ambitions by conduct more despicable than ever. Nauplia was the seat of
civil war between two military factions, whose joint contempt of the
worthless Government would have been, at any rate, excusable, had not
the interests of the whole nation been thereby injured. The triumvirate
was driven from the town, and taking refuge in a little island in the
Bay of Nauplia, wrote in despair to Lord Cochrane, asking him to come to
its aid and devise some means of preserving, or rather of constructing,
its authority.

To Nauplia he accordingly went on the 19th of July. "I am now at the
anchorage of this place," he wrote thence to Dr. Gosse on the 22nd. "The
town is evacuated by the inhabitants and abandoned by the Government.
The latter are in the little island in the bay in the most deplorable
condition, trembling like Sancho when invaded in his dominions of
Barataria, and not knowing which way to turn, whether to avoid or meet
the enemy. No words can depict the state of things. I have had
correspondence with the Government and all the chiefs, but have waited
on none, because I am determined to keep myself clear of faction, and go
straightforward in what I consider to be my duty." "We are now weighing
anchor," he added, in a postscript written in the evening of the same
day, "and the Austrian commodore is coming into the bay--an evil omen.
He is watching, like a vulture, the agonies of the expiring authorities
of Greece."

"As you have done me the honour," said Lord Cochrane, in a letter to the
Government, "to request my opinion regarding the manner of settling the
disputes between the contending chiefs who hold the higher and lower
fortresses of Nauplia, it becomes a sacred duty to give that opinion
without the slightest reserve, because the consequences of any half
measure will be entirely destructive of the influence of your
excellencies throughout Greece, and eventually may frustrate the
endeavours of the European powers to promote a settlement with the
Porte. Your excellencies, then, must at once remove from the situation
in which you are now placed, or, more properly speaking, to which you
have fled, and where you are still under the cannon of the disputing
chiefs, or both these chiefs must be caused to abandon the fortresses
they hold. To suffer one to remain and to expel the other would be
voluntarily to surrender your authority, and through Greece and
throughout the world you would be considered in no other light than as
instruments for giving the semblance of legality to the dictates of a
military chief."

Lord Cochrane did not wait to see the end of this dispute between the
mock Government and its nominal subjects. He left Nauplia on the 22nd of
July to complete the arrangements he had made for another attempt in
defence of Greece. He had already sent Admiral Saktoures and a small
force to maintain a show of blockading Alexandria, in order that thereby
neutral vessels, at any rate, might be deterred from giving aid to the
Turkish cause. He had sent vessels to blockade the Gulf of Patras in the
same way. He had also issued a vigorous proclamation to the inhabitants
of Western Greece, urging them to rise against their oppressors, and he
was eager to go thither himself and encourage the work, for which he
hoped that his fleet and his naval arrangements were now better fitted.
One important auxiliary to this work he hoped to have in a corps of
marines, to the number of a thousand, which Colonel Gordon Urquhart was
now trying, under his directions, to organise. "I have several things in
view which even this small force could accomplish," he wrote to Dr.
Gosse, "and amongst the rest will be the rooting out of the pirates from
the islands."

More important, however, than the restraint of piracy, was the
resistance, if possible, of the Turkish forces. Several of the Egyptian
ships which Lord Cochrane had hoped to destroy in the harbour of
Alexandria had now come out and joined the Ottoman fleet, which had
Navarino for its head-quarters. He determined, without loss of time, to
go and see what injury could be done to them; and accordingly, after a
brief visit to Poros, where he took on board some stores and provisions,
and where he left Dr. Gosse to use the scanty supply of money which he
had collected in completing the equipment of the other vessels, he
started in the _Hellas_, on the 28th of July, for the western side of
the Morea.

On the 29th, when near Cape St. Angelo, he fell in with the _Sauveur_,
returning from a cruise in the Gulf of Patras, and the two vessels
proceeded with all haste to Navarino. They reached that port, and had
sight of the Turkish fleet on the evening of the 30th. With French
colours flying, Lord Cochrane reconnoitred its position, and then
watched for an opportunity of attacking some part of it.

The opportunity occurred on the 1st of August. A corvette, carrying
twenty-eight fine guns, and a crew of three hundred and forty, with two
brigs and two schooners, had passed out on the previous day, apparently
with the intention of conveying reinforcements to the Gulf of Patras.
Lord Cochrane immediately gave them chase, and drove them backwards and
forwards between Zante and the shore north of Navarino all through the
night and till nearly noon on the 1st. Then suddenly tacking, he closed
upon the corvette, and there was hard fighting--the first in which he
had been able to persuade his Greeks to join--between the two vessels,
for fifty minutes. At about one o'clock, after fifty of their number had
been killed and thirty wounded, the Turks surrendered.[10] Lord Cochrane
found on board twenty Greek women and several children, who had been
subjected to the vilest treatment. In the meanwhile, Captain Thomas, of
the _Sauveur_, had engaged with one of the brigs, carrying twelve guns,
and captured her with a loss of fifteen killed and wounded to the Turks,
but none to the Greeks. The other vessels escaped, but an Ionian vessel,
laden with provisions for the Ottoman army at Patras, was seized in the
afternoon, and her cargo put to good use.

  [10] "The admiral," says Gordon (vol. ii., pp. 421, 422), "was less
  gratified at his victory than mortified that so inferior a vessel should
  have fought the _Hellas_ for three-quarters of an hour, and disgusted at
  the backwardness of his crew. In his first cruise he carried with him
  four hundred men recruited in the Cyclades; but as they ran below in his
  engagement with the two Egyptian corvettes, he discharged them and took
  Hydriots alone. These last, though better mariners, and really more
  courageous, were disconcerted by his system of reserving fire till
  within pistol-shot--so different from their own plan of cannonading at a
  mile's distance. 'The boys,' said Cochrane, 'behaved pretty well; but
  the oldest, and ugliest, and fiercest-looking bravoes of Hydra ran to
  the other side of the deck, roaring like market-bulls.' His lordship
  took summary satisfaction by knocking them down with his fists, right
  and left."

Lord Cochrane waited off Navarino for two days, hoping that some of the
enemy's fleet would come out to attack him. They, however, locked
themselves carefully in the harbour until he had set sail for the south,
when they feebly attempted to pursue him. He thereupon, after releasing
the Turkish prisoners at Candia, returned to Poros, there to leave his
prizes and endeavour to take back a larger force with which worthily to
supplement his recent successes.




CHAPTER XX.

THE ACTION OF GREAT BRITAIN AND RUSSIA ON BEHALF OF HELLENIC
INDEPENDENCE.--THE DEGRADATION OF GREECE.--LORD COCHRANE'S RENEWED
EFFORTS TO ORGANISE A FLEET.--PRINCE PAUL BUONAPARTE, AND HIS DEATH.--AN
ATTEMPT TO ASSASSINATE LORD COCHRANE.--HIS INTENDED EXPEDITION TO
WESTERN GREECE.--ITS PREVENTION BY SIR EDWARD CODRINGTON.--LORD
COCHRANE'S RETURN TO THE ARCHIPELAGO.--THE INTERFERENCE OF GREAT
BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND RUSSIA.--THE CAUSES OF THE BATTLE OF NAVARINO.--THE
BATTLE.

[1827.]


The Duke of Wellington's mission to St. Petersburg in the spring of
1826, which has been already referred to, was part of a policy by which
the British Government materially contributed to the ultimate
independence of Greece. Its first result was the protocol of the 4th of
April, in which England and Russia recognized the right of the Greeks to
claim from the Porte a recognition of their freedom. At about the same
time our Government had sent Mr. Stratford Canning, afterwards Lord
Stratford de Redclyffe, as ambassador to Constantinople, with special
instructions to use every endeavour to bring about a cessation of the
war which should be favourable to Greece; and on the 24th of April the
National Assembly at Epidaurus had authorized him to treat with Turkey
on its behalf, agreeing, if no more favourable terms could be obtained,
to a recognition of the Sultan's supremacy and the payment of tribute to
him, on condition that Greece should be independent in all its internal
government. Those terms, however, were rejected by the Porte; and after
a delay of a year and a half it was forced by the Great Powers, slowly
awakening from their long lethargy, to accede to arrangements far more
favourable to Greece.

These negotiations, however, proceeded very slowly, and before the dawn
of Greek independence there was a time of almost utter darkness, the
darkest time of all being the few months following Lord Cochrane's
arrival. "Vanquished Greece," says her historian, "lay writhing in
convulsive throes. In herself there was neither hope nor help, and the
question to be solved was merely whether the Mahometans would have time
to subdue her before the mediating powers made up their minds to use
force. That the former, if not checked from abroad, must speedily
overrun the country did not admit of the least doubt. But it was equally
certain that they could not pacify it; for, while the rich and timid
prepared to emigrate, the poorer and hardier portion of the insurgents
formed themselves into bands of robbers and pirates, which would have
long infested the mountains and the Levant seas, deriding the efforts of
the Porte to suppress them. The only branch of the Hellenic confederacy
that still presented a menacing aspect was the navy under Lord Cochrane.
Every other department was a heap of confusion. No government existed,
since it would be idle to dignify with that name the three puppets set
up by the Congress of Damala. None ever thought of obeying them, and
they sealed their own degradation by carrying on an infamous traffic in
selling letters of marque to freebooters. There was no army, because
there was no revenue. After the fall of Athens, Roumelia was entirely
lost, and the captains either renewed their act of submission to Reshid
Pasha or fled to the Morea. It was not, however, with an intention of
defending the peninsula that they retreated into it. Their purpose was
to seize the fortresses, and thereby be enabled to make a good bargain
with the Turks, or any other party that should remain in final
possession. Nauplia and the Acrocorinthus were already garrisoned by
Roumeliotes. Monemvasia, the third Peloponnesian stronghold yet held by
the Greeks, was in the hands of Petro-Bey's brother, John Mavromikales,
who, fitting out from thence predatory craft, converted it into a den of
thieves."[11]

  [11] Gordon, vol. ii., pp. 403, 404.

It is not strange that, amid all this confusion, cowardice, and
treachery, Lord Cochrane should have found it almost impossible to
achieve anything worthy of his abilities or of the cause which he
desired so earnestly to serve. Yet he continued, in spite of all
obstacles, to do all that lay in his power, in fulfilment of his duty,
and even in excess of that duty. He had engaged to act as First Admiral
of the Greek Fleet. Finding that there was no fleet for him to direct,
he laboured with unwearied zeal not only to construct one and to turn
his unmannerly subordinates into disciplined sailors and brave warriors,
but also to persuade the landsmen to co-operate with him in trying to
withstand, if not to drive back, the advancing force of the enemy. One
day when he was at Poros, Dr. Gosse came on board the _Hellas_ to visit
him. "See, my friend," said Lord Cochrane, taking a loaded pistol from
the inner pocket of his waistcoat, "see what it is to be a Greek
admiral." He found it necessary to be always provided with a weapon with
which he could defend himself from his indolent, unpatriotic seamen.

Having returned to Poros with his prizes on the 14th of August, he was
obliged to wait there for twelve days. There were no funds to be had for
the requisite repairs and other expenses in paying and feeding his
crews. All he could do was to repeat his former arguments and entreaties
for assistance from the miserable Government at Nauplia, and the more
active, but still half-hearted primates of the islands. He also made all
the other arrangements in his power for improving his fleet and for
carrying on some sort of naval warfare among the southern isles,
especially on the coast of Candia, and for fomenting an insurrection of
the inhabitants of Western Greece, who, held in awe by the Turks ever
since the fall of Missolonghi, had hitherto done little in aid of the
national strife, but to whose support he now looked with some hope.

On the 24th he obtained a little further assistance. Mr. George
Cochrane, whom he had sent to Marseilles in the _Unicorn_, to ask for
fresh supplies of money and stores from the Philhellenes of Western
Europe, but whose return had been long delayed, now arrived with a cargo
of provisions, and with a sum of 5000l., which, though altogether
inadequate to the work to be done, made possible some work at any rate.

In the _Unicorn_ also came a new volunteer on behalf of Greek
independence. The schooner having called at Zante on her way back, Mr.
Cochrane there met Prince Paul Buonaparte, nephew of the great Napoleon
who asked to be taken on board in order that he might serve under Lord
Cochrane. This was agreed to, and the Prince, a youth about eighteen
years old, and six feet high, became, immediately after his arrival at
Poros, a favourite with Lord Cochrane and all his staff and crew. He was
remarkable, said Dr. Grosse, for "his good-will, his amiability of
character, his solidity of judgment, his intelligence, and the
moderation of his principles."

His stay in Greece, however, was very brief. On the morning of the 6th
of September, all on board the _Hellas_ were startled by a shriek and
the exclamation, "Ah, mon Dieu! je suis mort!" Lord Cochrane and several
officers rushed to the Prince's cabin, there to find him lying in a pool
of blood, and writhing in agony. His servant had been cleaning his
pistols, and he had just loaded one of them to hang it on a nail, when,
the trigger being accidentally struck, the weapon discharged and a ball
entered his body and settled in the groin. Dr. Howe, an American
surgeon, famous for his services to Greece and for later philanthropic
labours, being at hand, came to his relief until Dr. Gosse could be sent
for. All that could be done, however, was to lessen the pain, which he
bore with great heroism through two-and-twenty hours. Lord Cochrane had
him placed in his own cabin, and carefully tended him with his own
hands. At seven o'clock in the following morning he cried out, "Ah, quel
douleur!" and died immediately.

That melancholy accident had a sequel which must be told in illustration
of the greed of the Greeks. The Prince's body was placed in a hogshead
of spirits and conveyed to Spetzas, there to be deposited in a convent
until the wishes of the father, Prince Lucien Buonaparte, could be
ascertained as to its interment. A few months afterwards, some natives
entering the convent and smelling the spirits, but apparently in
ignorance of the use to which they had been applied, could not resist
the temptation of tapping the hogshead and drinking a part of its
contents.

Prince Paul Buonaparte died while Lord Cochrane was again making a tour
of the islands, vainly trying to induce the inhabitants to provide him
with adequate means for a formidable attack on the enemy. "In the port
of Spetzas," wrote one of his officers, on the 29th of August, "there
are now nearly forty vessels--none of them ready, not a man on board.
All the men are out in cruisers, notwithstanding his excellency's order
to fit out their vessels to meet the enemy's fleet. But such are the
Greeks; they have no foresight, and until they see the enemy they will
make no preparations, nor will they, unless the money is in their hands,
expend a dollar to prepare a single fireship to defend their country. It
is now twenty-eight days since Lord Cochrane ordered the vessels from
Hydra, Spetzas, and Egina to be prepared, and they are not yet ready."

At length, on the 5th of September, Lord Cochrane was able, though still
with difficulty, to resign the irksome and extra-official duties of a
tax-gatherer that had been forced upon him. "Since my return from Zante,
and, indeed, since my return from Alexandria," he wrote on that day to
the Government, now lodged at Egina, "I have been using my utmost
endeavours to procure the equipment of a dozen brigs and as many
fireships. The delays occasioned, however, by the want of pecuniary
means have hitherto prevented the realization of my wishes, and the
services of this frigate have been lost to the State during the
fore-mentioned period, owing to the impossibility of procuring the
necessary funds without my personal presence at Syra and elsewhere. The
equipment of the brigs and part of the fireships is now completed, in
spite of all difficulties, and I shall not delay one moment the
endeavour to effect something useful to the interests of the State. I
think it proper, however, to intimate to your excellencies that,
everything being paid relative to the expense of the present expedition,
I know of no means whereby a single vessel can be maintained during the
ensuing month."

On the 7th of September, Lord Cochrane was able to start on another
warlike cruise. His force comprised the _Hellas_, the _Karteria_, the
_Sauveur_, and nineteen or twenty other vessels. The Spetziots and the
Hydriots, at the last moment, refused to aid him; but he was attended by
Miaoulis, Kanaris, and Saktoures, the three best of the native admirals.
After a brief visit to Candia, where he encouraged the garrison of
Grabusa to hold out against the enemy, he again passed round the Morea,
in which direction he desired to attain two important objects. The first
was to injure as much as possible the Turkish and Egyptian vessels
collected near Navarino. The second was to co-operate with the wretched
force that, under General Church, had for three months past been making
a show of resistance to the enemy at Corinth, and with its help to try
and stir up the natives of Albania and Western Greece.

These objects, partly prevented in other ways, were nearly averted by a
barbarous plot for Lord Cochrane's assassination. While halting off the
southern coast of the Morea, on or near the 10th of September, a short,
thick-built Greek, with an ugly countenance and determined eye, came on
board the _Hellas_ and asked for employment as a sailor. He was examined
and rejected, on the ground of previous misconduct. Instead of going on
shore again, however, he contrived to hide himself among the crew, and
was not detected by Lord Cochrane for several hours, and when the
frigate was in full sail. In the interval Lord Cochrane had received
authentic information that this man had been commissioned by Ibrahim
Pasha to attempt his life. There would have been justification for his
immediate arrest, and, after a court martial, for his summary execution.
But Lord Cochrane pursued a more generous policy. Walking up to his
secretary, Mr. George Cochrane, he said: "Observe that man who is at the
gangway on the larboard side. I have just had information that he has
been sent by Ibrahim Pasha to assassinate me. Go quietly below, put on
your sword, and watch him while he is on board." Mr. Cochrane obeyed his
instructions. "In less than five minutes," he says, "I was again on deck
with my sword. I took a few turns on the quarter-deck with his lordship,
and then placed myself in a convenient position, about a dozen yards
from the man. I did not lose sight of him for a couple of hours, keeping
my eye steadily upon him. He soon observed that I was watching him, and
I could perceive that he did not feel very comfortable in his mind. He
did not attempt to come aft. Had he done so, I should have drawn my
sword. After the men had had their dinner, one or two boats were got
ready to convey seamen on board another vessel; and this fellow, seeing
that his intentions were discovered, took advantage of the opportunity
and got into one of the boats. I looked over the side of the _Hellas_,
and saw him depart." Thus Lord Cochrane's life was saved.

Navarino was passed on the 11th of September. Lord Cochrane made no
halt, as he saw that a British squadron, under Sir Edward Codrington,
was there watching the Ottoman fleet and forbidding its egress. He
accordingly at once proceeded northwards, and entered the Gulf of Patras
on the 17th of September. On that day, in anticipation of the visit
which he proposed to pay them, he forwarded proclamations to the
inhabitants of the western coast. "People of Albania!" he wrote in one
of them, "although you have so long suffered under the Mussulman yoke;
although your love of liberty has been so long kept down by a dark and
cruel despotism, the hour of your deliverance is not distant, and if you
will you can hasten it. Europe takes a lively interest in your destiny;
your fellow-countrymen are hastening to aid you. But all depends on the
energy which you yourselves display: the support which we offer you, to
be efficacious, requires on your part redoubled zeal and patriotism in
the actual and decisive moment. Brave Albanians! your happy future, the
security of your families, and the honour of your religion, are in your
hands; your bold and steady co-operation will ensure your own salvation
and our success!"

The intended expedition was prevented. It had been arranged that Lord
Cochrane should wait near Cape Papas for the arrival of General Church's
army and convey it to Western Greece, in the hope of putting it to
better service in that region. But the land force was long in coming,
and before its arrival Lord Cochrane had to write to the Government,
explaining his recent movement and the reasons which compelled him to
abandon the project of fighting in Albania. "Having proceeded to the
Gulf of Patras," he said, "in order to co-operate with General Church in
his intended expedition to Western Greece, I thought it would be
conducive to the public service to invest the fort of Vasiladi, until,
by the arrival of the forces of the general, more important operations
could be undertaken; and accordingly that island was immediately
blockaded by the boats of the squadron, and now continues surrounded by
the vessels belonging to the Missolonghites, who have undertaken to
maintain the blockade until it shall surrender. The _Karteria_, the
_Sauveur_, and two of the gunboats, were immediately detached with
orders to take or destroy all the enemy's vessels within the Gulf of
Lepanto, whilst the _Hellas_ went to the anchorage of Kalamos, in order
to ascertain from the officers in arms what prospect there was of
general co-operation; and I regret to say that the want of union among
the chiefs and the prospect of some kind of accommodation with the enemy
seemed to paralyse all their energies. I therefore detached all the
squadron under Admiral Miaoulis to Syra and Naxos, to aid the Candiots
and Chiots, should they continue inclined to assert their independence.
I have to add that I received an indirect communication from the British
Admiral, intimating his desire that no new or further operations should
be undertaken in that quarter; for which reason I am about to proceed
elsewhere, under the impression that nothing should be left undone to
stir up the population of Greece to a sense of their duty to themselves
and to their country."

The communication referred to was conveyed by Lord Ingestre, commander
of the _Philomel_, who hailed the _Hellas_ on the 27th of September, to
deliver a message from Sir Edward Codrington. "Whereas I am informed by
Sir Frederick Adam," wrote the English Admiral, "that Lord Cochrane,
with the Greek fleet, is about to embark the army of General Church in
the neighbourhood of Cape Papas, for the purpose of conveying them to
the coast of Albania, you are hereby directed to make known to the
commander of that expedition that I consider it my duty, in the present
state of affairs, to prevent such a measure being carried into
execution, and that I shall shortly present myself in that neighbourhood
for that purpose." Lord Cochrane knew that, if it would be personally
very distasteful to him to be in collision with the naval force of his
own country, it would, on public grounds and in the interests of Greek
independence, be wholly inexcusable for him to act in violation of Sir
Edward Codrington's message. Therefore he complied with it and went back
to the Archipelago, there to do other work, while England was serving
Greece in her own way.

The service was to be rendered at last. After spending a year in
diplomatic formalities, Great Britain and Russia had, in the spring of
1827, openly renewed their arguments with the Porte in favour of Greek
independence. These arguments having been rejected, the two Christian
powers were in consultation as to the next course to be pursued, when
France, partly urged thereto by her schemes for the acquisition of
Algiers, then a Turkish dependency, offered to take part in the defence
of Greece. The result was a treaty signed in London, on behalf of the
three states, on the 6th of July, having for its object the enforcement
of the St. Petersburg protocol of the 4th of April, 1826. It insisted
that Greece should have internal freedom, though under vassalage to
Turkey; and provided that, if the contending parties did not agree to an
armistice within a month, there should be a forcible intervention.

The Greeks welcomed the proposals made to them in consequence of this
treaty; but they were rejected by the Turkish Government,
notwithstanding the appearance of English, French, and Russian warships
in the eastern part of the Mediterranean. Reshid Pasha and Ibrahim
continued their efforts to bring the whole insurgent district into
thorough subjection, and accordingly the patriotic Greeks and their
foreign supporters continued to act on the defensive. Lord Cochrane and
a few others, indeed, were eager to secure action bolder than ever,
considering that, when the settling-time arrived, the limits of
independent Greece would be augmented if a larger area was then the
scene of zealous opposition to the Turkish power. This it was that
chiefly induced the efforts to quicken the revolt in Albania, and when
Lord Cochrane was prevented by Sir Edward Codrington from persevering in
his work in that quarter, he lost no time in sailing round to the
eastern side of Greece, there to do his utmost towards rousing the
people of Candia and other islands into an assertion of their
independence, in order that they too might have a claim to be included
in the liberation of the Greeks.

The message from Sir Edward Codrington to Lord Cochrane, which has been
quoted, was dated the 25th of September. It was written immediately
after an interview of the English commander and Admiral de Rigny, who
was in charge of the French squadron, with Ibrahim Pasha. To him they
had formally announced that they were instructed to insist upon a
cessation of hostilities, and that they should promptly act upon their
instructions. Ibrahim answered that he had orders from the Sultan to
continue the war, but he promised to communicate with his sovereign, and
pledged himself to abstain from hostilities until the answer arrived and
was reported to the allied fleets. Before that answer came a fortunate
series of accidents, arising out of Lord Cochrane's expedition to the
Albanian coast, turned the current of diplomacy and secured for Greece
more freedom than had been anticipated.

Lord Cochrane, attended by his Greek vessels, had left the neighbourhood
of Cape Papas on the 27th of September. But, though deeming himself
bound in honour to that course, he was willing to allow a part of his
force to remain in the neighbourhood and watch the progress of events,
especially as that part was at the time separated from him and lying in
the Gulf of Lepanto. It consisted of the _Karteria_, under Captain Abney
Hastings, the _Sauveur_, under Captain Thomas, and two gunboats, each
mounting a 32-pounder. For a week this little squadron, ignorant of the
arrangement between the allied admirals and Ibrahim Pasha, watched a
Turkish force that was moored in the Scala of Salona, and comprised one
large Algerine schooner carrying twenty brass guns, a brig of fourteen
guns, six smaller brigs and schooners, two gunboats, and two armed
transports. These vessels were protected by batteries on the level shore
and other batteries on overhanging rocks. On the 30th of September,
Captains Hastings and Thomas proceeded to attack them, and did so with
excellent effect. The solid shot of the _Sauveur_ and the gunboats soon
silenced the batteries; the red-hot shells of the _Karteria_ made havoc
of the enemy's vessels, four being defeated within half-an-hour. Soon
the _Sauveur_ and the gunboats joined in the attack on the shipping,
and, in the end, seven vessels were destroyed and three captured.

The news of that victory, as soon as it was conveyed to Navarino, where
nearly all the naval force of the Turks was lying, roused the anger of
Ibrahim Pasha, who complained that the allied powers, while binding him
to inaction, allowed the Greeks to carry on the war. On the 1st of
October, he sent out thirty war-ships with orders to enter the Gulf of
Lepanto and punish Hastings and Thomas for their recent exploits. Sir
Edward Codrington, however, pursued them, and drove them back to
Navarino. Ibrahim Pasha, not easily to be baffled, himself left
Navarino, on the evening of the 3rd, with fourteen of his stoutest
vessels. Again Sir Edward Codrington gave chase, and this second
squadron also was compelled by him to return to port. Ibrahim Pasha,
however, was not to be robbed of his revenge. He dared not leave
Navarino by sea, but he sent thence a land force, which marched up to
the northern side of the Morea, and did serious mischief to the wornout
fragment of an army which General Church was slowly conducting from
Corinth to Papas, there to be embarked for Albania. Only by the
unlooked-for valour of young Kolokotrones and his section was the rout
of the whole army averted. Nor was Ibrahim satisfied with this act of
retaliation. His troops scoured all the adjoining country, burning
villages and laying waste the olive-groves and fig-gardens which were
the only source of subsistence to the luckless natives.

Thereby Sir Edward Codrington and his allies were in turn incensed. They
decided that the time had come for direct interference in the struggle,
and for the expulsion of the Ottoman forces from the Morea. In the
afternoon of the 20th of October, five and twenty line-of-battle ships,
frigates, and sloops entered the Bay of Navarino. Ten of them were
English, seven were French, and eight were Russian, and they carried in
all 1172 guns. Twenty thousand Ottoman troops watched them from the
fortresses of Navarino and Sphakteria, and, as they entered the harbour,
they saw some eighty Turkish and Egyptian vessels, mounting about 2000
guns, drawn up in the shape of a horseshoe to receive them. They had
come only to threaten; but accident, or design on the part of the enemy,
brought about a most momentous battle.

A volley from the Ottomans began the fight, which was continued for four
hours with stolid energy on both sides. The English and French vessels,
being foremost, carried on the chief contest with the enemy's shipping;
the Russians had to silence the batteries before they could enter the
harbour, but then their Admiral, Count Heyden, did his full share of the
deadly work. The fighting lasted till sunset; but by that time many of
the enemy's hulks were in flames, and all through the night these flames
spread from one vessel to another till nearly all were destroyed. At
daybreak, only twenty-nine out of the eighty were afloat, and six
thousand or more Moslems had been slain, burnt, or drowned. Many of the
vessels of the allies were seriously damaged, and of their crews a
hundred and seventy-five men were killed, and four hundred and fifty
wounded.

That was the battle of Navarino. "I have the honour to inform you,"
wrote Sir Edward Codrington to the Greek Government, "that, according to
the decision of my colleagues, Count Heyden and Rear-Admiral de Rigny,
and myself, the combined fleet entered this port at two o'clock on the
20th, that some of the ships of the Turko-Egyptian fleet first began a
fire of musketry, and then fired cannon-shot, which led very shortly to
a general battle, which lasted till dark, and that the consequence of
this has been the destruction of the whole of the Turkish fleet, except
a few corvettes and brigs. Most of the ships of the allied fleets have
received so much injury that they must go into port; but if the Greek
vessels of war are employed against their enemy instead of destroying
the commerce of the allies, they may henceforth easily obstruct the
movements of any Turkish force by sea."




CHAPTER XXI.

THE FIRST CONSEQUENCES OF THE INTERFERENCE OF THE ALLIED POWERS AND THE
BATTLE OF NAVARINO.--LORD COCHRANE'S INTENDED SHARE IN FABVIER'S
EXPEDITION TO CHIOS.--ITS ABANDONMENT.--HIS CRUISE AMONG THE ISLANDS AND
ABOUT NAVARINO.--HIS EFFORTS TO REPRESS PIRACY.--HIS RETURN TO THE
ARCHIPELAGO.--THE MISCONDUCT OF THE GOVERNMENT.--LORD COCHRANE'S
COMPLAINTS.--HIS LETTERS TO THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE ALLIED POWERS,
ACQUITTING HIMSELF OF COMPLICITY IN GREEK PIRACY.--HIS FURTHER
COMPLAINTS TO THE GOVERNMENT.--HIS RESOLUTION TO VISIT ENGLAND.--HIS
LETTER TO COUNT CAPODISTRIAS EXPLAINING AND JUSTIFYING THAT
RESOLUTION.--HIS DEPARTURE FROM GREECE, AND ARRIVAL AT PORTSMOUTH.--HIS
LETTER TO M. EYNARD.

[1827-1828.]


Heartily rejoicing at the benefit conferred on Greece by the battle of
Navarino, Lord Cochrane could not but be troubled to think that the
overthrow of the Turkish and Egyptian fleet, which he had laboured so
zealously to effect, and which, had he received any adequate support
from the Government or the people, would have been a work as easy for
him as the enterprises in which he had been so notably successful in
former times and other countries, had to be done by the officers and
ships of foreign nations instead of by him and the native fleet of
which, by name, he was commander-in-chief. The battle being won,
however, he tried, with no flagging of his energy, to complete the
triumph that had been thus begun, and, if anything was easy to a people
so wanting in patriotism, made easier.

He was at Poros at the time of the battle. On his way thither he had
fallen in with the _Enterprise_, the first of the steamers built in
England, and which, with others that never were completed at all, ought
to have been completed nearly two years before. The _Enterprise_ had
been so badly constructed, that now that she arrived, she was of very
little use. Lord Cochrane was now trying to improve her sailing powers,
and at the same time attempting to collect a really manageable crew for
the _Hellas_, and to bring together other vessels fit for naval work. In
these labours there was no less difficulty than had befallen him on
former occasions. The _Hellas_ was in want of water; but the inhabitants
of Poros refused to supply it, on the plea that they had no more than
was needed for their lemon-gardens. Some carpentering was urgently
needed by the _Enterprise_; but, as it had to be done on Sunday, the
workmen declined to touch a hammer, notwithstanding the exhortations of
a priest who promised them absolution, and even threatened to
excommunicate them if they failed in their duty to the country in this
pressing time of its necessity. Of those sorts were the obstacles that
occurred each day, and rendered futile all the efforts of Lord Cochrane
and his officers.

On the 27th of October, Lord Cochrane again set sail from Poros in the
_Hellas_, accompanied by the _Sauveur_, and the corvette which he had
lately taken from the Turks, to which the name of _Hydra_ was now given,
and proceeded to Chios. That island, the scene of previous disasters,
had since 1822 been left in the hands of the Turks. Colonel Fabvier was
now attempting to recover it for Greece, and Lord Cochrane entered
heartily into the work. He arrived on the 30th, and spent two days in
vigorous co-operation with the land force that had reached the island a
day before. His share in this enterprise, however, was brief. He was
visited on the 2nd of November first by Captain Le Blanc, bearing a
message from Admiral de Rigny, and afterwards by Captain Hamilton, who
produced a copy of a letter addressed on the 24th of October to the
Legislative Assembly by the Admirals of the three allied powers. "We
will not suffer Greece," they there said, "to send any expedition to
cruise or blockade, except between Lepanto and Volo, comprehending
Salamis, Egina, Hydra, and Spetzas. We will not suffer the Greeks to
carry insurrection into either Chios or Albania, and, by so doing, to
expose the inhabitants to the cruel reprisals of the Turks. We regard as
null and void all letters of marque given to cruisers found beyond the
above limits; and the ships-of-war of the allied powers will everywhere
have orders to detain them. There remains no longer any pretence for
them. The maritime armistice is, in fact, observed on the side of the
Turks, since their fleet no longer exists. Take care of yours, for we
will destroy it also, if the case requires it, to put an end to a system
of maritime pillage which will end by putting you out of the protection
of the law of nations."

By that letter, Lord Cochrane was constrained to abandon his intended
work at Chios. He could excuse the angry terms in which it was couched,
since the anger was only directed against the same unpatriotic conduct
which he had all along been denouncing. He was painfully aware that,
with the exception of his own flag-ship and the few vessels commanded by
English officers, his fleet was chiefly composed of pirates, who only
took temporary service under the national flag in order to fill up their
idle time, or to make their public service an occasion for further
clandestine pursuit of their lawless avocations. From the first he had
persistently and fiercely denounced this piracy, and from the day on
which he had heard of the victory at Navarino he had resolved to make it
a special business to do all in his power to root out the evil. "The
destruction of the Ottoman fleet by that of the allied powers," he had
said in a proclamation dated the 29th of October, "having delivered the
Greek fleet from the cares which had necessarily occupied its attention,
and the commander of the maritime forces of Greece having the right to
take due measures for the extinction of piracy, to preserve the honour
of the State, and to protect the people and property of friendly
nations, it is now made known that ships of less than a hundred tons'
burden are not to have arms on board, unless they are first provided
with express commissions, so registered, and numbered in such a manner
that the number shall be conspicuously noted on the ship. All other
vessels of the size defined which shall be found at sea with arms will
be considered as pirates, and the crews shall be brought to trial, and,
if found guilty, be executed."

For the brief remainder of his service in Greece, indeed, Lord Cochrane
made it his principal duty to do all in his power towards the
suppression of piracy. The admirals of the allies having insisted that
the Greek vessels should do nothing but watch their own coasts within a
distance of twelve miles from the shore, he proceeded to the southern
part of the Morea, making only a short tour, in order to meet the
primates of Samos, Naxia, Paros, Candia, and other islands, and
ascertain from them the condition of the people and their power of
resistance to the Turks and to their piratical enemies of their own
race. The information gained by him was not satisfactory. He found that
here, as in the mainland and the nearer islands, patriotism was weak and
misrule oppressive. Everywhere the people were the victims of their own
want of patriotism and of the tyranny of foes, both Moslem and
Christian.

He was off Cerigo on the 15th of November. There, having heard that the
residue of the Turkish and Egyptian fleet was preparing to put to sea
with all the available force, apparently to carry on the war in Candia,
he at once sailed on to the south-eastern promontory of the Morea, and,
during a fortnight, maintained the blockade on both sides of Navarino,
between Coron and Prodana. There also he was able to carry on his war
against pirates. "The _Hellas_ being off the island of Prodana, a few
miles to the north of Navarino," he reported to the Government,
describing an important adventure of the 21st of November, "I sent two
boats for the purpose of procuring wood from the island. The boats,
being fired upon from persons near to some vessels in a cove, returned
with a report that there were Turks upon the island. In consequence of
this report, the corvette _Hydra_ was directed to enter by the northern
passage, whilst the _Hellas_ entered to the southward of the island, and
both vessels anchored opposite to the place where the supposed Turkish
vessels were at anchor. It was immediately perceived, however, that the
vessels were not Turkish, and, on examination, one proved to be a
schooner under the Greek flag. It was soon discovered that a Dutch
vessel at anchor in the same port had been seized, without the slightest
pretence, by the schooner and plundered of almost everything that could
be removed, and, moreover, that the captain and crew had been most
barbarously flogged, for the purpose of ascertaining where the proceeds
of the outward cargo were deposited."

Lord Cochrane wrote to the same effect to the Governor of Zante. "I have
left the piratical vessel with a petty officer and sufficient crew to
blockade Prodana, until you can send and seize the pirates, should you
think proper, as they have been plundering and annoying the trade of the
Ionian Islands. I send two of the pirates in irons, in order that,
obtaining further information, you may deal with them and with the
others according to the law of nations."

That instance of the policy adopted by Lord Cochrane will help to show
how he set himself to put down piracy. The work was not easy, as the
lawless conduct was secretly authorised by the Government, and practised
with very little secresy by great numbers of the national vessels. It
was in vain that he issued the proclamation of the 27th of October, that
has been quoted; in vain, too, that he sent two gunboats to visit all
the principal ports, with fresh injunctions against piracy and with
authority to compel obedience to those injunctions, if necessary, by
force. Good work, however, was done by these gunboats, in conjunction
with two brigs detached for the purpose, in escorting neutral trading
vessels through the waters most infested by the sea-robbers.

Slowly and painfully the conviction was forced upon Lord Cochrane that,
after all his previous failures in attempting to turn the lawless Greeks
into honest patriots and to convert their ill-manned ships into members
of an efficient navy, his labours were now more useless than ever. After
a fortnight's cruising about Navarino, he retraced his course and
anchored, on the 3rd of December, off Egina, where the so-called
Government was then located. To it he wrote on that day, asking for
directions as to his mode of procedure. "The squadron under my command,"
he said, "has been in the blockade of Coron, Modon, and Navarino, and I
have to inform your excellencies that there yet exists in the port of
Navarino a naval force, under the Turkish flag, superior to the force
under my command. I have, therefore, felt it my duty to repair to this
port, in order that I may obtain instructions for my guidance, more
especially as the Turkish squadron is ready for sea, and said to be
destined for Candia, with ten thousand men, intending there to repeat
the barbarities which the want of provisions in the Morea renders it
impossible they can longer perpetrate in that quarter. There is also a
great number of captive women and children about to be transported as
slaves, and the only force of the allied powers off Navarino consists of
a small brig, the _Pelican_, which is totally inadequate to impede the
naval operations of the Turks. Under these circumstances, I beg to be
explicitly informed whether I am to consider that 'the armistice _de
facto_' continues, and if you have any doubt on the subject that you
will be pleased candidly to inform me, that I may not be led into error
and so increase the evils by doing anything in opposition to the
intentions of the allied powers."

That letter was answered by a personal visit from the members of the
Government, when Lord Cochrane was informed that the triumvirate was so
embarrassed by the demands of the allied powers for restitution on
account of piracies committed with its approval that it could neither do
nor sanction anything at all. He was told that even the scanty means
that he had had for supporting the fleet out of the revenues of the
islands could no longer be allowed to him, as every dollar that could
any how be collected would be required for other purposes.

Still, however, the Government expected him to continue his work, and he
was even asked to do work from which, both for his own honour and in the
interests of Greece, he felt bound to abstain. "I have received your
letter," he wrote to the Secretary, about ten days afterwards, from
Poros, "informing me that it is the desire of the Government that a
national vessel shall be despatched to Chios, in the event of my being
prevented from personally proceeding in the _Hellas_ to that island. In
reply to this intimation, I have to state to you that it is impossible
for me, consistently with the duties which I owe to Greece, to place the
national squadron, whilst it shall continue under my command, or any
part thereof, under circumstances to be treated by the ships-of-war of
the allied powers after the manner set forth in the letter of the 24th
of October, addressed by the three admirals to the Legislative
Assembly,--a determination which is even more painful to me than the
grief I feel at finding myself involved, notwithstanding all my
precautions, in the restrictions and penalties justly laid upon
privateers and pirates. I cannot trust myself to say more on this
subject, lest I should be led by my feelings to pass the bounds which I
prescribe to myself as an officer when treating of the conduct of the
Government which he serves. If Chios remains unprotected, if Candia is
deprived of the aid it might receive from the national marine, and if
the ships-of-war are incapacitated from extending the bounds of Greece,
I have the consolation of knowing that I have used my utmost endeavours
to prevent the evils I foresaw. One of these, however, I was far from
anticipating,--namely, that the revenues which I was authorised to
collect for the service of the marine would have been withdrawn from my
control and expended for other purposes; more particularly that sums so
diverted should be placed to the account of the marine, without the
objects for which they were employed having received my sanction or even
been known by me.

"I have struggled during eight months in the service of Greece against
difficulties far greater than all I ever encountered before; and I would
most willingly continue to contend with these, did I find the slightest
co-operation in any quarter. But, as the Government has withdrawn _de
facto_ the resources decreed, and the seamen decline to embark without
pay in advance, and the funds, arising from the philanthropy of other
European nations, which supplied the navy with the means of subsistence,
are wholly exhausted, I have no alternative but to lay the ships up in
port, until means to defray the expenses of the navy shall be found. I
have myself, during the last month, paid the Greeks in the naval
service; but whilst I see that even the share of prizes claimed by
Government is diverted from its proper use, I shall not continue to be
answerable for future expenses, nor for the liquidation of the just
claims of the foreign officers, which they have had the patience to
leave in arrears for many months."

It had come to this. Lord Cochrane had been devoting all his energies to
the service of Greece; and now he found himself deserted by his
employers, or only retained in the hope that he would be an unpaid agent
in piratical and lawless proceedings.

That last circumstance was to him the most painful of all. Having done
his utmost to restrain the piracy that was rife, he was still regarded
by the governing triumvirate as only the most powerful instrument for
achievements that were little better than piratical; and the same cruel
misrepresentation of his functions was common among his enemies in
England and other parts of Europe. Colour for this misrepresentation
appeared in the celebrated letter written by the three admirals on the
24th of October, which, describing the national fleet as a mere crowd of
"Greek corsairs," by implication included Lord Cochrane and his English
supporters in the same opprobrium. This had not at first been perceived
by him. On his detecting the insult, he wrote to the representatives of
the three powers three letters, which here need to be quoted in his
justification.

The first was addressed, on the 13th of December, to Captain Le Blanc,
commander of the _Junon_. "The silence respecting the regular forces
under my orders," he said, "observed in the letter of the admirals of
the mediating powers, dated October the 24th, 1827, appearing to make no
distinction between them and the mere pirates, hanging over both the
same accusations, and subjecting consequently the former to the
restrictions wisely adopted towards the latter, makes it my duty, both
towards the country which I serve, towards the officers under my
command, and towards myself, to protest publicly and in the face of
Europe, against the interpretations to which such a document seems to
give foundation. The detailed account of the conduct of those ships of
war which are under my immediate orders, and which compose the national
squadron of Greece, will prove that no neutral vessel whatever has been
seized, driven out of its course, or stopped by them under any pretext
whatever, with the exception of such as have broken the blockade of
Lepanto, the detention of which is legalized by the act above mentioned.
These facts are undeniable. The conduct of the officers of the national
squadron has been conformable, in all points, to the laws of nations and
to the instructions issued by the admirals, in their character of
representatives of the mediating Powers. No hostility has been committed
by the national vessels against the territory or the forces of the
Turco-Egyptian Government, placed beyond the prescribed limits of
Lepanto. But, if such be the state of things, I have the right of
sending on a mission, for the public service, ships of war beyond these
limits, and, availing myself of that right, I have despatched two (the
one to Corfu, and the other to Syra), the destination of which relates
to the finances of the navy. Be pleased, sir, to communicate the
contents of this letter to Admiral de Rigny, with whom you have
communicated verbally on the subject, and explain to him the propriety
of this step, to avoid explanations with which it is not necessary that
the public should intermix."

The second letter, dated the 5th of January, 1828, was to the commander
of the Russian frigate _Constantine_. "Although I am aware," wrote Lord
Cochrane, "that his excellency, Count Heyden, when he affixed his
signature to the letter of the Admirals, addressed to the Legislative
Assembly of Greece, dated the 24th of October, could not attest, of his
own knowledge, the truth of the imputations contained in the said
document; yet, as the public may not recollect that the recent arrival
of the Count precluded the possibility of his being in the slightest
degree acquainted with facts regarding the regular naval service under
my command, I expect from the Count, that so soon as he shall have
informed himself on the subject, he will take the necessary steps to
remove an evil impression which he unconsciously has contributed to
produce, and thus save me, in as far as the Count is concerned, the
necessity, always disagreeable, even of a satisfactory refutation of the
imputations cast upon me as Commander-in-Chief of the Greek fleet."

The third letter was to Commodore Hamilton, of the _Cambrian_, who had
been left by Sir Edward Codrington to represent the British squadron in
the Archipelago. "The Government of Greece having acquiesced in the
offer made by the three Powers to mediate in her behalf," wrote Lord
Cochrane, "it became my duty to obey the decision of the admirals
representing those Powers, when duly communicated. But whilst my
official situation demands acquiescence on points of a public nature, it
is far otherwise when the Admirals give reasons affecting the character
of the regular naval service of Greece, in justification of restrictions
imposed by them on the movements of the squadron I command, accompanied
by threats to destroy the Greek vessels of war, in order to prevent
asserted piracy. You, sir, who are accurately acquainted with facts, and
now possess ample means of ascertaining the truth here upon the spot,
must know, or may learn, that no neutral vessel has been seized or
disturbed in her course by the national squadron on the high seas, nor
any vessel detained, except those acting in violation of the blockades
acknowledged by these very Admirals. Is it not then extraordinary that
such limitations and menaces on false grounds should originate with
persons whose high official situations would seem to sanction imputation
under their signatures? I have told the French and Russian commanders,
and I hope you will assure the British Admiral, that I shall be loth to
trespass on public attention with explanations, to refute their joint
letter of the 24th of October, in justification of those under my
orders; but it will become me so to do unless a satisfactory
interpretation shall be given to expressions which, at present, seem
even more particularly personal to myself."

That was almost the last letter written by Lord Cochrane in Greece for
many months. Finding his position as First Admiral of the Greek navy,
without work to do or crews to direct, unbearable, he had resolved upon
a fresh expedient for attempting to improve the state of affairs. Before
that, however, he made a last attempt to gain support from the nominal
Government, and uttered a last protest against its mode of procedure. "I
have strenuously endeavoured," he wrote on the 18th of December, "to
avoid laying before you any complaint, more particularly concerning acts
done by your excellencies; but there is a point at which such
forbearance on my part would become a dereliction of my duty as an
officer in the service of Greece, amounting even to treason against the
State. So long as the evils extended no further than the depriving the
ships-of-war of their crews, and preventing the brulottes from being
equipped for service; so long as the injury occasioned by the granting
of numerous licences to privateers only prevented naval operations from
being carried on against the enemy, I remained silent. But now that the
conduct of those privateers has brought down upon the Greek nation a
threat of being placed out of the law of nations, and has involved the
national squadron, unmeritedly, in the disgrace attached to those who
have been guilty of unlawful acts, it is my duty to notify to your
excellencies that I consider all authorities given without my
intervention to armed vessels, of any description, for belligerent
purposes, to be illegal, and that I have given orders to the national
vessels under my authority to seize them, wherever they may be found,
that they may be judged according to the law of nations." "I have been
waiting with anxiety," he wrote in another letter, a few days later,
"for the occurrence of events which would have rendered it unnecessary
for me to enter into any correspondence with your excellencies on
pecuniary matters; but, unfortunately, my anticipations on this head
having been disappointed, and the squadron being without even the
provisions necessary for the maintenance of the few men required on
board the ships when at anchor, it has become an imperious duty no
longer to delay calling upon your excellencies to fulfil the engagement
entered into relative to the appropriation of two-thirds of the revenues
of the islands, which you have thought fit to apply to other purposes."

To neither letter was any satisfactory answer sent by the authorities,
and Lord Cochrane, after all his previous troubles, believed that none
would ever be obtained. He therefore suddenly resolved to leave Greece
for a time, to go himself to England and France, and there, by personal
communication with the leading Philhellenes, to describe the actual
condition of Greece, and to see if any better state of affairs could be
brought about. This resolution he announced on the 1st of January, 1828,
to Count Capodistrias, who, having been elected President of Greece
nearly nine months before, and having accepted that office, had not yet
thought fit to enter upon it or to do anything towards repairing the
shattered fortunes and retrieving the violated honour of the State of
which he was nominally the head.

"On my return home from Brazil," said Lord Cochrane, in this memorable
letter, "I was pressed by various friends of Greece to engage in the
service of a people struggling to free themselves from oppression and
slavery. My inclination was consonant to theirs. It was stipulated that,
for the objects in view, six steam-vessels should be rapidly built, and
that two old vessels of war, or Indiamen, should be purchased and manned
with foreign seamen. The engines for the steam-vessels were to be
high-pressure, these being the easiest constructed and managed; and two
American frigates, when finished, were also to be placed under my
authority. The failure of the engineer, through disgraceful ignorance or
base treachery, in the proper construction of the engines--the want of
funds to procure the old vessels of war or Indiamen with foreign
seamen--and the retention of one of the frigates built in North America,
deprived me of the whole of the stipulated force, except the _Hellas_.
It is needless to remark that with one frigate I was unable to effect
that which has since required eleven European ships of the line, aided
by many frigates and smaller vessels, to accomplish. Under these
circumstances, it became my duty to confine myself to desultory
operations, secretly conducted against the enemy.

"The difficulties I have had to contend with, even in these excursions,"
he continued, "can best be appreciated by the few foreign European
officers who accompanied me. The obstinate refusal of the Greek seamen
to embark or perform the smallest service without being paid in
advance--the contempt with which the elder portion of the seamen treated
every endeavour to promote regularity and maintain silence in exercising
the great guns and other evolutions, rendered their improvement
hopeless; and the enlistment of young seamen, whilst the old were
rejected, has been rendered extremely difficult by reason of the
influence of the latter, and by the prejudice excited against a regular
naval service by influential individuals, whose power and importance are
thereby diminished in the maritime islands. The frequent mutinies or
resistance to authority, and the numerous instances in which I have been
obliged to return to port or abstain from going to sea are recorded, as
to dates and circumstances, in the log-book of the _Hellas_, together
with the disgraceful conduct of the crew in the stripping and robbing of
prisoners, and their want of coolness in the presence of an
enemy--exemplified on our attacking a small frigate and a corvette near
Clarenza, and by the firing of upwards of four hundred round shot, on a
subsequent occasion, at the corvette now named _Hydra_, without hitting
the hull of that vessel four times, although she was within a hundred
yards of the _Hellas_. Such was the confusion excited by the contiguity
even of so inferior an enemy. It is not my intention to trouble you at
present with detail; yet I cannot suffer to pass unnoticed that certain
commanders, and the seamen of the majority of the fireships--in the use
of which vessels rested my last hopes--failed in their duty on the only
two important occasions when their services were required; once at
Alexandria in the presence of the enemy, as the brave Kanaris can well
testify; and again by the crews abandoning their duty and embarking in
privateers, many of them after having received pay in advance for their
services. Indeed--encouraged by privateering licenses--insubordination,
outrage, and piracy have arrived at such a pitch that these very
national fireships, stripped not only of their rigging, but of their
anchors and cables, are now drifting about the harbour of Poros. A
neutral boat, detained by the _Hellas_ for violation of blockade, has
been plundered by those sent in charge of her; and scarcely a vessel can
pass between the islands, or along the shore, without the passengers and
property being exposed to brutal violence and plunder. A darker period
is yet approaching if decisive measures are not adopted for the
suppression of outrages like these.

"I am ready to serve Greece, and to aid in any way in the accomplishment
of the arduous task you have undertaken; but, on the fullest
consideration of circumstances, I feel that I should practise a
deception were I to contribute to the belief that the few foreign
officers in the naval service can put a stop to these disorders, which
must finally involve the character of that very service, already
prematurely brought in question by the conduct of vessels unlawfully
commissioned by the temporary Government. I have, in consequence of this
opinion, come to the resolution to exert myself to procure adequate
means to execute the duties of an office in which my efforts hitherto
have been all counteracted; and I the more readily adopt this resolution
as, during the winter months, it is impossible to navigate the _Hellas_
in these narrow seas with a crew of young inexperienced Greek seamen,
and still more impracticable to manage her with old ones of Turkish
habits. I may, indeed, add that, until the communication addressed on
the 24th of October by the three admirals to the Legislative Assembly
shall be cancelled, it is hopeless to attempt any naval enterprise in
favour of Greece, even had Admiral de Rigny not super-added his commands
'that all Greek vessels, armed for war, found beyond twelve miles from
the shores of continental Greece, between Volo and Lepanto, shall be
destroyed.' I repeat that I have taken my determination, not from any
private feeling of disgust at the above disgraceful restrictions brought
by the temporary Government; nor from their misappropriation of the
revenues allotted to maritime purposes, and the consequent want of pay,
stores, and even provisions for the ships of war; nor from the painful
feeling that the crippled ships of the enemy are thereby enabled to
depart in security, dragging with them four thousand Grecian captives to
slavery; nor from the impossibility of reducing their maritime
fortifications, while the Greeks, unpunished, are the chief violators of
the blockade; but I have resolved to proceed to England without loss of
time, that I may render better service to Greece. If you aid me with
means, my object as to seamen will be ensured. Sober, steady men can be
obtained from the northern nations, who will do their duty, and, since
precept is useless, teach the Greeks by example. Then piracy may cease
and commerce may flourish. Be your intention in regard to the
steam-vessels still in England what it may, foreign seamen are
indispensable to the interests of Greece and to your own; and the
expense of bringing them here will be little increased if these
steamers, fitted under my inspection, shall become the means of their
conveyance. The hardship of a winter's voyage to the North, in a small
vessel, I shall deem amply repaid if I can accomplish these objects,
expose the injustice and impolicy of certain measures, and bring the
real wants of Greece to the knowledge of a liberal and enlightened
administration."

On the same New Year's Day Lord Cochrane wrote, explaining his
resolution, to Dr. Gosse, who, of all the Philhellenes in Greece, had
rendered him most efficient service in his thankless task, and most
zealously encouraged him, throughout a long series of failures for which
he was in no way answerable, to persevere in struggling for success. "My
dear friend and fellow-sufferer," he said, "in conformity with your wish
and opinion, I have tolerated my mental load of grievances until the new
year; but as it is essential to commence it well in order that measures
may prosper to the end, I have resolved to put my intention in
execution, regardless of the officious tongues of those of microscopic
views who may deem that my time might be well employed in balancing the
rivalships of barbarous seamen or protecting the movable stores of the
immovable _Hellas_. In my present state of official insignificance I
could render no other service. I have stated a few of my reasons in a
letter to Capodistrias, for his private information, when he shall
assume the office of president. I hope these will suffice, and that he
will communicate his desire, which shall be duly attended to."

In accordance with his new resolution, Lord Cochrane transferred the
command of the _Hellas_, and such control of the whole navy as was
possible, to Admiral Miaoulis. He left Poros in the little schooner
_Unicorn_, on the 10th of January, and arrived at Portsmouth on the 11th
of February. "The anxiety and disappointment," he said, writing to M.
Eynard from Portsmouth on the following day, "which I experienced in
regard to the steam-vessels and other means that were to have been
placed at my disposal are trifling, when compared to the distress I have
felt at finding my only remaining hope of rendering effectual service to
Greece destroyed by the impossibility of inducing the Greek seamen to
submit to the slightest restraint on their inclinations, or to render
the most trifling service without being paid in advance, or to perform
such service after being so paid, if it suited their interest or
convenience to evade the fulfilment of their engagement. More than six
crews have passed under my review on board the _Hellas_ in the course of
as many months, exclusive of those in other vessels, and,
notwithstanding all that has been written to praise the courage of the
Greek seamen, they are collectively the greatest cowards I have ever met
with. No service of any difficulty or danger can be undertaken with such
men without the greatest risk of being compromised by the confusion they
create, and the impossibility of causing orders to be obeyed. Indeed,
though styled Commander-in-Chief of the Greek Naval Forces, I have,
since the 12th of April last, when I hoisted my flag, been, in truth,
under the control of wild and frantic savages, whose acts are guided by
momentary impulses or heedless avidity to grasp some immediate pecuniary
or petty advantage, regardless of any prospect of future benefit,
however great, to their country or to themselves. To give you an idea of
the character of men suddenly emancipated from a state of the most
degrading and abject slavery, in which state cunning, deception, and
fraud, if not absolutely requisite, were convenient and profitable, of
their present arrogancy, ignorance, despotism, and cruelty, when safe
opportunity offers for revenge, would require that a diary should be
laid before you of events which have actually occurred. The confidence
you were pleased to repose in me, and the friendly offices for which I
am indebted to you would have imposed upon me the task of transmitting
to you such detail, had the state of my mind, harassed by constant
contrarieties, permitted.

"Leaving to a future period, then, minute recital of distressing
occurrences, permit me to make a few observations as to the course that
appears to be necessary to be pursued in order to save Greece from
impending ruin:--1st. The chief leaders of the different factions should
be removed from Greece,--those who have education, on missions to
different states, as envoys, consuls, etc., and the others, as
circumstances will permit. Else Greece will be a theatre of plunder and
discord whilst they hold authority or have means to interfere in public
affairs. 2ndly. Troops to the amount of four thousand, at least, are
required to enforce obedience to salutary laws and regulations. 3rdly.
Five hundred seamen from the northern nations of Europe or North America
are indispensable for the suppression of piracy and to prevent the
plunder of the islands. 4thly. Young Greek seamen should be employed by
the civilized nations in their vessels of war and commerce. 5thly. The
settlement of persons from all quarters of Europe, in numbers affording
mutual protection, should be encouraged. Of course education at home,
but more especially abroad, will improve the rising generation. For all
those people now at the age of maturity in Greece there is no hope of
amelioration. In regard to myself, I am ready, according to my
engagement, to render any service in my power to Greece, and I shall
feel great satisfaction if I am enabled to do so; but it is no part of
my contract to place myself under the control of lawless savages. What
might we not have done had the steam-vessels and five hundred good
seamen been employed in Greece, when, with these barbarians, we have
doubled the number of Greek national vessels of war, and destroyed twice
as many of the enemy's squadron? I hope the President Capodistrias will
not put his foot on shore in Greece, unless accompanied by a military
force. If he does, he will afford corroborative proof of the
impossibility of establishing a new order of things by the
instrumentality of men who feel interested in the continuance of ancient
habits and abuses."[12]

  [12] See Appendix.




CHAPTER XXII.

LORD COCHRANE'S OCCUPATIONS ON BEHALF OF GREECE IN LONDON AND
PARIS.--HIS SECOND LETTER TO CAPODISTRIAS.--HIS DEFENCE OF HIMSELF WITH
REFERENCE TO HIS VISIT TO WESTERN EUROPE.--HIS RETURN TO
GREECE.--CAPODISTRIAS'S PRESIDENCY AND THE PROGRESS OF GREECE.--LORD
COCHRANE'S RECEPTION BY THE GOVERNMENT.--THE SETTLEMENT OF HIS
ACCOUNTS.--HIS LETTER OF RESIGNATION.--THE FINAL INDIGNITIES TO WHICH HE
WAS SUBJECTED.--THE CORRESPONDENCE THEREUPON BETWEEN ADMIRAL HEYDEN AND
DR. GOSSE.--LORD COCHRANE'S DEPARTURE FROM GREECE.--HIS OPINIONS
REGARDING HER.--THE CHARACTER AND ISSUES OF HIS SERVICES TO THE GREEKS.

[1828-1829.]


Lord Cochrane's absence from Greece was longer and less advantageous
than he anticipated. Arriving in London on the 19th of February, 1828,
he found that the English Philhellenes were tired out by the bad faith
and the unpatriotic conduct of the Greeks, and that the English
Government, which he had hoped to influence so far as to obtain an
alteration in the Foreign Enlistment Act which would enable him to
secure the services of a well-trained force of British seamen, was
determined to give no help in the matter. He found, too, that the
steam-vessels yet to be furnished in accordance with the old contract
with Mr. Galloway were still unfinished, and that there would be no
little trouble and delay, added to all that had already been endured,
before their completion could be hoped for. Not disheartened, however,
he went almost immediately to Paris, there to see what could be expected
from the Philhellenes of the Continent.

"I have taken steps," he wrote to M. Eynard from Paris on the 2nd of
March, "to cause one of our small steam-vessels to be fitted with proper
engines, the expense of which I shall find means to defray. I hope the
President will favour me with a communication at an early date, at
least, to say whether he has means to pay and victual a few hundreds of
foreign seamen, and thus put my mind at rest. For he must depend on
foreign aid to support him in his government, protect commerce, and
enable a revenue to be derived from the latent resources of Greece. The
Greeks themselves will do nothing towards these objects; though there
will not be wanting individuals who will endeavour, for their personal
views, to persuade them to the contrary of this. My mind is not yet
sufficiently tranquil to give detailed reasons for my opinion that
things will not succeed in Greece without troops and other foreign aid;
but such time will prove to be the case."

"Were the three great powers," he said in another letter to M. Eynard,
dated the 17th of March, "pleased to aid the President with funds to a
small amount, they would accomplish more for their own benefit and that
of Greece, than by great fleets and armies. Four thousand troops, under
the Greek Government, and five hundred seamen, would terminate the
affair; but never will anarchy cease or piracy be put down, nor will
Capodistrias be secure, unless he has, under his own authority, the
means of enforcing obedience to the laws and regulations for the public
good by sea and land. I have told you that the Greek seamen cannot be
used to suppress piracy, and I may truly add that no Greeks of age to
bear arms can become soldiers, though they learn readily enough to
perform the military exercises. There neither is nor has yet been, since
my arrival in Greece, one single company--not even the marines, with
which so much pains was taken--that deserves the name of regular. Their
ideas are quite repugnant to everything that constitutes the military
character."

Lord Cochrane, who, it will be remembered, was chiefly instrumental in
the election of Count John Capodistrias as President of Greece in April,
1827, had hoped much from his government. His confidence was not a
little shaken by the long delay which the President had shown in
entering on his office, and when Capodistrias arrived, in Greece, only a
few days after Lord Cochrane's departure, his first acts were calculated
to shake that confidence yet more. He introduced many solid reforms; but
in other respects clung to the old and bad traditions of the people,
and, which was yet worse, allowed himself to be guided by some of the
worst placehunters and most skilful abusers of national power, whom he
ought to have most carefully avoided. Lord Cochrane began to perceive
this before he had been six weeks out of Greece. He yet hoped, however,
that wise counsels and good government would prevail, and he tendered
his advice, while he reported his own movements, in a second letter
which he addressed to Capodistrias.

"The information which your excellency must have acquired since your
arrival in Greece," he wrote to him on the 22nd of March, "may have
convinced you of the facts briefly touched on in the letter which I had
the honour to address to you on the 1st of January, and may also have
proved to you the impossibility, under existing circumstances, of my
rendering service to Greece, otherwise than by the course I have
pursued. Although, on my arrival in England, I was disappointed at
finding other ministers than those I expected in the counsels of his
Britannic Majesty, yet I had an opportunity of making facts known to
influential individuals in proof that the interests of England would be
best promoted by a liberal policy towards Greece, and by placing that
country, without loss of time, in the rank of an independent state,
having boundaries the most extensive that could be conceded. Since then,
I have had several conversations here with the gentlemen of the Paris
Greek Committee, and I have advised them to assure the ministers that
large naval and military armaments are not required for the expulsion of
the Turkish and Egyptian forces from Greece, or to protect that country
from farther attempts at invasion by the before-mentioned powers; that
for the speedy regulation of the internal affairs of Greece, and the
support of your authority, it would be far preferable and infinitely
less costly for the mediating powers to place in your hands the means of
maintaining four or five thousand troops, together with five hundred
seamen, and apply a portion of the vast sums they will save to the
education of the rising generation of Greeks abroad and at home, and to
the encouragement of whatever will tend to direct the talent and genius
of the young people most speedily into the course which will entitle
Greece to rank amongst the civilized nations of Europe. Whether this
advice shall be listened to or not, I am satisfied that my opinion is
correct, and that a multitude of foreign troops, in the pay of rival
foreign nations, would contribute less to the objects these nations
profess to have in view than a much smaller force under your own
authority, more especially when it is considered that these troops could
in no way interfere with the internal arrangement and police of the
country, unless by usurping, or at least superseding the authority which
ought to be exclusively vested in your excellency as chief of the Greek
Government. Besides, knowing, as I do, the jealous character of your
countrymen, the facility with which they listen to surmises and reports,
the diversity of interests amongst the rival chiefs, and the intrigues
practised by base and worthless individuals, I have little doubt but
that such mixture of troops of different nations would give rise to a
state of anarchy more injurious to Greece than that which at present
exists. Whether such anarchy might be prevented by one nation alone
taking upon itself the internal arrangement of Greece seems doubtful;
for, to enforce laws, however just and necessary, by troops in foreign
pay, against the opinion and habits of a people who have no just notion
of the reciprocal duties of civilized society, would be in their
estimation to erect a military despotism, and would call forth
resistance on their part even to the most salutary changes. I have also
recommended, as an additional security against a multitude of evils, an
immediate demarkation of the boundaries of Greece, or, at least, an
acknowledgment of your excellency as President. The outfit of two or
three steam-vessels still unfinished is going on, and I shall find means
to accomplish this object in a way that will render them equal if not
superior in velocity to most of the steamboats in general use. But, as
no pecuniary means could be obtained in England to procure seamen and
purchase provisions, coals, and other necessaries, I came to Paris, in
the hope that the Greek Committee might enable me to give orders
regarding these arrangements, so indispensable to the navigating of
these vessels to Greece. The Paris Committee, however, intimate that
they have no funds; and the Chevalier Eynard assures me that the moneys
collected by him are exhausted. I therefore await with anxiety your
answer to the letter which I had the honour to address to you previous
to my departure from Greece."

No answer came from Capodistrias. He sent a message to Lord Cochrane
asking him to sell him the little _Unicorn_, which had conveyed him to
England, but said nothing about his own return. Believing that the
allied powers would do for him all that was necessary in naval
resistance of Turkey, he was not sorry to be deprived of an associate in
the actual service of Greece as powerful as Lord Cochrane.

This Lord Cochrane began to suspect. "Everything is arranged regarding
the engines for the two steamboats," he said in a letter to M. Eynard,
on the 24th of March; "but circumstances do not enable me to accomplish
more, especially without the sanction of the President, from whom I
shall no doubt shortly hear on the subject;--unless, indeed, he shall be
persuaded by the primates of the islands that he can do better without a
regular naval force, or, at least, without me, which I know is the
opinion of Konduriottes, and also of Mavromichales, the great licenser
and patron of pirates, so loudly and justly complained of. I am very
low, and do not feel at all well. I cannot free myself from the
oppression of spirits occasioned by seeing everything in the lamentable
state in which all must continue in Greece, unless some effectual steps
are taken to put an end to the intrigues and rivalships headed by
unprincipled chiefs and backed by their savage followers. Believe me,
that there is nothing I will leave undone to serve the cause. But it is
essential that more time shall not be wasted in endeavouring to
accomplish objects of vital importance by inadequate means."

While Lord Cochrane was endeavouring to hasten the arrangements for his
return to Greece, he was annoyed by a letter forwarded to him by Sir
Francis Burdett. The letter was from Andreas Luriottis, one of the two
Greek deputies who had requested Lord Cochrane, two years and a half
before, to enter the service of Greece, and who now claimed a
restitution of the 37,000l. paid to him, on the plea that by leaving
Greece he had broken his contract.

"Before writing to Sir Francis," said Lord Cochrane in the indignant
letter which he addressed to this person on the 20th of April, "you
ought to have informed yourself of facts and circumstances. You might
have learnt that I continued to serve until the Greek Government had
assumed to themselves the powers vested in me, as naval
commander-in-chief, to regulate the distribution of armed vessels, and
until they had covered the seas with piratical craft. You might have
informed yourself that I remained at my post until the neutral admirals
refused to hold communication with a Government which had so
misconducted itself, and with which they considered it would have been
disgraceful to correspond, even on subjects of a public nature. You
might have informed yourself that I remained on board the _Hellas_ until
the temporary Government had sold and applied to other purposes the
revenues of the islands allotted for the maintenance of the regular
naval service, and deprived me of the means to satisfy the claims of the
officers and seamen; that I continued until the seamen had abandoned the
frigate, plundered the fireships, and fitted out pirate vessels before
my eyes--all which I had no power to punish or means to prevent. If you
or others infer that my endeavours in the cause of Greece are to be
judged by naval operations carried on against the enemy by open force,
you are mistaken. It is essential that you hold in mind that there are
no naval officers in Greece who are acquainted with the discipline of
regular ships of war, that the seamen would submit to no restraint, that
they would not enlist for more than one month, that they would do
nothing without being paid in advance, nor continue to serve after the
expiration of the short period for which they were so paid, that by this
determination of the seamen the _Hellas_ was detained for months in port
or occupied in collecting amongst the islands paltry means to satisfy
their demands, and that at last, when money was found, half the period
of the seamen's engagement was consumed in proceeding even to the
nearest point at which hostile operations could be carried on, whence it
became necessary to return almost at the moment of our arrival. It is
not for me to speak, except when I am attacked, of the services I have
rendered both in my professional capacity and otherwise. Those who were
in Greece knew my exertions to reconcile the National Assemblies in
April, 1827, to suppress the animosity amongst the chiefs and save the
country from civil discord. They know that I doubled the national marine
by captures from the enemy. They know that by desultory operations I
paralysed the efforts of fleets we could not oppose. They know that the
attack on Vasiladi and Lepanto, in September last, induced the Turkish
and Egyptian fleets to follow to that quarter, in violation of the
armistice, and that this act produced their rencontre and dispute with
the British admiral, and ultimately led to the destruction of those
fleets in the port of Navarino."

A few days after writing that letter, Lord Cochrane returned to London
from Paris, where he had been staying for nearly two months, in frequent
communication with the members of the Philhellenic Committees of that
city and of other parts of the Continent. The growing dissatisfaction
which the bad conduct of the Greeks had awakened in many of their best
friends, and still more the silence of Capodistrias, prevented his doing
all that he had hoped to do. He succeeded, however, in exciting some
fresh interest, and found that one of the steamboats, at any rate, the
_Mercury_, was at length in a fair way of completion, though this and
its subsequent equipment were only effected by an advance of two
thousand pounds, which he himself made. This was the business which took
him to London, where he was busily employed during May and the first few
days of June. He then went back to Paris for nearly three months more,
and made further efforts, though in vain, to procure the substantial
assistance for Greece on which his heart was set. As soon as the
_Mercury_ was ready for sea, he directed that she should proceed to
Marseilles, where she arrived on the 13th of September: on the 18th,
determined to make the best use of her in his power, he again set sail
for Greece.

He reached Poros on or near the last day of September. He found that the
internal arrangements of Greece had wonderfully improved. Capodistrias
during the last eight months had been ruling with an iron hand over all
those districts which the previous conquests of the Turks and Egyptians
had not taken out of his control, and all those conquests were just then
being finally abrogated. The full effects of the battle of Navarino were
now appearing. Ibrahim Pasha, having deported many of his troops to
Alexandria, chiefly because there was not food enough to be found for
them in the Morea, had refused to surrender his authority or to abandon
any of the numerous fortresses of which he was master. The President,
with Sir Richard Church and the worn-out refuse of the so-called army
for his only support, could do nothing to expel him; but he gladly
accepted the proffered aid of France. In compliance with a protocol
signed on the 19th of July, fourteen thousand soldiers, under General
Maison, had landed at Petilidi, on the 30th of August, and within a week
Ibrahim had been forced to sign a convention pledging himself to prompt
evacuation of the peninsula. Half of the residue of his army quitted
Navarino on the 16th of September; the rest was preparing to depart at
the time of Lord Cochrane's arrival, and actually started on the 5th of
October. The ensuing weeks were worthily employed by the French army in
clearing out the pestilential garrisons and making it possible for
wholesome rule to succeed to the seven weary years of strife.

Thus the primary work which Lord Cochrane had been engaged to do, and
which he vainly strove to do under the miserable circumstances of his
position, had been effected by others. The Ottoman fleets had been
dispersed and destroyed, and, as far as they were concerned, Greece was
free at last. There was work yet to be done, troublesome but most
important work, in converting the disorderly and piratical vessels and
crews which constituted the navy of Greece into an efficient agent for
protecting the State and extending its boundaries. This, in spite of all
his previous annoyances, Lord Cochrane was prepared to do, if the Greeks
were willing. But they did not will it. Capodistrias had laid his plans
for governing Greece, and for their performance he had no need of a
foreigner as wise and honest as Lord Cochrane. The plans were not
altogether reprehensible. At starting they were perhaps the best that
could be adopted. The new President--the President whom Lord Cochrane
had nominated as the likeliest man to beat down the factions and
override the jealousies that had hitherto wrought such grievous mischief
to Greece--began by acting up to the anticipations which had induced his
selection. Schooled in Italy and Russia, he practised both tortuous
diplomacy and straightforward tyranny in attempting to turn divided
Greece into a united nation, in which a hundred rival claimants for
power should be made humble instruments of the authority of their one
master. Thereby the State was enabled to assert its existence, and it
was made possible for good government to be introduced. When, however,
the time came for inaugurating that good government, Capodistrias sought
to continue the method of rule which, if allowable at first, was no
longer right or likely to succeed. Young Greece was to be kept in
subjection for his own aggrandisement and for the aggrandisement of his
few favourites and advisers. These favourites and advisers were the
leaders of the old Phanariot party, Prince Mavrocordatos and his
brother-in-law Mr. Trikoupes; men whose policy Lord Cochrane had opposed
on his first arrival in Greece, and who accordingly became even more
inimical to himself than he was to their purposes and plans.

Therefore it was that, when Lord Cochrane returned to Greece in the
autumn of 1828, he was coldly received and his offers of further
service, though not openly rejected, were not accepted. Throughout ten
weeks he was treated with contemptuous indifference, or formal
compliments, the hollowness of which was transparent. On his arrival,
the President found it difficult to grant him an interview. When that
interview was granted, the only subject allowed to be discussed was the
accuracy of the accounts that had been drawn up by Dr. Gosse as
Commissary-General of the Fleet, during the nine months of the previous
year in which Lord Cochrane had been in active service. Nearly two
months were spent in tedious and vexatious examination of these
accounts, and correspondence thereupon, ending, however, in the partial
satisfaction which Lord Cochrane derived from the knowledge that, after
the most searching investigation, they were admitted to be correct in
every particular.

More than once, during this waiting time, Lord Cochrane threatened to
leave Greece immediately, without waiting for the settlement of the
accounts. He was only induced to remain, and submit to the insults
offered to him, by the consideration that his hasty departure might
cause an indefinite postponement of this settlement, and so prove
injurious to his subordinates if not to himself. This being done,
however, he lost no time in resigning his office as First Admiral of
Greece; and that measure was accompanied by a rare exhibition of
generosity. "The direct and active interference of the great European
powers having decided the glorious contest for the freedom of Greece,"
he said in a letter to Count Capodistrias, written at Poros, on the 26th
of November, "and its independence being formally acknowledged by
accredited agents from these powers, no means now present themselves to
me whereby I can professionally promote the interests of this hitherto
oppressed people. I beg, therefore, that I may be permitted as an
individual to alleviate their burdens by presenting the State with my
share as Admiral of the corvette _Hydra_, and schooner-of-war
_Athenian_, captured from the enemy; and further by absolving the State
from any and every obligation whereby the sum of 20,000l. was to be paid
to me on the acknowledgment of the independence of this country. If your
excellency shall be pleased, conjointly with the National Assembly, to
appropriate any part of the said amount to the relief of the seamen
wounded, and of the families of those who have fallen during the
contest, it will be a high gratification to my feelings, and I hope will
be admitted as a testimony of my satisfaction at the introduction of
useful institutions, and of the pleasure I experience at the rapid
advancement towards order which has taken place even during the short
period of your excellency's presidency. I have only to add that, if at
any future time your excellency shall deem my services useful, I shall
be delighted at an opportunity to prove my zeal for the welfare of
Greece, more fully than circumstances have heretofore permitted."

The President's reply, dated the 4th of December, was complimentary:
"The Government of Greece," he said, "thanks you, my lord, for the
services you have rendered, and for the new proof of your interest and
your benevolence which you have shown in your letter of the 26th of
November. As you observe, Greece having been taken under the protection
of the great Powers of Europe, the Provisional Government can engage in
no warlike operation worthy of your talents and your station. It
regrets, therefore, that it cannot offer you an opportunity of giving
further proof of the noble and generous sentiments which animate you in
favour of Greece. The Government will make it its duty to convey to the
National Congress your offer to cede your rights in the corvette _Hydra_
and the schooner _Athenian_, and in the 20,000l. which Greece was to pay
you on the acknowledgment of her independence. It doubts not that the
Congress will value at its true worth all the nation's debt to you, and
that it will adopt the measures which you propose for succouring the
families of the Greek seamen who have fallen in the war. The future of
Greece is in the hands of God and of the Allied Powers. You have taken
part in her restoration, and she will reckon you, with sentiments of
profound gratitude, among her first and generous defenders."

A day had not passed, however, before Lord Cochrane had fresh proof of
the worthlessness of that pretended gratitude. Information having
reached Messrs. J. and S. Ricardo, the contractors for the Greek loan of
1825, that the new Government contemplated repudiating the debt, they
had written to Lord Cochrane, begging him to bring the matter before
Capodistrias, and represent to him the injustice to the stock-holders
and the discredit to Greece that would result from such an act. Lord
Cochrane, accordingly, had an interview with the President and his two
chief advisers on the 5th of December, when this subject was discussed,
and, though the repudiation was only threatened, attempts were made to
justify it on the plea that the 2,000,000l. forming the loan had nearly
all been squandered in England and America, much having disappeared in
unexplained ways, the rest having been absorbed in ship-building and
engine-making, from which Greece had derived no benefit. Both in the
personal interview and in a long letter which he addressed to the
President on the following day, Lord Cochrane indignantly resented the
proposed repudiation. He admitted that there had been gross
mismanagement, but showed that the chief blame for this attached to the
Greek deputies, Orlando and Luriottis, who had been sent to England to
raise the money and to see that it was properly expended, but who, as
was well known, had sought only their own advantage and enjoyment, and,
pilfering themselves, had allowed others to pilfer without restraint. He
urged that the innocent holders of the Greek stock ought not to suffer
on this account, and showed also, that, if there had been great abuse of
the loan, it had enabled the Greeks to tide over their worst time of
trouble. "Your excellency must be aware," he wrote, "that there was no
war-ship belonging to the State which was not bought, taken, or obtained
by the aid of this loan, and that all the guns, mortars, powder, and
other military stores which served to maintain the liberties of Greece
during these later years were chiefly procured by help of this same
fund. It enabled you to carry on the war until independence was secured
by the intervention of the Allied Powers."

The debt was not repudiated; but Lord Cochrane's arguments for its
acknowledgment gave an opportunity for exhibition of the long-smothered
jealousy with which he was regarded by the counsellors of Capodistrias,
if not by Capodistrias himself. The exhibition certainly was
contemptible. As Lord Cochrane was about to leave Greece--and, indeed,
eager to do so--the spite could only be shown in the arrangements made
for his departure.

Having transferred the _Mercury_, which brought him out, to the
President, Lord Cochrane had to ask for a vessel to take him from Egina,
where he was then staying, to the Ionian Islands, or, if he could not
there find suitable conveyance, to Toulon or Marseilles. The brig
_Proserpine_ was grudgingly placed at his disposal. "I pray you, my
lord," wrote Mavrocordatos, on the 8th of December, "if you are obliged
to take her to Toulon or Marseilles, not to detain her at Navarino or
Zante, but to enable her to return with as little delay as possible to
her work on the shores of Western Greece." Lord Cochrane accordingly
embarked in this vessel on the 10th. No sooner was he on board, however,
than he found himself treated with studied rudeness by her captain,
Manoli Bouti, "exposed," as he said, "to privations and insults that
would not be allowed in the conveyance of convicts." He had to put in at
Poros on the same evening, and thence address a complaint to the
Government, then lodged in that island. Four days passed before he
received a written answer to his letter, and then it conveyed nothing
but a formal intimation that another captain would be appointed in lieu
of the obnoxious officer.

Many personal communications, however, had passed in the interval, by
which was confirmed the suspicion formed by Lord Cochrane from the
first, that the captain's misconduct had been dictated by his superiors,
and that it had been a preconceived plan to try and send the First
Admiral of Greece--for both title and functions still belonged to
him--from her shores with every possible degradation. He naturally
resented this indignity. He claimed that, while he remained in Greece,
and until his office of First Admiral was abrogated, he should be
treated with the respect due to his rank. All he asked, he urged, was
that he might be allowed to leave Greece at once, if with such show of
honour from the people whom he had done his best to serve, as would free
him from insult and the Government from disgrace. "I assure your
excellency," he wrote to the President, "that I regret the occurrence of
any circumstance that occasions uneasiness to you; but I believe that,
on reflection, you will clearly perceive that all which has occurred has
been the work of others, whose acts I could neither control nor foresee.
I waive my right to insist at present on any explicit recognition of my
authority, and, though there is ample justification for my seeking more
than I desire, all that I demand of your excellency is, for the sake of
Greece, not to suffer, not to sanction your ministers in an endeavour to
force me on to public explanations, by persevering in the scandalous
line of conduct which they pursue. Surely your excellency cannot be
aware of the importance which naval men attach to the continuance of the
insignia of office, whilst actually embarked within the limits of their
station, or you would not for an instant tolerate the attempt made to
degrade me in the estimation of the high authorities and numerous
officers here present in the port of Poros. I respectfully await your
excellency's official commands and warrant to strike my flag; not
founded on reasonings or on assumptions, which may prove fallacious or
incorrect; but dictated in explicit terms, such as an officer can, such
as he ought to obey."

That Lord Cochrane was not fighting with a shadow, appears from a letter
addressed to Dr. Gosse, on the 15th of December, by Count Heyden, then
commanding the _Azoff_, as representative of Russia in the bay of Poros.
"As the affairs of etiquette are delicate," he said, "I beg that you
will inform me whether his lordship is still serving as First Admiral of
Greece, or whether he has received his _conge_. If he is still in her
service and employ, I shall rejoice to render him all the honours due to
his rank. In the other case, I will pay him all the honours, except the
salute of cannon. I beg that you will favour me with an answer, in order
that I may show his lordship all the honour that is due to him."

Dr. Gosse's answer, though longer than Admiral Heyden expected, claims
to be here quoted, as it furnished an important tribute to Lord
Cochrane's worth, and was all the more valuable in that the Russian
officer, glad to do all in his power to render homage to a man whom the
Greek Government was now treating with childish insolence, made it his
own by publishing it in the naval archives of Russia. "Lord Cochrane,"
wrote Dr. Gosse, "having arrived in Greece in March 1827, was, in the
National Assembly at Troezene, elected First Admiral and
Commander-in-Chief of the Naval Forces of Greece, with independent and
unlimited powers. Subsequently, and after the election of Count
Capodistrias as President, the Assembly decided that the admiral should
be under the authority of the Government until the arrival of the
President. During the year 1827, Lord Cochrane fulfilled his duties with
all the zeal, all the accuracy, and all the talent for which he is
renowned; but he found it impossible to achieve anything of importance,
isolated as he was, without sufficient funds, and without support from
others, except that of the Philhellenic Committees, and without the
co-operation of the Greeks themselves. At length, having pledged himself
not to interfere in internal politics, he considered his presence in
Greece useless until a firm Government could be organized, and deemed
that he could render best service to the nation by advocating its
interests in Western Europe. He departed early in January, after during
two months vainly awaiting the arrival of Count Capodistrias, whom he
informed of his expedition, and asked for instructions. He returned to
France and England, used all the means in his power to obtain fresh aid
for Greece, fitted out one of the steamboats that were being prepared in
London, took steps for the completion of the other two, and, after
writing a second letter to the President--which, like the first one,
received no answer--returned to Greece, resolved to devote himself to
her cause. He was received with coldness and indifference; neither
lodging, nor provisions, nor employment were offered to him. He asked
that his accounts might be examined: ignorant or evil-minded
commissioners were entrusted with their investigation, and the
Government only took it in hand very tardily. Objections and disputes,
difficulties and contradictions, accumulated, and it was only after a
delay of sixty days that his accounts were publicly and officially
declared to be correct. All that while he remained like a private person
on board his steamboat, manned only by six sailors. In all the audiences
that he had with the President, he asked for instructions as to the
position and work that he should assume; but he could never receive any
definite answer. During one interview which he had with Prince
Mavrocordatos on board the _Mercury_, in the port of Poros, on the 1st
of December, the anniversary of the coronation of the Emperor of Russia,
he announced his intention of hoisting his flag on board one of the
national vessels as a public compliment to that sovereign, and asked M.
Mavrocordatos to inform the President of that intention; but he received
no answer. He had during this period received numerous letters from the
Government addressed to him as First Admiral and Commander-in-Chief of
the Naval Forces of Greece. He afterwards went to Egina with Messrs.
Trikoupes and Mavrocordatos, to receive a part of the money due to him,
and to hand over to the Commission of Marine the steamboat _Mercury_.
That done, he was embarked in a national vessel, a miserable brig which
had been seized as contraband, badly repaired, which had been sent to
convey him to Navarino, Zante, Toulon, or Marseilles. This vessel was
under the orders of a Hydriot brulotteer, an ignorant and coarse man,
who, long before, at the expedition against Alexandria, had acted in
direct violation of the admiral's orders; and the crew was on a par with
the captain. Lord Cochrane was insolently received by these people. No
place of safety was found for his baggage and his money; no food was
provided even for the voyage from Egina to Poros, where Lord Cochrane
wished to take leave of the President. At Poros the captain repeated his
insults. Lord Cochrane requested the President to dismiss him, but
received no answer. M. Trikoupes even came on board and declared that
the captain should continue his voyage and proceed to his destination.
Lord Cochrane then said that he would be master on board a vessel from
whose mast floated his admiral's flag, and that he would yield to
nothing but the written orders of the President, in order, as he said,
that he might protect himself from the insolence of servants of the
Government who sought to annoy him by their exhibition of paltry
jealousy, or to force him into a quarrel with the President. The day
before yesterday, in the afternoon, he had an interview with the
President, and, Messrs. Trikoupes and Mavrocordatos being present, he
openly pointed out to him the intrigues of these officials and the
dangers of the course in which they were leading him. Warmly, and with
the boldness of a good conscience, he exposed their policy and expressed
his views upon the organization of the Greek navy. He then repeated his
wish to depart as soon as possible, although he declared himself willing
at any future time to serve Greece if she had need of him. He also
announced that he would at once take down his flag of authority if the
President officially and directly required it, but that, if any charges
were brought against him, he should be compelled to remain in Greece
until he had exculpated himself before the nation and obtained the
punishment of the unworthy servants of the President, for whom
personally he declared that he had a profound respect, while he
commiserated his difficult and painful position. In this interview Lord
Cochrane appeared to me to have a great advantage over his antagonists.
Yesterday the admiral's flag was still floating. In the evening the
President wrote him a letter in vague terms and contributing nothing to
the end he had in view. This morning Lord Cochrane, in his reply, has
again asked for authority to lower his flag, if that is the will of the
President; but no orders have been received. This precise statement of
facts which have come under my own knowledge will, I think, make it easy
for your excellency to arrive at conclusions comporting with the laws of
etiquette."

"I have read your letter with pleasure and with pain," wrote Admiral
Heyden in answer on the same day; "for I am certain that Lord Cochrane
must have suffered greatly from the treatment to which he has been
exposed. In proof of my esteem I beg that he will send back to their
kennels these miserable causes of his annoyance, and proceed to Malta,
or to Zante if he wishes, in one of my corvettes, taking with him as
large a suite as he likes. It cannot be too numerous. As regards his
salute, I shall receive him with the honours due to his rank and with
musical honours; and at his departure I will man the yards; but the
salute of guns I cannot give him, as he is not in naval authority.
Vice-Admiral Miaoulis never received from me the honours which I offer
to Lord Cochrane. I did not man the yards and did not give him a salute.
I hope I shall have the pleasure of seeing his lordship, and that I can
provide him a passage more agreeable than that proposed for him by
Greece."

Not content with sending that friendly message to Lord Cochrane, Admiral
Heyden took prompt occasion to reprove Capodistrias for his unworthy
conduct. Capodistrias thereupon used the influence of Dr. Grosse in
bringing about at any rate a formal reconciliation between himself and
Lord Cochrane, the result of which was that the latter received the
official discharge that he desired, and even an offer to find him in
another ship a better passage than he could have expected on board the
_Proserpine_. Lord Cochrane, however, preferred to accept Admiral
Heyden's more generous invitation. "It is gratifying," he said in a
letter to Dr. Grosse on the 18th of December,[13] "that even the
authority to which wicked men refer in proof of the rectitude of evil
deeds fails to sanction infamous conduct. Alas! if Capodistrias
suffers--and he seems not inclined to oppose--I say, if he suffers the
base intrigues of the Phanar to be introduced as the means of ruling a
nation, Greece must fall back, if not into a darker state, yet into a
worse condition, inasmuch as suspended anarchy is preferable to civil
war."

  [13] Dr. Gosse had remained in Greece during Lord Cochrane's absence,
  and he continued to reside in Greece for a few months after his friend's
  final departure. He won for himself much gratitude, not only by his
  zealous work in war time, but by the skill and patience with which he
  sought to reduce the plague which raged in Greece in 1827 and 1828. Two
  proofs of the popularity which he fairly won are as follows. The first,
  dated the 17th of June, 1828, was signed by twenty-three leading
  inhabitants of Poros.

  "Nous citoyens de Poros, reconnaissant dans la personne de M. le Docteur
  Louis Andre Gosse, un homme anime du philhellenisme le plus sincere et
  doue de vertus eminentes, considerant son zele ardent et infatigable
  pourtant en ce qui concerne le bien de la patrie et pour la cause sacree
  de la Grece et en particulier temoins des soins philanthropiques qu'il a
  prodigues aux indigens, persuades d'autre part que ses qualites rares
  contribueront a l'amelioration de la morale du peuple Grec, et animes du
  desir d'attacher a notre Ile cette homme vertueux; d'une voix unanime et
  d'un accord commun concedons le droit de bourgeoisie au susdit M. L. A.
  Gosse, pour qu'il jonisse dorenavant du titre et des droits de citoyen
  Poriote indigene. En foi de quoi nous lui avons delivre la presente."

  The other document was issued by President Capodistrias on the 23rd of
  February, 1829.

  "La lettre que vous venez de m'adresser, datee du 21 Fevrier, et les
  comptes qu'elle renferme, sont une nouvelle preuve du zele et de
  l'extreme exactitude, par laquelle vous vous etes toujours montre digne
  de la confiance des amis genereux de la Grece.

  "Je n'ai pas besoin de vous repeter combien la nation sait apprecier les
  services que vous lui avez rendus, et combien de reconnaissance je vous
  dois en particulier. C'est a mon instance que vous avez prolonge d'un an
  votre sejour en Grece. Dans cet espace, et surtout dans l'ete dernier,
  la peste et les maladies qui vinrent augmenter nos malheurs et nos
  souffrances, vous ont fourni l'occasion de co-operer par un noble
  denouement a l'accomplissement des mesures sanitaires qui a l'aide de la
  Providence ont conjure les manx majeurs, dont la Patrie etait menacee.

  "Maintenant vous devez remplir des desirs qui honorent vos sentiments,
  vous allez retourner dans votre heureuse patrie, aupres de votre mere.
  Mes voeux vous y accompagneront, je vous souhaite toute sorte de
  bonheur. La Grece ne peut dans ce moment vous exprimer d'autre maniere
  sa reconnaissance, mais un jour viendra, je l'espere, dans lequel elle
  le pourra et son Gouvernement s'empressera alors d'acquitter sa dette
  envers vous, ainsi qu'envers les autres etrangers, qui sincerement et
  genereusement ont servi sa cause sacree.

  "Lorsque vos affaires et vos interets le permettront, vous vous
  occuperez toujours du bien de la Grece; vous lui serez toujours utile
  partout ou vous vous trouverez; mais si vous voulez lui etre utile plus
  directement, revenez encore au milieu d'un peuple qui vous connait et
  qui vous aime, et son gouvernement se hatera de vous mettre a meme de
  lui rendre encore de grands services.

  "Recevez en attendant l'expression de ces sentiments, avec l'assurance
  de la consideration le plus distinguee."

Those prognostications proved correct. Capodistrias, allowing others to
direct him in ways of bad government, entered on a policy which very
soon led to his assassination--to be followed by the milder rule of King
Otho.

On the 20th of December Lord Cochrane left Poros in the Russian corvette
_Grimachi_, honourably placed at his disposal by Admiral Heyden, and
proceeded to Malta. There he was worthily received by the British
admiral, Sir Pulteney Malcolm, who offered him immediate conveyance to
Naples in the _Racer_, or, in a week's time, a passage direct to
Marseilles in the _Etna_. Believing that thus he would save time, he
chose the former alternative. From Naples, however, he found it
impossible to proceed to Marseilles, and he was obliged, on the 29th of
January, to embark in an English merchant vessel to Leghorn. Eleven days
were spent in the short voyage, and on reaching Leghorn he had to submit
to fifteen days' quarantine before being allowed to proceed to Paris,
there to rejoin his family. The whole journey occupied nearly ten weeks.

From Leghorn he wrote on the 15th of February to Chevalier Eynard
respecting Greece and her still unfortunate condition. "Civilization and
internal order," he said, "can make no steady progress in Greece unless
the Government can be supported otherwise than by the present bands of
undisciplined, ignorant, and lawless savages. Under existing
circumstances, Greeks who have attained the age of maturity are
incapable of military organization. You have long known my opinion as to
the necessity of sending foreign troops to Greece to maintain order. You
know that I preferred Swiss or Bavarian soldiers to those of the great
pacificating powers, because the latter cannot, with propriety,
interfere in matters of police, whilst paid by foreign countries. It is
now, however, too late to send small military establishments, such as
would have sufficed on the arrival of Capodistrias, because _now_ they
would be considered as oppressors; _then_ they would have been received
as allies and friends. The alternatives that may be pursued in the
conduct relative to Greece now are, to let the Revolution work itself
out, as in South America, or to leave six regiments in the country until
the young men who are abroad shall be educated and the rising generation
at home shall be somewhat civilized. It is of no use to attempt to do
good by half measures under the present circumstances of Greece.
Kolokotrones is ready, on the spot, to take possession of Patras the
moment it is evacuated. Petro-Bey, who has been prosecuted in the Court
of Admiralty for piracy, is prepared to avenge himself by taking
authority in Maina. Konduriottes, Zaimes, and all the other chiefs,
anxiously await the meeting of the Assembly, which they hail as the
final hour of the President's authority. Capodistrias's ministers, too,
who are no fools, but, on the contrary, cunning men, undoubtedly have
similar views, for they have taken every means to discredit, disgust,
and drive away every foreigner who, by his conduct, counsel, or friendly
intimation, could avert the evil. Thus things are fast tending towards a
discreditable close of the President's administration."

"Thank God," wrote Lord Cochrane three months later, on the 17th of May,
to Dr. Gosse, who, in the interval, had also left Greece, "we are both
clear of a country in which there is no hope of amelioration for half a
century to come; unless, indeed, immigration shall take place to a great
extent, under some king, or competent ruler, appointed and supported by
the Governments of the mediating powers. The mental fever I contracted
in Greece has not yet subsided, nor will it probably for some months to
come."

Lord Cochrane might well be suffering from a mental fever. Nearly four
years of his life had been spent in efforts to serve Greece, and with
very poor result. To himself the issue had been wholly unfortunate; even
the pecuniary recompense to which he was entitled having been so reduced
as not to meet the expenses to which he had been put, partly through his
generous surrender of the 20,000l. which he was to receive on completion
of the work, partly through the depreciation of the Greek stock in
which, out of sympathy for the cause, he had invested the 37,000l. paid
to him on his engagement.

And to Greece the issues had been far less beneficial than he had hoped.
The tedious and wanton delays to which he had been subjected at
starting, whereby that starting was prevented for a year and a half, had
hindered his arrival in Greece till it was too late for him to do much
of the work that he had planned. The want of money, and, still more, the
want of patriotism, courage, and even common honesty on the part of
nearly all the leaders with whom he was to co-operate, and the officers
and crews whom he was to command, had caused his ten months' active
service in Greece to comprise little more than a series of bold
projects, and projects which, if he had been aided by brave men, would
have been as easy as they were bold, in which he received none of the
support that was necessary, and which accordingly all his energy and
genius could not make successful. When, after his visit to England and
France, he returned to Greece, eager and able to render invaluable
assistance in the organization of the navy, he was treated only with
neglect and insolence, from which at last he was enabled to escape
through the generous sympathy of a Russian admiral.

Much, however, he had done for Greece. To his persistent entreaties were
due all the meagre displays of patriotism by which the Government of the
country was maintained and Capodistrias accepted as President, and all
the feeble efforts by which the war was carried on and the triumph of
the Porte was averted until the direct interference of the Allied
Powers. That interference had been in great measure induced by the
report that he had entered the service of Greece, so that to him was due
not a little of the benefit that accrued from the whole course of
diplomacy by which her independence was secured; and the independence
was made more prompt and complete than could have been expected by the
fortunate circumstance of his having occasioned the collision between
the forces of Turkey and those of the Allied Powers which issued in the
Battle of Navarino. Much more he would have achieved had his arguments
been listened to and his plans supported. His failures no less than his
successes bespeak his worth.




CHAPTER XXIII.

A RECAPITULATION OF LORD COCHRANE'S NAVAL SERVICES.--HIS EFFORTS TO
OBTAIN RESTITUTION OF THE RANK TAKEN FROM HIM AFTER THE STOCK EXCHANGE
TRIAL.--HIS PETITION TO THE DUKE OF CLARENCE.--ITS REJECTION BY THE DUKE
OF WELLINGTON'S CABINET.--LORD COCHRANE'S OCCUPATIONS AFTER THE CLOSE OF
HIS GREEK SERVICE.--HIS RETURN TO ENGLAND.--HIS MEMORIAL TO WILLIAM
IV.--ITS TARDY CONSIDERATION BY EARL GREY'S CABINET.--ITS PROMOTERS AND
OPPONENTS.--LORD COCHRANE'S ACCESSION TO THE PEERAGE AS TENTH EARL OF
DUNDONALD.--HIS INTERVIEW WITH THE KING.--THE COUNTESS OF DUNDONALD'S
EFFORTS IN AID OF HER HUSBAND'S MEMORIAL.--THEIR ULTIMATE SUCCESS.--THE
EARL OF DUNDONALD'S "FREE PARDON," AND RESTORATION TO NAVAL RANK.

[1828-1832.]


Lord Cochrane's retirement from the service of Greece brought to a close
his career as a fighting seaman. With one brief exception, occurring
twenty years later, when he commanded the British squadron in the North
American and West Indian waters, but when there was no warfare to be
done the rest of his life, comprising thirty years of ripe manhood and
vigorous old age, was passed without employment in the profession which
was dear to him, and in which he had shown himself to be possessed of
talents rarely equalled and certainly never surpassed.

He entered that profession at the age of seventeen. In 1800, when he was
twenty-four, he was promoted to the command of the _Speedy_. With that
crazy little sloop, no larger than a coasting brig, he captured a large
French privateer on the 10th of May, and on the 14th he recaptured two
English vessels that had been seized by the enemy. On the 16th of June
he took another French vessel, and on the 22nd another, with a prize
which she had just obtained. On the 29th, he secured a large Spanish
privateer, in spite of five gunboats which fought in her defence. On the
19th of July he captured another French privateer and rescued her prize;
on the 27th he sunk another; and on the 31st he put another to flight
and took possession of the prize which she had in tow. On the 22nd of
September, he seized another of the enemy's vessels. On the 15th of
December he wrecked one French war-ship and captured another, one of
three which came to her assistance; and on the 24th, being attacked by
two Spanish privateers, he took one of them. On the 16th of January,
1801, he chased two vessels, and seized one, and on the 22nd, two of the
enemy's craft, one French and the other Spanish, struck to him. On the
24th of February a French brig fell into his hands. The same fate was
shared by another vessel on the 11th of April, by another on the 13th,
and by two others on the 15th. He captured a Spanish tartan and a
Spanish privateer on the 4th of May; and on the 13th occurred his
celebrated victory over the _Gamo_--carrying four times the tonnage, six
times the number of men, and seven times the weight of shot possessed by
the _Speedy_--which was soon followed by the taking of two other Spanish
privateers heavily armed. On the 9th of June, the _Speedy_ and another
little vessel had a nine hours' fight, first with a Spanish zebec and
three gunboats, and afterwards with a felucco and two more gunboats
which came to their aid, which were only allowed to escape when the
English ammunition was nearly exhausted, the _Speedy_ having discharged
fourteen hundred shot. On the 3rd of July, the pigmy vessel, after hard
fighting, had to surrender to three French line-of-battle ships. It was
on that occasion that their senior officer, Captain Palliere, declined
to accept the sword of "an officer," as he said, "who had for so many
hours struggled against impossibility." In his thirteen months' cruise
Lord Cochrane had with his little sloop of fourteen 4-pounders, and a
crew of fifty-four officers and men, taken and retaken fifty vessels, a
hundred and twenty-two guns, and five hundred and thirty-four prisoners.

His next ship, the _Arab_, was made to serve during fourteen months in
seas in which there was no work to be done; but for the _Pallas_, a fine
frigate of thirty-two guns, he was allowed to find memorable employment.
He was sent to the Azores, with orders to limit his cruise to a month.
He captured one large Spanish vessel on the 6th of February, 1805, a
second on the 13th, a third on the 15th, a fourth on the 16th. Forced
after that to be idle, as far as prize-taking was concerned, for more
than a year, he seized two French vessels on the 27th of March, 1806,
and another a few days later. On the 6th of April he captured the
_Tapageuse_, and on the 7th he chased three other corvettes till they
were driven on shore by their crews and wrecked. He took another prize
on the 14th. On the 14th of May, the _Pallas_ had her famous engagement
with the French frigate _Minerve_ and three brigs, the _Lynx_, the
_Sylph_, and the _Palinure_, carrying eighty-eight guns in all, wherein
she was so disabled that she was forced to return to Portsmouth to be
refitted.

The _Imperieuse_ being assigned to him in August, 1806, Lord Cochrane
took two prizes on the 19th of December, and a third on the 31st. He was
then ordered home, and there detained till the autumn of 1807. On the
14th of November, being again in the Mediterranean, he captured a
Maltese pirate-ship, and soon afterwards he seized some other vessels.
Being ordered to scour the French coast during the summer of 1808, he
took numerous prizes on the sea and effected yet more important work on
land. "With varying opposition but with unvaried success," he wrote in
his concise report to Lord Collingwood on the 28th of September, "the
newly-constructed semaphoric telegraphs--which are of the utmost
consequence to the safety of the numerous convoys that pass along the
coast of France--at Bourdigne, La Pinede, St. Maguire, Frontignan,
Canet, and Fay, have been blown up and completely demolished, together
with their telegraph houses, fourteen barracks of gens d'armes, one
battery, and the strong tower on the Lake of Frontignan." The list of
casualties was "None killed, none wounded, one singed, in blowing up the
battery." That work was followed by more of the same nature, a famous
episode in which was Lord Cochrane's occupation of the Castle of
Trinidad. "The zeal and energy with which he has maintained that
fortress," wrote Lord Collingwood, "excite the highest admiration. His
resources for every exigency have no end."

The splendid exploit with the fireships in Basque Roads followed in
1809, and with that Lord Cochrane's services to England as a seaman were
brought to a conclusion. Official persecution kept him in idleness
during the remaining period of war with France, and he was in the end
driven to seek relief from oppression at home, and exercise for his
talents, by devoting himself to the cause of freedom in Chili, Peru,
Brazil, and Greece. His unparalleled successes on both sides of the
South American continent, and the circumstances of his partial failure
in Greece, have been sufficiently detailed in previous chapters.

All through that time of virtual expatriation, his dearest hope had been
that England would, as far as possible, retrieve the cruel wrong that
had been done to him. Full redress was impossible. The heavy cloud that
had been cast over so many years of his most energetic manhood could not
be removed by any tardy act of justice; but that tardy justice could at
any rate be done to him, and for this he strove with unabated zeal.

To this end he was partly occupied during his temporary absence from
Greece in 1828. On the 4th of June he addressed a memorial to the Duke
of Clarence, then Lord High Admiral, who just two years afterwards was
to become King of England. This memorial, eloquent in its simplicity and
earnestness, the prelude to many others that were to be presented in
later years, claims to be here quoted in full. "To his Royal Highness
the Lord High Admiral," it ran, "the memorial of Lord Cochrane humbly
showeth;--That for fourteen years your memorialist has suffered, among
many injuries and privations, the loss of his situation and rank as
post-captain in his Majesty's navy, in consequence of a verdict
pronouncing your memorialist guilty of an offence of which he was
entirely and absolutely innocent;--That during the whole course of your
memorialist's life, up to the day on which he was charged with the crime
of conspiring with others to raise false reports for the purpose of
fraudulently effecting a rise in the price of the public funds, the
character and conduct of your memorialist were without reproach; and,
numerous as have been the transactions in which your memorialist has
subsequently engaged, he has, amid them all, uniformly preserved, though
not an unassailed, yet an unshaken and unsullied character;--That your
memorialist has never ceased, and never can cease to assert his absolute
innocence of the crime of which he was pronounced guilty. He asserts it
now, most solemnly, as in the presence of Almighty God, and certain he
is, if every doubt be not dissipated in this world, that when summoned
to enter more immediately into that Awful and Infinite Presence, he
shall not fail, with his last breath, most solemnly to assert his
innocence;--That it was your memorialist's consciousness of innocence
that contributed, perhaps more than any other cause, to produce his
conviction; because it rendered him confident, and much less careful in
making the necessary preparations for his defence than he ought to have
been, or than he would have been, if guilty; while, on the other hand,
there existed the utmost zeal, industry, and skill in the conduct of the
prosecution;--That your memorialist did all that was possible to procure
a revision of his case; but, as he had laboured under the disadvantage
of being included in, and tried under, the same indictment with some who
had probably no reason to complain of the result, as well as the still
greater disadvantage of having his defence blended, with theirs, so was
he denied a new trial for the same reason; it being a rule of Court that
a new trial should not be allowed to any individual tried for conspiracy
unless all the parties should appear in Court to join in the
application; which, in the case of your memorialist, could not possibly
be, some of the parties having quitted the country on the verdict being
pronounced against them;--That your memorialist has never been able to
obtain a re-investigation of his extraordinary case, nor to obtain
redress in any way; but now that your Royal Highness is Lord High
Admiral, and has, among other illustrious acts, distinguished yourself
in that capacity by doing justice to meritorious officers, your
memorialist feels that he has everything to hope from the magnanimity of
your Royal Highness;--That it is indeed certain that nothing can be more
repugnant to the feelings of your Royal Highness than that an individual
who zealously devoted himself to the naval service of his king and
country, as your Royal Highness knows your memorialist to have done,
should be for ever cut off from the service without the most
unquestionable certainty of the rectitude of so severe an infliction. So
far, therefore, as depends on your Royal Highness, your memorialist
cannot but confidently entertain the hope that he shall not be doomed to
remain all his life long the victim of a verdict of which he has not
only never ceased to complain, but which he knows that he has proved to
be unfounded, to the satisfaction of those who have examined as well
what was advanced against him at the trial as what he has since adduced
in his own justification. Your memorialist, therefore, is encouraged
most respectfully to solicit your Royal Highness to represent his
case--a case of peculiar and unprecedented hardship--to his most Sacred
Majesty, and to advocate his cause. And if, happily for your
memorialist, his most Sacred Majesty, recognising the innocence of your
memorialist, and taking his long-protracted and unmerited sufferings
into his gracious consideration, should, of his most gracious pleasure,
vouchsafe to reinstate your memorialist in that rank and station in his
Royal Navy which he previously held, your memorialist will ever maintain
the deepest and most grateful sense of his duty to his most Sacred
Majesty and to your Royal Highness, and will never cease to testify his
gratitude by all the means in his power."

That document was presented by Sir Robert Preston to the Duke of
Clarence, who promised to use every endeavour to obtain a
reconsideration of Lord Cochrane's case. He was unsuccessful. "Dear
Sir," he wrote to Sir Robert Preston on the 14th of June, "immediately
on the receipt of the memorial you brought from Lord Cochrane, I sent it
to the Duke of Wellington, with a request it might be considered by his
Majesty's confidential servants, and last evening I had a communication
from his Grace to state that the King's Cabinet cannot comply with the
prayer of the memorial. I ever remain, dear Sir, yours sincerely,
William."

The harsh news of this failure was sent to Paris, whither Lord Cochrane
had gone in furtherance of his efforts for the assistance of Greece.

To Paris he returned, as we have seen, after his final departure from
Greece, and there he resided with his family for about six months. He
paid a brief visit to England in September, 1829; but, seeing no
immediate prospect of gaining the restitution of his naval rank, and
finding that idle life at home was especially irksome to him, he soon
went back to the Continent. The serious illness of Lady Cochrane induced
him to pass the winter in Italy, where by the same cause he was detained
for several months. He was in England again in the autumn of 1830.

One motive for his return was the accession of the Duke of Clarence to
the throne as King William IV. The new sovereign's often-expressed
sympathy for him, induced him to hope that now he had a better chance of
obtaining the justice that had been so long withheld. The change of
sovereigns, however, was of small avail while the ministers who had
summarily rejected his former memorial continued to have the direction
of affairs. "To petition or memorialize the King whilst his present
ministers remain in office," he said in a letter written on the 10th of
September, "would be to debase myself in my own estimation, and, I
think, in that of every man of sense and feeling." "I cannot petition
again," he said in another letter; "though I am assured from high
authority it would be attended to. Sir Robert Wilson and others have
obtained favour; but I, who protested against the forging of charts and
public waste of money, have had no mercy shown!" Lord Cochrane
ascertained, about this time, that his memorial of 1828, though sent by
the Duke of Clarence for the consideration of King George IV., had never
reached his Majesty, the Cabinet having preferred to dismiss it at once.
He therefore had good reason for abstaining from further action until a
more friendly ministry should be in power.

He had not long to wait. On the 16th of November, the Duke of
Wellington's Cabinet resigned. In the Administration which succeeded
Earl Grey was Premier, and Mr. Brougham, raised to the peerage, was Lord
Chancellor. Lord Cochrane then lost no time in completing a "Review" of
his case, which he had prepared for publication, and in getting ready
some early copies of the volume to be presented to the King and his
ministers.

The King's copy was forwarded through Lord Melbourne, the Home
Secretary, on the 10th of December, accompanied by a brief petition.
"Assured that the memorial which I laid before your Majesty when Lord
High Admiral," wrote Lord Cochrane, "was honoured with your earnest
consideration, and that your Majesty was graciously pleased to make an
effort in my behalf, with the desire of restoring me to my station in
the navy; assured, too, that, had not the ministers of his late most
gracious Majesty been opposed to the prayer of my memorial, I should
then have been restored; and believing that no such obstacle to your
Majesty's favour would be now interposed, I have every reason to hope
that the auspicious moment is at length arrived when the redress which I
have so long sought will be freely bestowed by my most gracious
Sovereign. I beseech your Majesty to condescend to receive the
accompanying review of my case, which, I trust, will prove to your
Majesty that I am not unworthy of that act of your Majesty's favour
which I humbly solicit. It is not because I have undergone a sentence
heavier than the law pronounced, it is not because I have been deprived
for sixteen years of the rank and honours which I acquired in the Royal
Navy, nor is it because I am deserving of any consideration on account
of services to my King and country, that I now presume to appeal to your
Majesty,--though no one is more likely than your Majesty to feel for my
sufferings, and no one more competent to appreciate my services,--but it
is because I had no participation in, and no knowledge, not even the
most indistinct or remote, of the crime under the imputation of which I
have been so variously and so unceasingly punished. It is this alone
which impels me to approach your Majesty, and this alone which enables
me."

Other copies of the "Review" having been sent to the Cabinet Ministers,
with letters urging its favourable consideration, Lord Cochrane, in
nearly every case, received a friendly answer. "I need not say," wrote
Earl Grey on the 12th of December, "that it would give me great
satisfaction if it should be found possible to comply with the prayer of
your petition. This opinion I expressed some years ago in a letter
which, I believe, was communicated to you. To the sentiments expressed
in that letter I refer, which, if I remember right, acquitted you of all
blame, except such as might have been incurred by inadvertence and by
having suffered yourself to be led by others into measures of the
consequences of which you were not sufficiently aware."

More than a year was to be spent, however, in persevering effort before
Lord Cochrane's claim for justice was acceded to. Objection was taken by
some to the form in which his address to the King was worded. It was "a
letter," they said, and not "a petition;" and Lord Cochrane was
distressed at hearing, on the 18th, that the document had been given
back by his Majesty to Lord Melbourne without any comment.

"If I have erred as to the form of my petition, which was in the shape
of a most respectful and dutiful letter to his Majesty, or as to the
channel through which it should have been forwarded," said Lord Cochrane
in a letter to Earl Grey, written on the 23rd of December, "I have erred
in judgment only; and it would be hard indeed should redress not be
accorded by reason of an informality in the mode of my application. I
have since been advised that my petition ought to have been forwarded
through the First Lord of the Admiralty, whom I have therefore solicited
to present another petition, the same in effect, but more brief, and in
the regular form. When his Majesty was Lord High Admiral he received a
memorial from me by the hands of Sir Robert Preston, and though it had
not the effect, of procuring my restoration at that time, yet from the
gracious manner in which, I am assured, it was received, I did flatter
myself that his Majesty would have pleasure in the opportunity, which
appeared to present itself when your lordship's Administration was
formed, of originating a measure which all would consider gracious, and
most, I hope, believe to be perfectly just. In reference to the letter,
in answer to mine, with which your lordship honoured me on the 12th
instant, which I cannot but perceive is written with a kindness of
feeling which commands my best thanks, I beg only to state that any
opinion of me in regard to the crime imputed to me that does not fully
acquit me of all knowledge thereof whatever does not do me justice. That
crime was contrived and completed so entirely without my knowledge that
I had not the most distant idea of its having been meditated until I
read of its commission in the public prints." In a brief reply to that
letter Earl Grey stated that, the petition having been presented to the
King and being now under consideration, no more formal address need be
sent in lieu of it.

Thus Lord Cochrane had only to await the result of his application, and
he waited for sixteen months. During that interval many friends
interceded on his behalf, especially Lord Durham and Lord Auckland, and
from time to time his hopes were quickened by information that the
subject was still being considered by his Majesty's ministers, who were
anxious that right should be done.

But he was often disappointed. "The King," he said, in a letter written
on the 1st of April, "has invited all the Knights of the Bath to dine
with him on the 12th, which is the anniversary of the affair of Basque
Roads, as well as that of Grambier's installation. If nothing is done on
that day I shall not obtain justice during the life of William IV.
Indeed, I understand that every effort has been made to influence the
King to my prejudice."

"I was at an evening party at the Marquess of Lansdowne's on Friday,"
wrote Lord Cochrane on the 25th of April, "and there I met the Lord
Chancellor [Brougham] who was very civil indeed, and told me they had a
battle to fight for me, and hoped they would succeed. Since then the
electors of the borough of Southwark have sent a deputation to beg me to
stand; but hearing that Brougham's brother was also to be a candidate, I
have declined opposing him. I had a double motive for this line of
conduct, for, had I been returned to Parliament, I could not
conscientiously have accepted a favour at the hands of the ministers of
the Crown."

Service in the House of Commons was, soon after that, made impossible to
Lord Cochrane. His father, Archibald, ninth Earl of Dundonald, died on
the 1st of July, 1831. Lord Cochrane then ceased to be a commoner, and
became in succession, when he was nearly fifty-six years old, Earl of
Dundonald.

As Earl of Dundonald, however, he found it no easier to obtain an answer
to his demand for justice than as Lord Cochrane. In September he heard
that his opponents were making use of some Admiralty correspondence
respecting his conduct in Chili, nearly ten years before, to throw fresh
difficulties in his way. He at once applied to Sir James Graham, the
First Lord of the Admiralty, for extracts from this correspondence of
any parts requiring explanation, in order that he might furnish the
same. "I beg leave to state," wrote Sir James in reply, "that it is not
usual for his Majesty's Government to produce, from the records of
public offices, documents which do not appear to be required for any
public purpose. I am therefore under the necessity of declining to
comply with your lordship's request." "Is it not astonishing," said Lord
Dundonald, in a letter to the Duke of Hamilton, "that Sir James Graham
does not consider justice to an individual to be a public object?"

Tired out, at length, by the delays in the settlement of his case, Lord
Dundonald wisely resolved to seek a personal interview with the King.
With that object he went down to Brighton, and the interview was readily
granted to him on Sunday, the 27th of November. He was graciously
received, and the King listened attentively to his respectful claim for
a fair investigation of the matter, and for permission to rebut any
charges that might be brought against him respecting his conduct in
connection with the Stock Exchange fraud, his Chilian service, or any
other portion of his life that had been or could be complained of. His
Majesty promised to see that the case was fairly looked into, and Lord
Dundonald was not long in observing the good effects of his bold step.

"Lady Dundonald has seen Lord Grey, and he has expressed his readiness
to do all he can," he wrote from London on the 17th of December. "But I
understand there is something in the way. Burdett assures me that he
will bring the whole affair before Parliament if they do not do me
justice."

Sir Francis Burdett, who, never flagging in his friendship, had rendered
valuable assistance during these weary months, continued in the same
course to the end; but it was not necessary for him to appeal to
Parliament in this case. Yet its settlement was further delayed. "I am
unwilling to trespass on your lordship's most valuable time," wrote Lord
Dundonald to Earl Grey, on the 28th of January, 1832; "but as it is now
two months since I had the honour of an audience of the King, and of
presenting to his Majesty my humble memorial setting forth my claims to
be heard in my defence in refutation of the accusations existing against
me in the Admiralty, and praying that I might be furnished with copies
of the accusatory documents, I can no longer refrain from entreating
your lordship to relieve my mind from its present state of most painful
suspense by making me acquainted with the decision of the Government.
From my knowledge of your lordship's considerate feelings towards me,
and of your desire, should it be found practicable and just, to restore
me to my place in his Majesty's service, and from that consciousness of
my own integrity which has maintained me during so many years of
adversity, I cannot but be sanguine, notwithstanding the delay, of an
ultimately favourable result. But the period of suspense is not only one
of great mental anxiety, but in other respects most injurious. It places
me in a position worse than that which I was in under the former
Administration, which at once decided to dismiss my complaint without
consideration, and spared me that uncertainty which 'makes the heart
sick.' While those ministers were in power my character sustained no
injury from their refusal to do me justice. But under the Administration
of your lordship, the public opinion must be that my case has received
every consideration, and that the ascertained justice of the verdict
against me is the bar to my restoration. This opinion already operates
so much to my disadvantage and annoyance as to paralyze all my pursuits,
and will shortly compel me, unless your lordship spares me that
sacrifice, to quit a country of which I have never, by any act of my
life, rendered myself unworthy, and in the bosom of which, unless called
out again in her service, I would fain spend the remainder of my life in
tranquillity."

That letter was delivered by the Countess of Dundonald, who at this
time, as at all others, laboured with rare energy and tact to lighten
her husband's heavy load of suffering and to augment his scanty store of
joy. "Lady Dundonald," he wrote on the 6th of February, "has had a long
talk with Lord Grey on the subject of my affair, and it clearly appears
that there are two individuals in the Cabinet who will not give in. It
is now, however, determined that Lady Dundonald--I being out of
town--shall go to the King with a very proper memorial on her part,
praying that the stain on the family may be wiped away by a free pardon.
It is supposed that this will succeed; because in that case the King can
exercise his prerogative without other counsel than that of his Prime
Minister, who is favourable."

That term "free pardon" was galling to Lord Dundonald. He knew that he
had done nothing which needed forgiveness. It was justice, not pardon,
that he sought. He had suffered so much, however, from official
formalities, and his honest resentment of them, that he now reluctantly
consented to accept the virtual acquittal which was the great object of
his hopes and toils, though it might be couched in a phrase none the
less distasteful to him because it was the phrase that from time
immemorial had been used as a cloak for the withdrawal of official
wrong.

His concession was successful. "The King," he was able to write on the
4th of March, "has at last promised to do that which the late
Administration refused, and the present ministry had not the power or
courage to accomplish. For this I am indebted to the zealous exertions
of Lady Dundonald, who has been at Brighton, and has left Lord Grey and
others no rest until her object was accomplished. Thus, you see,
perseverance has done more than reason, right, and justice. The fact is
that great folks neither read nor trouble themselves with judging from
facts on subjects which do not immediately concern themselves. I have no
doubt that the 'Review' has never been looked into by one of the
ministers."

The "free pardon" was promised on the 28th of February, but it was not
formally granted till five weeks afterwards. Lord Dundonald ascertained
that one cause of the long delay in considering his case was the heat of
party fight occasioned by the Reform Bill. The Government feared to show
any kindness to a man whom the Tories had so long and so persistently
reviled, lest thereby they should lose in the House of Commons a few
wavering votes that were important. The Reform Bill passed the Lower
House, for the second time, at the end of March.[14] Its final adoption
being expected with less difficulty than arose, it was now easier to do
justice to Lord Dundonald. "I was happy to hear your memorial to the
King read in Council and referred to the Admiralty," the Earl of Durham
wrote to him on the 16th of April. "I trust we may eventually have the
means of doing an act of private as well as of public justice, and that
I shall see you restored to that service of which you are the highest
ornament. But you well know that you have had not only my best wishes,
but my warmest exertions, for the attainment of that object."

  [14] "My dear Lord Durham," wrote the Earl of Dundonald, on the 15th of
  April, "allow me most sincerely to congratulate you on the attainment of
  the great object which the present Administration has now, so honourably
  for themselves and so fortunately for the country, brought to a pass
  wherein no retrograde movement can take place, whatever may be the
  obstructions offered by the interested proprietors of borough influence,
  or by persons whose ideas of Government have been formed under the
  tuition of preceding Administrations. It is rare felicity for a nation
  to be governed by men having the liberality and justice which induce
  them to confer free institutions peacefully on the country; institutions
  which merit the gratitude of all who now exist, and will receive the
  unqualified applause of future generations. The page of history affords
  no parallel to the present event."

The object was at last attained. At a Privy Council held on the 2nd of
May, a "free pardon" was granted to the Earl of Dundonald. He was
restored to his position in the Royal Navy, and, on the 8th, gazetted as
a Rear-Admiral of the Fleet.

In that capacity he was presented to King William IV. at the levee held
on the 9th of May; and congratulations poured in from all quarters as
soon as the good news was published. But he could not, even in the first
moments of rejoicing, forget that the cause of congratulation was only a
pardon for an offence which he had never committed, and for which he had
been enduring heavy punishment during sixteen years of his life.




CHAPTER XXIV.

THE INTENTIONS AND DISCOVERIES OF LORD DUNDONALD'S FATHER.--HIS OWN
MECHANICAL CONTRIVANCES.--HIS LAMPS.--HIS ROTARY STEAM-ENGINE, HIS
SCREW-PROPELLER, HIS CONDENSING-BOILER, AND HIS LINES OF
SHIP-BUILDING.--THEIR TARDY DEVELOPMENT.--HIS CORRESPONDENCE UPON
STEAM-SHIPPING WITH SIR JAMES GRAHAM, THE EARL OF MINTO, THE EARL OF
HADDINGTON, AND THE EARL OF AUCKLAND.--THE PROGRESS OF HIS
INVENTIONS.--THE "JANUS."--THE BENEFICIAL RESULTS OF HIS EXPERIMENTS.

[1833-1847.]


Lord Dundonald's father, the ninth earl, had devoted the chief energies
of his long life to scientific pursuits, which won for him, not profit,
but well-earned fame, and which proved of immense benefit to his own and
succeeding generations. By him was discovered the art of extracting tar
from coal, and out of that discovery was developed, partly by him and
partly by others, the manufacture of gas, first used for lighting his
tar-works. The important chemical process of making alkali and crystals
of soda was also introduced by him, whereby a great impetus was given to
the manufacture of glass and to many other important branches of
industry. He discovered the present method of preparing alum, or
sulphate of vitriol, and suggested its substitution for gum senegal,
which has proved hardly less advantageous to the mechanical arts. In
1795, he published a treatise, the result of numerous and costly
experiments, on the connection between agriculture and chemistry, which
was almost the parent of all the later researches that have issued in
beneficial plans for improving the soil and invigorating the growth of
crops, and in various and important developments of scientific farming.

The tenth Earl of Dundonald inherited his father's mechanical and
scientific genius. The lamp invented by him in 1814, which introduced
the principle upon which all later lamps for burning oil, naphtha, and
other combustibles have been constructed, has been already referred to.
Many other inventions and discoveries occupied his leisure during the
years in which he was allowed to follow his profession both in British
and in foreign service;[15] and the fuller leisure forced upon him
during the years following his return from Greece was chiefly devoted to
further exercise of his inventive faculties.

  [15] It is interesting to note that the recent introduction among us of
  the Turkish bath was due to Lord Dundonald. "Having recovered," says Dr.
  Gosse, in his treatise "Du Bain Turc," p. 58, "from two attacks of
  intermitting fever, I visited the islands of the Archipelago until
  summoned to Nauplia by Admiral Cochrane, who was then on board the
  little steam-vessel _Mercury_. There the air of the gulf, and the marshy
  miasma, brought on another attack of fever, from which I feared a fatal
  issue. Lord Cochrane had the kindness to take me in his arms, and to
  place me in the current of steam, which caused me to perspire freely. My
  illness disappeared as by enchantment." A similar service was rendered
  by Lord Dundonald to Mr. David Urquhart, whose attention was thus called
  to the advantages of the Turkish bath, and who became its great
  advocate.

To the wonderful invention known as his "secret war-plan" allusion will
presently be made. His other most important mechanical pursuits had for
their principal object the improvement of steam-engines and other
appliances for steam-shipping. Almost his first reminiscence was of a
visit in which, when he was seven or eight years old, he accompanied his
father to Birmingham, there to meet with James Watt, and hear something
of his memorable discovery. Apprehending in his youth the value of that
discovery, he never wearied in his efforts to extend its usefulness. The
_Rising Star_, built in 1818 under his directions, and those of his
brother, Major Cochrane, for service in Chili, was the first
steam-vessel that crossed the Atlantic, and it was an additional
disappointment to him, amid all the misfortunes incident to his efforts
to give adequate assistance to the Greeks in their war of independence,
that the ill-fated steamers which were to be his chief instruments
therein, failed through the indolence and incompetence of those to whom
their construction was assigned.

It is not necessary here to detail the studies and experiments by which
he afterwards sought to introduce a better steam-engine, for locomotive
purposes, than was then, or is even now, in general use. His plan--not a
new one, though it had never before been made available in practice--was
to substitute for the ordinary reciprocating engine a machine which
should at once produce a circular motion. "Of the many rotary engines
heretofore offered to the notice of the world," he wrote, in 1833, "none
have stood the test of practical use and experience. The cause of this
uniform failure has been the great difficulty of obtaining, within the
machine, a base of resistance on which the steam might act in propelling
the moveable piston." He did not quite overcome this difficulty, but he
succeeded in producing what the foremost critic in this department of
manufacture describes--after a lapse of thirty years unrivalled for
their development of ingenuity--as "the most perfect engine of the class
that has yet been projected."

"In this engine," says the same authority, "an eccentric is made to
revolve on an axis in the manner of a piston, and two doors, forming
part of the side of the cylinder, press upon the eccentric. The points
of these doors are armed with swivelling brasses, which apply themselves
to the eccentric and make the point of contact tight in all
positions."[16]

  [16] John Bourne. "A Treatise on the Steam-Engine" (1861), p. 392.

"This revolving engine," said Lord Dundonald, "does not require any
valve or slide; consequently, there is no waste of steam thereby;
neither is there any loss, as in the space left at the top and bottom of
the cylinders of reciprocating engines. There is much less friction than
arises from the sum of all the bearings required to convert the
rectilineal force of the common engine to circular motion. There are no
beams, cranks, side-rods, connecting-rods, parallel motions, levers,
slide-valves, or eccentrics, with their nicely-adjusted joints and
bearings; and thus the revolving engine is not liable, even in one-tenth
degree, to the accidents and hindrances of other engines. As its moving
parts pursue their course in perfect circles, without stop or hindrance,
it is capable of progressive acceleration, until the work performed
equals the pressure of steam on the vacuum--an advantage which the
reciprocating engine does not possess. The diminished bulk and weight,
and the absence of tremor, add to the capacity, buoyancy, velocity, and
durability of vessels in which it is placed." The rotary engine did not
satisfy all Lord Dundonald's expectations, but it took precedence of all
others of the same sort, and was of great service at any rate in
directing attention to what he rightly considered to be the great want
in war-shipping, namely, vessels of the least possible bulk and of the
greatest possible strength, speed, and fighting power.

Years were spent by him in attempting to bring it into notice. At his
own cost he fitted out a little steamboat, which navigated the Thames;
but to perfect the invention were required more funds than he had at his
command, and he sought in vain for adequate assistance from others.

In January, 1834, he wrote to Sir James Graham, then First Lord of the
Admiralty, thanking him for his share in the restitution of his naval
rank that had occurred nearly two years before, and urging the
co-operation of the Government in perfecting an invention that promised
to be of so much importance to the naval power of England. "You are not
obliged to me for anything," answered Sir James on the 15th; "I only am
fortunate in being the member of a Government which has regained for our
country the benefit of your distinguished valour and services, which, if
again required in war, will, I am persuaded, be so exerted as to win the
gratitude of the nation, and to demonstrate the justice of the decision
to which you allude. It is impossible to over-estimate the paramount
importance of steam in future naval operations; and it is fortunate that
you have directed so much of your attention to the subject. The Board
has complied with your request, and two engineers, in whom we place
reliance, will be ordered to attend you." It does not appear, how-ever,
that the engineers did attend. At any rate, nothing was done by the
Admiralty in aid of the invention either then or for many years after.

Yet its ingenuity was acknowledged by all who investigated it, and by
naval authorities among the number. The Earl of Minto, when First Lord
of the Admiralty, sought to introduce it into the national
ship-building; but official hindrances, too great even for him to
overcome, stood in his way. All he could do was to have it referred to
competent judges and to receive their report in its favour. "I am
commanded to acquaint your lordship," wrote Sir John Barrow, the
Secretary to the Admiralty, to the Earl of Dundonald, on the 20th of
December, 1839, "that the opinions received of your revolving engine are
favourable to the principle, and that it has not been stated that there
are any insurmountable obstacles to its practical execution." The
insurmountable obstacles were in the stolid resistance of subordinates
to any novelty designed to lessen labour and promote economy.

Lord Minto, when out of office, was able to speak of the engine in more
approving terms than he could adopt in his official capacity. "I need
hardly say," he wrote on the 6th of September, 1842, "that the report of
continued success in your rotatory engine gives me great pleasure, not
only upon your own account, but as promising a valuable addition to our
naval power in its application to ships of war. As a high-pressure
engine, the complete success of your plan has, I believe, been
recognised by all who have attended to it, and it is in this form that I
had contemplated its application in the first instance as an auxiliary
and occasional power in some ships of war."

At length, though not with all the energy that he desired, Lord
Dundonald's engine was put to the test by the Admiralty during the Earl
of Haddington's tenure of office in that department. In May, 1842, he
was invited by the new First Lord, who, in common with all the world,
was aware of the zeal and intelligence with which he had devoted himself
to the consideration of every branch of naval science, to communicate
his opinions thereupon. The first result of this invitation was a letter
showing remarkable discernment of evils then existing, and curiously
anticipating some later efforts to correct them.

"The slow progress," wrote Lord Dundonald, on the 7th of June, "which
the naval service has made towards its present ameliorated state--yet
far from perfection--has not permitted any one Board of Admiralty in my
time to stand pre-eminently distinguished for decisive improvements.
These have rather been effected by the gradual changes which time
occasions, or by following the example of America, or even of France,
than by encouraging efforts of native genius. This has arisen from
causes easily remedied; one of which is, that the rejection or adoption
of proffered improvements has depended on the decision of several
authorities, who consequently feel little individual responsibility, and
imagine themselves liable to censure only for a change of system. Thus,
my lord, a still heavier responsibility has, in fact, been incurred by
continuing, long after the most superficial observation demanded a
change, to construct small ships of the line, and little frigates, which
the great practical skill and bravery of our countrymen were taxed to
defend against the powerful eighty-gun ships of France and the large
frigates of America. This timidity as to change caused many years to
elapse, after the commercial use of steam-vessels, before the naval
department possessed even a tug-boat. Hence the mischievous economy
manifested by the purchase of worthless merchant steamers; hence the
subsequent parsimonious project of building small steam-vessels fitted
with engines immersed beyond their bearing, and deficient in every
requisite for purposes of war. I am not one of those, my lord, who deem
it advantageous to act on the belief that one Englishman can beat two
Frenchmen. I am inclined to doubt whether a practical demonstration of
that saying might not be attended with disastrous consequences. Long
habitude reared experienced British officers, who are now replaced by
others who possess less nautical skill, and are nearer on a par with
those of France, in regard to whose education every pains has been taken
by its Government. I do not presume to advise that your lordship should
adopt changes precipitately, nor without consulting those who may be
most competent to judge; no, nor even then that the best measures should
be prematurely disclosed, so as to give intimation to other nations of
the vast increase of power which may suddenly be rendered available. But
I venture to suggest that you may quietly prepare the means of effecting
purposes which neither the ordinary ships of war nor the present
steam-ships in the navy can accomplish. Permanent blockades, my lord,
are now quite out of the question; and so, in my opinion, are all our
ordinary naval tactics. A couple of heavy line-of-battle ships, suddenly
fitted, on the outbreak of war, with adequate steam-power, would decide
the successful result of a general action; and I am assured that I could
show your lordship how to fit a steam-ship which, in scouring the
Channel or ranging the coast, could take or destroy every steam-ship
belonging to France that came within view."

That offer was accepted by the Earl of Haddington, who, being at
Portsmouth in August, made personal inspection of some experiments in
which Lord Dundonald was there engaging; and the result of that
inspection was that he promptly arranged for the introduction, at the
public expense, of the rotary engine in the _Firefly_, a small
steam-vessel which, like many others, the Government had bought and
found useless, by reason of its clumsy machinery. In her, with no more
than the usual delay occasioned by the co-operation of official routine
with private enterprise, in which Lord Dundonald had the assistance of
Mr. Renton and Messrs. Bramah, the experiment was tried and found to
answer so well, in spite of the difficulties incident to a first
attempt, that it was resolved to develop it further in a frigate to be
built throughout in accordance with his plans for the improved
construction of shipping.

To these he had lately made some valuable additions. On the 19th of
January, 1843, a patent was granted to him for various improvements in
engines and other machinery, one of which was an apparatus for
propelling vessels. "This improved propeller," says a competent
authority, "consists of an arrangement of propelling blades immerged
beneath the water, in the manner now usual in screw vessels; but,
instead of the blades being set at right angles with the
propeller-shaft, they form an angle therewith. One important effect of
this arrangement is that it corrects the centrifugal action of the
screw; for whereas, in common screws, the water which is discharged
backwards assumes a conical figure, enlarging as it recedes, in a screw
formed on Lord Dundonald's plan the outline of the moving water will be
cylindrical, the centrifugal action being counteracted by the convergent
action due to the backward inclination of the propelling blades. It is
found, practically, that screws constructed upon this principle give a
better result than ordinary screws."[17]

  [17] John Bourne. "A Treatise on the Screw Propeller, Screw Vessels, and
  Screw Engines" (1867), p. 42.

Another invention patented by Lord Dundonald at the same time was a
modification of the boilers used for steam-engines. "These boilers,"
says the same critic, "are constructed with a double tier of furnaces
and with upright tubes, the water being contained within the tubes and
the smoke impinging upon them on its passage to the chimney. This
species of boiler is found to be very efficient. A hanging bridge is
introduced to retain the heat in the upper part of the flue in which the
tubes are erected. By inserting a short piece of tube in the upper
extremity of each tube within the boiler the upward circulation of the
water within the tubes was increased as the length of the lighter column
of water was augmented, while the length of the gravitating column
remained without alteration."[18]

  [18] John Bourne. "A Treatise on the Steam Engine" (1861), p. 233. These
  boilers, extensively used in London, America, and elsewhere, and now
  introduced in the Admiralty ship-building, have been greatly improved by
  Lord Dundonald's son, Captain the Hon. A. A. Cochrane, C.B.

"I believe," he said in a letter to Lord Haddington dated the 22nd of
May, 1843, "that all our old vessels of war, save the class of
eighty-gun ships and a few first-rate and large frigates, are almost
worthless; whilst our steam department is deficient in most of the
properties which constitute effective vessels. No blockades worthy of
the name can now be maintained by fleets of sailing ships; nor can
accompanying steamships be kept for months and years even in
'approximate readiness,' awaiting the distant night when it may suit the
enemy to attack our blockading force or quietly to slip out in the dark
in order to assail our commerce in other quarters. I have, my lord,
during the last twelve years actually disbursed, to the great
inconvenience of my family, upwards of 16,000l. to promote nautical
objects which appeared to me of importance. Your lordship knows their
nature, and it is in no way difficult to ascertain their reality. I
consider that several, if not all our line-of-battle ships, should have
the benefit of mechanical power, say to the extent of a hundred
horses--the machinery to be placed out of the reach of shot. The
construction of new ships on the best lines that could be found would
prove more judicious than repairing old ones, however apparently cheap
such repairs may be; for a few powerful and quick-sailing ships are
preferable to a multitude which can neither successfully chase, nor
escape from, an enemy."

That allusion to the "best lines" of ship-building, and some of Lord
Dundonald's other views on naval architecture, will be explained by
another letter written by him to Lord Haddington, three months before,
on the 20th of February. "I have lately," he said, "submitted to the
consideration of Sir George Cockburn an axiom for the uniform
delineation of consecutive parabolic curves, forming a series of lines
presenting the least resistance in the submerged portion of ships and
vessels--an axiom never before so applied in naval architecture, as is
manifest from the discrepant forms of our ships of war. I also offered
to Sir George's attention a new propeller and method of adapting
propellers to sailing ships in her Majesty's service, free from the
disadvantages of paddle-wheels and from the injurious consequences of
lessening the buoyancy and weakening the strength of the after part of
ships by a prolongation of the 'dead wood,' and by cutting a large hole
through it for the insertion of the Archimedean screw. The favourable
impression made on the mind of Sir George, and my own deliberate
conviction of the importance of these improvements, and of others then
briefly touched on, lead me, by reason of the lamented indisposition of
that talented officer, now personally, instead of through him, to offer
them to your lordship's attention.

"The French, as your lordship is well aware, are making great exertions
to advance their steam department, especially in the Mediterranean,
where calms are frequent and their coal is abundant--doubtless in the
hope of thereby preventing the future blockade of Toulon, and of keeping
open their intercourse with Algiers; which would be equivalent to
possessing the dominion of the Mediterranean Sea, where a British
blockading fleet of sailing ships must, under such circumstances,
themselves be protected. In saying this, my lord, I beg to be understood
as by no means depreciating the capabilities of our common ships of war,
whilst they possess the power of motion, but as holding them to be quite
unfit for blockades, and exposed to great peril where calms are of
frequent occurrence and long duration. Indeed, it may be worthy of your
lordship's serious consideration whether, in another point of view, it
might not be judicious to place steam-engines in some, at least, of our
line-of-battle ships, in order to divert the attention of foreign
nations from the exclusive employment of mechanical propelling power to
purposes of naval war, whereby British officers and seamen, deprived of
the means of displaying their superior skill, become reduced to a par
with the trained bands of Continental states.

"I have prepared a model in bronze of a steam-frigate possessing
peculiar properties, founded on the before-mentioned axiom, which, I do
not hesitate to submit to your lordship, would save vast sums wasted in
the construction of inferior ships and vessels, by enabling the
Admiralty, on unerring data, to stereotype--if I may use the
expression--every curve in every rate or class of ships, and so impose
on constructors the undeviating task of adhering to the lines and models
scientifically determined on by their lordships."[19]

  [19] The following statement of Lord Dundonald's "axiom" accompanied the
  model which was submitted to the Admiralty:--"It is universally admitted
  that a sharp _bow_ and a clear _run_ contribute to the speed of vessels;
  but what the consecutive lines ought to be, in order to constitute a
  perfect _bow_, or what those to form the _run_, no builder has yet
  exemplified by uniformity of practice, or theoretically defined.
  Ship-delineators profess the art as a mystery, and arbitrary forms are
  assumed as the result of science. These lines ought to be, by an axiom,
  founded on a law imposed by Infinite Wisdom for the perfect guidance of
  inanimate matter. Projectiles, thrown obliquely, take their flight in
  convex parabolic curves, wherein resistance is overcome by a minimum of
  force; and elastic surfaces obey the converse of that law in opposing
  certain external influences. It is a property of conic sections that a
  straight line, centred in the apex, and caused to circumscribe the
  surface of the cone, will apply itself continuously to all consecutive
  parabolic curves. Hence curves similar to the flight of projectiles, and
  to those formed by the flection of elastic surfaces, may be described on
  a large scale simply by causing a straight line or beam to revolve as on
  the axis of a cone, in contact with a parabolic or elliptical section.
  Thus a consecutive series of convex parabolic or elliptical curves may
  be substituted in ship-building for hollow fantastical lines. The
  benefits from which application are, increased velocity, capacity,
  strength, buoyancy, facility of steering, ease in hard seas, and
  exemption from breaking or 'hogging.'" Diagrams and explanations thereof
  accompanied this concise statement of the principle.

Great interest attended the development of Lord Dundonald's inventions.
"I need hardly assure you," wrote Lord Minto, on the 4th of October, "of
the very great satisfaction I derive from the continued and increasing
success of your rotatory engine; and I shall now look with no little
impatience for further evidence of its merits in the new steam-frigate
to which it is to be applied. I am glad, also, that you have turned your
attention to the construction of steamers of war. I have never been
satisfied with the properties of these vessels, much as their
construction has undoubtedly been improved of late years. It is
certainly a difficult subject, because some of the qualities essential
to a vessel under sail can only be obtained by some deviation from the
form calculated to give the greatest speed under steam; and I consider
fair sailing powers, so as under all circumstances to keep company with
a fleet, as not less important than speed and power as a steamer. The
best combination of these very different qualities, or that which will
upon the whole produce the most serviceable ship, is yet to be sought. I
think, also, that sufficient consideration has not yet been given to the
correction of that very grievous defect, the great uneasiness and
excessive rolling of all these vessels, from the low position of the
weights they carry. There is another object in connection with your
engine which I had constantly in view: I mean its adaptation in the
high-pressure form to our ships of war in general. It was my intention,
had I remained in office, to have fitted a frigate with one of your
high-pressure engines--not very high, however--with a view, if the
experiment answered, to the introduction of an occasional steam power in
all ships of the line. I believe you and I may probably differ as to the
amount of steam power it might be advisable to give such ships, and that
you would wish to steam the _Vanguard_ or the _Queen_ at the rate of ten
miles an hour. My wishes are much more humble, and I should be perfectly
satisfied with an amount of power sufficient to give steerage way under
all circumstances, to carry the ship into or out of action, and to
afford her some assistance in clearing off a lee-shore--something about
equivalent to five knots--an amount of power that might probably be
obtained, together with some fuel for occasional use, without
encroaching too much upon the stowage of the ship. I shall be extremely
glad if you can induce Lord Haddington to direct his attention to this
object."

Through the latter part of 1843 and the whole of 1844, Lord Dundonald
was chiefly occupied with the construction of the _Janus_, the
steam-frigate which was being built and fitted upon his plans. She was
shaped in accordance with his "lines," and in her were introduced both
his revolving engines and his improved boilers. "I have just returned
from Chatham," he wrote to a friend on the 6th of April, 1844, "where
everything regarding the _Janus_ is going on very well indeed. And I
have further good news to tell you. The Admiralty are so pleased with my
parabolic lines for ship-building that they have ordered a drawing to be
made immediately of a frigate of the first class, in order to have one
constructed." Hopeful that at last his long-cherished ideas would bring
benefit both to himself and to the nation, he had in these months much
to encourage him. "All is going on as well as I could wish, or even as I
could accomplish, were destiny at my command," he wrote on the 31st of
May. "The Portsmouth engines now meet the approbation of all the
authorities of the yard, and the Admiralty are so satisfied that they
have given me the building of a steamship to put them in, in lieu of
placing them in the old _Firefly_." "Nothing," he said in a letter
written a week or two later, "can exceed the perfection of the work
which the Bramahs have put into the _Janus_'s engines." "The
experimental engine at Portsmouth," he wrote on the 3rd of July,
"continues to perform admirably, beating all others in the yard in point
of vacuum, which, you know, is the test of power." "The engines will
commence being put together in ten or fourteen days," we read in another
letter dated the 10th of July; "after that we shall make rapid progress.
The _Janus_ is now completing--that is, being coppered--and having the
part of her deck laid down which was left off for the purpose of getting
the boilers on board. My patent boilers will be tried by authority of
the Admiralty about the 20th, and I hope for a favourable result." The
trial, postponed till the 1st of August, was satisfactory. "We have
tried the boilers of the _Janus_," he wrote on that day, "and the result
is most triumphant, having, with slack firing, ten and a half pounds of
water evaporated by each pound of coal." "I have just returned from
Portsmouth," he had written five days before, "where I had the pleasure
to find my engine exceeding even all that it had done before--the
vacuum, with all the work on, being 28-1/2, two inches above that of any
other engine in the dockyard. Mr. Taplin, the chief engineer, is quite
delighted with it." "Sir George Cockburn and Sir John Barrow, permanent
Secretary of the Admiralty, saw my engine yesterday," he wrote on the
24th of October, concerning the machine being built by the Bramahs for
the _Janus_; "and so did Lord Brougham; all of whom were well pleased
with my explanation of its principles and the appearance of the
workmanship. It is now being pulled to pieces, in order to its being
sent to Chatham and set up on board the _Janus_, whose boilers, by my
request, are again to be officially tested as to their evaporative
power, and that, too, by the Woolwich authorities, whose boilers have
been beaten one-third by the evaporation of mine. This request must show
the Admiralty my confidence in the correctness of the former trial; for
there is no doubt the Woolwich people would condemn it if they could."
This second and crucial trial took place on the 9th of November, and the
result exceeded alike Lord Dundonald's expectations and those of the
official judges, to whom failure would have been most pleasant. "All
matters as regards my engines," he wrote on the 20th of November, "are
going on well. I hope soon to hear something satisfactory from the
Admiralty on the subject of the boilers, respecting which they have
until now pursued the most profound silence, notwithstanding the
triumphant result, which has surpassed the product of the far-famed
Cornish boilers in evaporative power."

Those extracts from Lord Dundonald's letters to the friend with whom he
corresponded most freely will suffice to show in what temper he watched
the progress of his inventions during 1844. At the close of the year he
hoped that his labours to bring them into general use were now nearly at
an end; but in this he was disappointed. The Woolwich authorities, who
had at the time expressed their approval of the boilers, sent in an
adverse report to the Admiralty, and Lord Dundonald had to wait several
months before he could disprove the statements made against them; and
opposition of the same sort--the common experience of nearly every
inventor--encountered him at every turn, and had again and again to be
overcome. His Portsmouth engine continued to work well; but in
September, 1845, he learnt that a malicious trick had been resorted to,
to prevent its working better. "On a recent examination of the pumps in
the well," wrote Mr. Taplin, the engineer, "to our utter astonishment we
found, in the middle suction pipe, an elm plug, driven in so tight that
we were obliged to bore and cut it out. The plug stopped that suction
pipe effectually, and from its appearance must have been there from the
time the pumps were first put in motion. As proof of this, we never had
such a supply of water as at present." And that is only an illustration
of the obstacles, accidental or designed, that occurred to him.

By them, the _Janus_ was delayed for a whole year. She was to have been
completed in 1844; but this was not done till the end of 1845. "I have
just returned," Lord Dundonald was able to write on the 24th of
December, "from a nine days' trip in the _Janus_, the result of which
has been successful, both in regard to the properties of the engines and
those of the 'lines' on which she has been constructed. Nothing can
exceed the beauty of her passage through the water, without even a
ripple, far less the wave which ordinary steamboats occasion." That
success, however, was to be followed by a long series of disasters. The
weight of the _Janus_ had been miscalculated, and though she could
proceed admirably in smooth water, she was found to lie so low
that there was constant danger of her being wrecked in rough seas
and bad weather. Other faults, incident to the bringing together
for the first time of so much new workmanship, were also discovered. She
had to be returned to dock, and fresh hindrances of every sort occurred
during the two following years; each hindrance being attended by tedious
correspondence or controversies with petty functionaries jealous of a
stranger's interference, and only eager to bring discredit upon his
work. Much discredit did result. Loud complaints were made concerning
the waste of public money resulting from Lord Dundonald's experiments,
and on him, of course, nearly all the blame was thrown. All this, added
to his previous difficulties in securing for his boiler and engine any
notice at all, was very grievous to him. Every complaint and every
entreaty from him was met by a new excuse and a new reason for delay.
"Ten days are always added," he said, in one letter, "and ten days yet
are said to be required."

The days became weeks and the weeks months, and still the _Janus_ was
incomplete. She was unfinished when Lord Dundonald left England for more
than two years in order to fulfil the duties assigned to him as
commander-in-chief of the North American and West Indian squadron, and
his absence caused a final abandonment of the works.

The tedious process of her construction, however, to which only
sufficient reference has here been made to serve as illustration of one
phase of Lord Dundonald's life, was attended by many good results. To
himself she brought only trouble and expense; but the obstacles thrown
in her way and in his did not deter private adventurers from acting upon
some of the principles developed in abortive attempts at her completion
by public functionaries. Lord Dundonald's inventions--his revolving
engine, his screw-propeller, his boiler, and his "lines of
ship-building,"--have all proved useful in themselves, and have been of
yet greater use in their influence upon the improved mechanism of our
own generation.

To him must be attributed no slight share in the revolution that has
been effected in the materials for naval warfare. Of the superiority of
steamers to war-ships, he was one of the first advocates. His own
rotatory engine was never extensively adopted, and was superseded by
other engines which, lacking the great merit of direct action upon the
paddles, that it was his object to attain, had other and greater merits
of their own; but in their adoption his great object was realized,
seeing that that object was not his own aggrandisement, but the
development of the naval strength of England.




CHAPTER XXV.

LORD DUNDONALD'S SECRET WAR-PLANS.--HIS CORRESPONDENCE CONCERNING THEM
WITH LORD LANSDOWNE, LORD MINTO, LORD HADDINGTON, AND LORD
AUCKLAND.--HIS LETTER TO THE "TIMES."--THE REPORT OF A COMMITTEE
CONSISTING OF SIR THOMAS HASTINGS, SIR JOHN BURGOYNE, AND LIEUT.-COL.
COLQUHOUN UPON THE SECRET WAR-PLANS.--A FRENCH PROJECT FOR NAVAL WARFARE
WITH ENGLAND.--LORD DUNDONALD'S OPINION THEREUPON.--HIS VIEWS ON THE
DEFENCE OF ENGLAND.

[1833-1848.]


Zealously as the Earl of Dundonald strove through nearly twenty years to
perfect and to make generally useful his inventions in connection with
steam shipping, he attached yet greater importance to another and an
older invention or discovery, which, though its efficacy has been
admitted by all to whom it has been explained, has never yet been
adopted. This was the device known as his "secret war-plans," for
capturing the fleets and forts of an enemy by an altogether novel
process, attended by little cost or risk to the assailant, but of
terrible effect upon the objects attacked.

These plans were conceived by him in 1811, and in the following year, as
he has told in his "Autobiography," he submitted them to the Prince
Regent, afterwards King George IV. By the Prince they were referred to a
Secret Committee, consisting of the Duke of York, as President, Lord
Keith, Lord Exmouth, and the two Congreves; who, on the details being
set before them, declared this method of attack to be infallible and
irresistible. Lord Dundonald was pledged to secrecy by the Prince
Regent, and it was proposed to employ the device in the war still
proceeding with France. That proposal, however, was abandoned, and
another, for a trial of the plan under Sir Alexander Cochrane in North
America, in 1814, was prevented by the Stock Exchange trial. After that,
the long peace enjoyed by England would have postponed the experiment,
even if Lord Dundonald had not been debarred from pursuit of his calling
as an English naval officer. He might have used his secret in Chili,
Brazil, and Greece; but his promise to the Prince Regent, and patriotic
feelings, that were even more cogent than that promise, restrained him.
Once used, it would cease to be a secret; and he resolved that the great
advantage that would accrue from the first use should be reserved for
his own country.

The project, however, was not forgotten by him. Soon after the accession
of King William IV., he explained it to his Majesty, who acknowledged
its value, and paid a tribute to Lord Dundonald's honourable conduct in
keeping his secret so long and under such strong inducements to an
opposite course. Soon afterwards, and during many years, the prospect of
another war induced him to engage in frequent correspondence on the
subject with various members of the successive Governments.

"I long ago," wrote the Marquis of Lansdowne--then President of the
Council--in May, 1834, "communicated the substance of the paper you left
with me, on the important objects which might be accomplished by the
agency you describe, in an attack upon an hostile marine, to such of my
colleagues as I then had an opportunity of seeing, and more particularly
to Lord Minto, whom I found in some degree apprized of your views upon
this subject. As questions of such importance to the naval interests of
the country can only be satisfactorily inquired into by the Admiralty
Department of the Government, I should recommend your entering into an
unreserved communication with him on the subject, which I know he will
receive with all the attention due to your high professional character
and experience."

The Earl of Minto gave many proofs of his regard for Lord Dundonald; but
he was not disposed to think favourably of the secret war-plan, and it
was kept in abeyance for four years more. In the autumn of 1838 Lord
Dundonald again pressed its consideration upon Lord Lansdowne, alleging
as a reason the warlike attitude of Russia. "I am obliged to you for
your letter," wrote Lord Lansdowne in reply, on the 5th of November,
"and will certainly make use of the communication it contains in the
proper quarter, if the occasion arises, which I sincerely hope it will
not. Ambitious and encroaching as Russia is seen and felt to be in all
directions, I am confident that her own true policy is to avoid giving
just cause for war, and that, busily as she may use all indirect means
towards her ends which she thinks she can justify, she will yield to
remonstrance when these limits are transgressed by her agents. This is a
course, however, which requires to be, and I trust will be, most
carefully watched."

In that interesting letter, Lord Lansdowne showed, by his silence, that
he was not inclined to investigate the war-plan; and a like indifference
was experienced by Lord Dundonald in his repeated efforts, during the
ensuing years, to secure its acceptance by the Government. It was
submitted to a favoured few, and all to whom it was explained
acknowledged its efficacy; but no more than that was done. Its most
competent critic was the Duke of Wellington, who recognised the terrible
power of the device, although he objected to it on the score that "two
could play at that game." "If the people of France shall force their
Government to war with England," wrote Lord Dundonald to Lord Minto on
the 3rd of August, 1840, "I hope you will do me the favour and justice
to reflect on the nature of the opinion you received from the Duke of
Wellington in regard to my plans, which is the same as that given to the
Prince Regent by Lords Keith and Exmouth and the two Congreves in the
year 1811, and that your lordship will perceive, that 'although two can
play at the game,' the one who first understands it can alone be
successful. In the event of war, I beg to offer my endeavours to place
the navy of France under your control, or at once effectually to
annihilate it. Were my plans known to the world, I should not be accused
of over-rating their powers by the above otherwise extraordinary
assertion." Lord Minto's answer was very brief: "I shall bear your offer
in mind; but there is not the slightest chance of war."

For the same reason the secret plans were set aside by the Earl of
Haddington, who was First Lord of the Admiralty after Lord Minto. He
rendered considerable aid to Lord Dundonald in testing his steam-engine
and boiler, but considered the fact that England was at peace as a
sufficient reason for not discussing the value of a new instrument of
war.

Lord Dundonald, however, who knew the value of his invention, thought
otherwise. While vast sums of money were being spent at Dover,
Portsmouth, and elsewhere upon fortifications and harbours of refuge for
trading-vessels, which, in war time, could have no chance of safety
against fighting steam ships in the open sea, he deemed it especially
important that attention should be paid to a project calculated to
effect an entire revolution in the principles and methods of warfare. If
his project was feasible, it furnished an instrument by which
fortifications and harbours of refuge would be rendered useless, seeing
that the most powerful enemy might by it be effectually prevented from
coming within reach of those defences, or, if he was allowed to approach
them, could use it with a terrible effect, to which the most formidable
defences could offer no resistance. It was under this impression that,
on the 29th of November, 1845, finding Governments indifferent to his
arguments, he addressed a vigorous letter to "The Times."

"Had gunpowder and its adaptation to artillery," he there said, "been
discovered and perfected by an individual, and had its wonderful power
been privately tested, indisputably proved, and reported to a
Government, or to a council of military men, at the period when the
battering-ram and cross-bow were chief implements in war, it is probable
that the civilians would have treated the author as a wild visionary,
and that the professional council, true to the _esprit de corps_, would
have spurned the supposed insult to their superior understanding.
Science and the arts, both of peace and war, nevertheless, in despite of
all such retarding causes, have advanced, and probably will advance,
until effects and consequences accrue which the imagination can scarcely
contemplate.

"It is not, however, my intention to intrude observations of an ordinary
nature, but to endeavour to rectify an erroneous opinion which appears
to prevail, that consequences disastrous to this country may be
anticipated from the introduction of steam-ships into maritime warfare.
I am desirous of showing that the use of steam-ships of war, though at
present available by rival nations, need not necessarily diminish the
security of our commerce; that still less need it necessarily endanger
our national existence, which appears to be apprehended by those who
allege the necessity of devoting millions of money to the defence of our
coasts. I contend that there is nothing in the expected new system of
naval warfare, through the employment of steam-vessels, that can justify
such expensive and derogatory precautions, because there are equally
new, and yet secret, means of conquest, which no devices hitherto used
in maritime warfare could resist or evade.

"That the like prejudice or incredulity which in all probability would
have scouted the invention of gunpowder, if offered to notice under the
circumstances above supposed, may exist to a considerable extent in the
present case, is extremely likely; yet I do not the less advisedly
affirm, that with this all-powerful auxiliary invasion may be rendered
impossible, and our commerce secure, by the speedy and effectual
destruction of all assemblages of steam-ships, and, if necessary, of all
the navies of the whole world, which, for ever after, might be prevented
from inconveniently increasing. Away then with the sinister forebodings
which have originated the recent devices for protruding through the
sterns of sluggish ships of war additional guns for defence in fight!
Away with the projected plans of 'protective forts and ports' of
cowardly refuge! Let the manly resolution be taken, when occasion shall
require, vigorously to attack the enemy, instead of preparing elaborate
means of defence. Factitious ports on the margin of the Channel cannot
be better protected than those which exist, respecting which I pledge
any professional credit I may possess, that whatever hostile force might
therein be assembled could be destroyed within the first twenty-four
hours favourable for effective operations, in defiance of forts and
batteries, mounted with the most powerful ordnance now in use.

"In the capacity of an officer all hope seemed to be precluded, that in
time of peace I could render service to my country. A new light,
however, has beamed through the cloud, for in the pursuit of my vocation
as an amateur engineer it has become apparent that a plan, which I
deemed available only in war, may contribute to prevent the naval
department from being paralysed by wasteful perversion of its legitimate
support. Protective harbours (save as screens from wind and sea) may be
likened to nets wherein fishes, seeking to escape, find themselves
inextricably entangled; or to the guardian care of a shepherd, who
should pen his flock in a fold to secure it from a marching army. No
effective protection could be afforded in such ports against a superior
naval force equipped for purposes of destruction; whilst their utility
as places of refuge from steam privateers is quite disproportioned to
their cost--privateers could neither tow off merchant vessels from our
shore, nor regain their own, if appropriate measures shall be adopted to
intercept them.

"Impressions in favour of so expensive, so despondent, and so inadequate
a scheme, can have no better origin than specious reports, emanating
from delusive opinions derived from a very limited knowledge of facts.
The hasty adoption of such measures, and the voting away the vast sums
required to carry them into execution, are evils seriously to be
deprecated. It is, therefore, greatly to be desired that those in power
should pause before proceeding further in such a course. It behoves them
to consider in all its bearings, and in all its consequences, the
contemplated system of stationary maritime defence, subject, as that
system may become, to the overwhelming influence of the secret plan
which I placed in their hands, similar to that which I presented in 1812
to His Royal Highness the Prince Regent, who referred its consideration
confidentially to Lord Keith, Lord Exmouth, and the two Congreves,
professional and scientific men, by whom it was pronounced to be
infallible, under the circumstances detailed in my explanatory
statement.

"Thirty-three years is a long time to retain an important secret,
especially as I could have used it with effect in defence of my
character when cruelly assailed (as I have shown at length in a
representation to the Government), and could have practically employed
it on various occasions to my private advantage. I have now, however,
determined to solicit its well-merited consideration, in the hope,
privately, if possible, to prove the comparative inexpedience of an
expenditure of some 12,000,000l. or 20,000,000l. sterling for the
construction of forts and harbours, instead of applying ample funds at
once to remodel and renovate the navy--professionally known to be
susceptible of immense improvement--including the removal from its
swollen bulk of much that is cumbrous and prejudicial.

"However injudicious it might be thought to divulge my plan, at least
until energetically put in execution for an adequate object; yet, if its
disclosure is indispensable to enable a just and general estimate to be
formed of the merits of the mongrel terraqueous scheme of defence now in
contemplation, as compared with the mighty power and protective ubiquity
of the floating bulwarks of Britain, I am satisfied that the balance
would be greatly in favour of publicity. It would demonstrate that there
could be no security in those defences and those asylums, on the
construction of which it is proposed to expend so many millions of the
public money; it might, therefore, have the effect of preventing such
useless expenditure, and of averting the obviously impending danger of
future parsimonious naval administration, abandonment of essential
measures of nautical improvement, and the national disgrace of maritime
degradation--all inseparable from an unnatural hermaphrodite union
between a distinguished service, which might still further be
immeasurably exalted, and the most extravagant, derogatory, inefficient,
and preposterous project that could be devised for the security and
protection of an insular, widely-extended, colonial and commercial
State."

A few months after that letter had been written, Lord Dundonald's hopes
that his secret plans would be accepted by the Government were revived.
In 1846, his friend Lord Auckland took office as First Lord of the
Admiralty; and by him, with very little delay, it was proposed to submit
the plans to the judgment of a competent committee of officers. This was
all that Lord Dundonald had asked for, and he gladly accepted the
proposal. The officers chosen were Sir Thomas Hastings, then Surveyor
General of the Ordnance, Sir J. F. Burgoyne, and Lieutenant-Colonel J. S.
Colquhoun. By them the project was carefully considered, and on the 16th
of January, 1847, they tendered their official report upon it. "These
plans," it was there said, "may be classed under three heads:--1st. One,
on which an opinion may be formed with experiment, for concealing or
masking offensive warlike operations; and we consider that, under many
particular circumstances, the method of his lordship may be made
available as well by land as by sea, and we therefore suggest that a
record of this part of Lord Dundonald's plans should be deposited with
the Admiralty, to be made use of when, in the judgment of their
lordships, the opportunity for employing it may occur. 2nd. One, on
which experiments would be required before a satisfactory conclusion
could be arrived at. 3rd. Nos. 1 and 2 combined for the purpose of
hostile operations. After mature consideration, we have resolved that it
is not desirable that any experiment should be made. We assume it to be
possible that the plan No. 2 contains power for producing the sweeping
destruction the inventor ascribes to it; but it is clear this power
could not be retained exclusively by this country, because its first
employment would develop both its principle and application. We
considered, in the next place, how far the adoption of the proposed
secret plans would accord with the feelings and principles of civilized
warfare. We are of unanimous opinion that plans Nos. 2 and 3 would not
be so. We therefore recommend that, as hitherto, plans Nos. 2 and 3
should remain concealed. We feel that great credit is due to Lord
Dundonald for the right feeling which prompted him not to disclose his
secret plans, when serving in war as naval commander-in-chief of the
forces of other nations, and under many trying circumstances, in the
conviction that these plans might eventually be of the highest
importance to his own country."

That report was, in the main, highly gratifying to Lord Dundonald. It
recognized the efficacy of his plans, and recommended their partial use,
at any rate, in time of need. "Permit me to express, as far as I am
able," he wrote to Lord Auckland on the 27th of January, "my deep sense
of obligation to your lordship in causing my plans of war to be
thoroughly investigated by the most competent authorities, and for the
extremely kind terms in which you have informed me of the satisfactory
result. With regard to their disposal, I submit that it would be
advisable to retain them inviolate until a period shall arrive when the
use of them may be deemed beneficial to the interests of the country, I
have to observe, as to the opinions of the commission, that plans Nos. 2
and 3 would not accord with the principles and feeling of civilized
warfare, that the new method resorted to by the French, of firing
horizontal shells and carcases, is stated by a commission of scientific
and practical men appointed by the French Government to ascertain their
effects, to be so formidable that 'it would render impossible the
success of any enterprise attempted against their vessels in harbour,'
and that, 'for the defence of roadsteads, or for the attack of
line-of-battle ships, becalmed or embayed, its effect would be
infallible,'--namely, by blowing up or burning our ships, to the
probable destruction of the lives of all their crews. I submit that,
against such batteries as these, the adoption of my plans Nos. 2 and 3
would be perfectly justifiable."

That the French, not yet forgetful of the injuries inflicted on them in
the last great war, and in the frequent wars of previous centuries, were
still hoping and planning for an opportunity of retaliation, and that
their plans needed to be carefully watched and counteracted, were
convictions strongly impressed upon Lord Dundonald in these years; and
in 1848 he had a singular verification of them. "I enclose a paper of
some consequence," wrote Lord Auckland to him on the 30th of June. "It
contains the plan which, in contemplation of war, has been submitted to
the French Provisional Government for naval operations. It is, perhaps,
little more than the pamphlet of the Prince de Joinville, carried out
methodically and in detail, and the writer seems to me to anticipate a
far more exclusive playing of the game only on one side than we should
allow to be the case; but, nevertheless, such a mode of warfare would be
embarrassing and mischievous, and I should like to have from you your
views of a counter project to it, and your criticisms upon it."

The report here forwarded to Lord Dundonald by Lord Auckland, entitled
"La Puissance Maritime de la France," and designed to show that "une
guerre maritime est plus a redouter pour l'Angleterre que pour la
France," besides affording curious confirmation of Lord Dundonald's
opinions, is a document very memorable in itself. Its main idea was that
in naval warfare victory is to be obtained, not by mere numbers, but by
superiority in ships and guns. "In the present condition of our marine,"
said its author, "we must give up fleet-fighting. The English can arm
more fleets than we can, and we cannot maintain a war of fleets with
England without exposing ourselves to losses as great as those we
experienced under the First Empire. Though during twenty years, however,
our warfare, as carried on by fleets, was disastrous, that of our
cruisers was nearly always successful. By again sending these forth,
with instructions not to compromise themselves with an enemy superior to
them in numbers, we shall inflict great loss on English commerce. To
attack that commerce is to attack the vital principle of England--to
strike her to the heart."

That was the view advanced under Louis Philippe's reign by the Prince de
Joinville; but it was much more elaborately worked out by the advocate
of naval energy in days immediately preceding Prince Louis Napoleon's
accession to power. "What I propose," he said, "is a war founded on this
principle of striking at English commerce. In a naval war between two
nations, one of which has a very large commerce, and the other very
little, military forces are of small consequence. In the end, peace must
become a necessity to the power which has much to lose and little to
gain. Let us see what took place in America during the disputes on the
Oregon question. Despite the immense superiority of the English navy,
the Americans maintained their pretensions. England found out that their
well-equipped frigates and countless privateers were sufficient to carry
on a war against her commerce in all parts of the globe; whilst all the
damage she could do to America was the destruction of a few coast-towns,
by which she could gain neither honour nor profit; and so she decided to
preserve peace by yielding the question. It is this American system that
we in France must adopt. Renouncing the glory of fleet victories, we
must make active war on the commercial shipping of Great Britain. If
America with her small means could gain such an advantage over England,
what results may we not expect to obtain with a hundred and fifty ships
of war and three hundred corsairs armed with long-range guns?"

The report recommended that the naval force of France should be
organized in twenty "corsair-divisions." These were to have Cherbourg
for their head-quarters; one to look after the merchant-shipping in the
British Channel; another to watch the mouth of the Thames; and a third
to cruise along the Dutch and German coasts, so as to intercept our
Baltic trade; and all these were to be aided by a line of telegraphs
from Brest to Dunkirk, in correspondence with a line of scouts ranged
along the French coast, with orders to communicate to the central
station at Cherbourg every movement of British merchantmen. Three
similar divisions were to be formed at Brest, charged respectively with
the oversight of the East and West Indian shipping as it passed Cape
Clear, of the Azores, and of the Irish Coast. A seventh division,
stationed at Rochefort, was to watch for a favourable opportunity of
co-operating with the other six, if desirable, in transporting an army
to Ireland. An eighth division was to watch the neighbourhood of
Gibraltar, and four others were to be stationed in various parts of the
Mediterranean. Three other divisions were to cruise along the North
American coast, to harass our commerce with the United States, to
intercept the trade of Canada and the neighbouring colonies, and, in
spring time, to capture the produce of the Newfoundland fisheries. Three
smaller divisions were to be charged with the annoyance of our West
Indian Islands and the destruction of their commerce; and the remaining
two were to scour the coasts of South America. A separate and formidable
establishment of screw-frigates was to have for its head-quarters a port
of refuge to be constructed in Madagascar, whence operations were to be
directed in all quarters against our East Indian possessions and their
extensive trade.

"In addition to these means," it was further said in the report, "the
Departmental Councils should each arm one steam-frigate, commanded by an
officer of the navy born in the department. The prizes captured by each
should in this case be at the disposal of the Departmental Councils, a
portion being devoted to defraying the expenses of the vessel, and the
remainder applied to the execution of public works within the
department." "As regards the defence of French ports, this may be best
effected by flat-bottomed hulks, armed with long-range guns adapted to
horizontal firing. The chances against invasion are greatly in favour of
France, on account of the superiority of her land force, and the
facility of transporting troops by railway to the locality attacked." "A
great point will be the perfect training of the French squadron by
annual evolutions, and with double or treble the requisite number of
officers. If these suggestions are carried out, France will establish at
sea what Russia has done on land, to the injury and restriction of
British commerce, which must be seriously damaged, without material harm
being done to ourselves. This loss of commerce will especially affect
the working classes of England, and thus bring about a democratic
inundation which will compel her to a speedy submission."

Those were the chief proposals of the secret memoir which, falling into
the hands of the British Government, so far alarmed it as to lead it to
call upon the Earl of Dundonald for his opinions as to the best way of
meeting the threatened danger. "This document," he wrote in his reply to
Lord Auckland, "describes a plan of maritime operations undoubtedly more
injurious to the interests of England than that pursued by France in
former wars. There is nothing new, however, in the opinions promulgated.
They have long been familiar to British naval officers, whose wonder has
been that the wide-spread colonial commerce of England has never yet
been effectually assailed. It is true that the advice given in the
memoir derives more importance now from the fact that the application of
steam-power to a system of predatory warfare constitutes every harbour a
port of naval equipment, requiring to be watched, not in the passive
manner of former blockades, but effectively by steam-vessels having
their fires kindled at least during the obscurity of night. The cost and
number of such blockades need not be dwelt on, nor the indefinite period
to which prudence on the part of the enemy, and vigilance on that of the
blockading force, might prolong a war. One hundred millions sterling
added to our national debt would solve a doubt whether the most
successful depredation on British commerce could produce consequences
more extensive and permanently injurious. The memoir obviously
anticipates that 'l'usage des canons bombes, dont les atteintes ont un
si prodigieux effet,' will prevent our blockading ships from approaching
the shores of France, and that thus their steam-vessels might escape
unobserved during night, even with sailing-vessels in tow. This is no
vague conjecture, but a consequence which assuredly will follow any
hesitation on our part to counteract the system extensively adopted, and
now under the consideration of the National Assembly, of arming all
batteries with projectiles, whereby to burn or blow up our ships of
war--a fate which even the precaution of keeping out of range could not
avert, by reason of the incendiary and explosive missiles whereby 'les
petits bailments a vapeur pouront attaquer les plus gros vaisseaux.' It
is impossible to retaliate by using similar weapons. Forts and batteries
are incombustible. Recourse must therefore be had to other means,
whereby to overcome fortifications protecting expeditionary forces and
piratical equipments."

The means recommended by Lord Dundonald, it need hardly be said, were
the secret war-plans which he had developed nearly forty years before,
and the efficacy of which had recently been again admitted by the
committee appointed to investigate them in 1846. It is not allowable, of
course, to quote the paragraphs in which Lord Dundonald once more
explained them and urged their adoption in case of need. The only
objection offered to them was that they were too terrible for use by a
civilized community. "These means," he replied, "all powerful, are
nevertheless humane when contrasted with the use of shells and carcases
by ships at sea, and most merciful, as competent to avert the bloodshed
that would attend the contemplated 'descente en Angleterre ou en
Ireland,' and other hostile schemes recommended in the memoir."

That letter was forwarded to Lord Auckland from Halifax, where Lord
Dundonald then was, in the beginning of August. "Assuredly the reasons
which you give for the use of the means suggested are such as it is
difficult to controvert," wrote Lord Auckland on the 18th; "but I would
at least defer my assent or dissent to the time when the question may be
more pressing than it is at present." "I would postpone my own
reflections on the 'secret plans,'" he wrote again on the 1st of
September, "and would fain hope that events will allow the Government
long to postpone all decision upon them. I agree with you, however, in
much that you say upon their principle, and am well satisfied that to no
hands better than yours could the execution of any vigorous plans be
entrusted."

When, however, as will be seen on a latter page, an opportunity did
arise for enforcing those plans against another power than France, their
execution was not permitted to Lord Dundonald.

Strongly as he himself was impressed with their importance, they formed
only a part of a complete system of opinions respecting the defence of
England at which he arrived by close study and long experience. These
have already been partially indicated. He did not wish that his plans
should be lightly made use of; but, believing that they would ultimately
become a recognised means of warfare, and that even without them a great
revolution would soon take place in ways of fighting, he deprecated as
useless and wasteful the elaborate fortifications which were in his time
beginning to be extensively set up at Dover, Portsmouth, and other
possible points of attack upon England, and urged, with no less energy,
that vast improvements ought to be made in the construction and
employment of ships of war.

Fortifications, he considered, were only desirable for the protection of
the special ports and depots around which they were set up; and even for
that purpose they ought to be so compact as to need no more than a few
troops and local garrisons for their occupation. To have them so
complicated and numerous as to require the exclusive attention of all or
nearly all the military force of England, appeared to him only a source
of national weakness. His own achievements at Valdivia and elsewhere
showed him that skilful seamanship on the part of an invader would
render them much less sufficient for the defence of the country than was
generally supposed. If all our soldiers were scattered along various
parts of the coast, it would not be difficult for the enemy, by a bold
and sudden onslaught, or still more by a feint of the sort in which he
himself was master, to take possession of one, and then there would be
no concentrated army available to prevent the onward march of the
assailant. Much wiser would it be to leave the seaboard comparatively
unprotected from the land, and to have a powerful army so arranged as to
be ready for prompt resistance of the enemy, if, by any means, he had
gained a footing on the shore.

To prevent that footing being gained, however, Lord Dundonald was quite
as eager as any champion of monster fortifications could be; but this
prevention, he urged, must be by means of moveable ships, and not by
immoveable land-works. A strong fleet of gunboats, stationed all along
the coast, and with carefully-devised arrangements for mutual
communication, so that at any time their force could be speedily
concentrated in one or more important positions, would be far more
efficacious and far more economical than the more popular expedients for
the military defence of England. He heartily believed, in fact, in the
old and often-proved maxim that the sea was England's wall, and he
desired to have that wall guarded by a force able to watch its whole
extent and pass at ease from one point to another as occasion required.

Desiring that thus the coast should be immediately protected by
efficient gunboats, he desired no less to augment the naval strength of
the country by means of improved war-ships as much like gunboats as
possible. To large ships, if constructed in moderation and applied to
special purposes, he was not averse; but he set a far higher value upon
small and well-armed vessels, able to pass rapidly from place to place
and to navigate shallow seas. "Give me," he often said, "a fast small
steamer, with a heavy long-range gun in the bow, and another in the hold
to fall back upon, and I would not hesitate to attack the largest ship
afloat." His opinion on this point also was confirmed by his own
experience--most notably in the exploits of his little _Speedy_ in the
Mediterranean--and by the whole history of English naval triumphs. Since
the time when the so-called Invincible Armada of Spain entered the
British Channel, designed to conquer England by means of its huge
armaments, and when the bulky galleons and galeasses of Philip's haughty
sailors were chased and worried by the smaller barks and pinnaces of
Drake, Hawkins, Frobisher, and the other sea-captains of Elizabeth, who
sailed round and round their foe, and darted in and out of his unwieldy
mass of shipping, never failing to inflict great injury, while his
volleys of artillery passed harmlessly over their decks to sink into the
sea, there had been abundant proof of the constant superiority of small
warships over large. A "mosquito fleet," as he called it, was what Lord
Dundonald wished to see developed; a swarm of active little vessels,
just large enough to carry one or two powerful guns, which could go
anywhere and do anything, to which the larger crafts of the enemy would
afford convenient targets, but which, small and nimble, would be much
less likely to be themselves attacked, and, even if attacked and sunk,
would entail far less loss than would ensue from the destruction of a
large war-ship. "As large a gun as possible, in a vessel as small and
swift as possible, and as many of them as you can put upon the sea," was
Lord Dundonald's ideal. For this he argued during half a century; for
this he laboured hard and long in the exercise of his inventive powers.
In 1826, the plan of the war-steamers which he was to have taken to
Greece was explained to Lord Exmouth--no slight authority on naval
matters. "Why, it's not only the Turkish fleet," exclaimed the veteran,
"but all the navies in the world, that you will be able to conquer with
such craft as these."




CHAPTER XXVI

THE EARL OF DUNDONALD'S CLAIM FOR THE RESTORATION OF THE ORDER OF THE
BATH.--HIS GOOD SERVICE PENSION.--THE INVESTIGATION OF HIS SECRET
WAR-PLANS.--HIS PAMPHLET ON NAVAL AFFAIRS.--HIS INSTALLATION AS A
G.O.B.--HIS CANDIDATURE FOR ELECTION AS A SCOTCH REPRESENTATIVE
PEER.--THE QUEEN'S PERMISSION TO HIS WEARING THE BRAZILIAN ORDER OF THE
"CRUZIERO."--HIS APPOINTMENT AS COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE NORTH AMERICAN
AND WEST INDIAN STATION.

[1839-1848.]


The restoration of his naval rank to the Earl of Dundonald in 1832, was
slowly followed by other acts reversing the injustice of previous years
by which a large portion of his life had been embittered.

"Your lordship and the Admiralty," he wrote to Lord Minto, then at the
head of naval affairs, on the 30th of March, 1839, "may have been
surprised that I have never solicited any appointment since my
reinstatement in the naval service by his late Majesty, whose memory I
shall ever cherish for this magnanimous act of justice. The cause, my
lord, has not been from any reluctance on my part, but from a feeling
which, I have no doubt, will appear satisfactory to your lordship, if
you do me the favour to read the enclosed copy of a letter which I have
written this day to the Marquess of Lansdowne as President of the
Council." The letter to Lord Lansdowne referred in great part to Lord
Dundonald's rotary-engine, and to his secret war-plan, which he
expressed his willingness to put in execution if ever it was required.
"Your lordship and the Privy Council, however," it was added, "will not
fail to observe that, if it shall ever be the intention of the
Government, under any circumstances, again to employ me in the naval
service, it would be quite inconsistent with the character of that
service, as well as my own reputation, for me to assume command, unless
the Order of the Bath, gained on the 12th of April, 1809, now thirty
years ago, shall be restored to me."

"I hope it will appear to your lordship," said Lord Dundonald, in a
letter to Lord Melbourne, dated the 11th July, 1839, "that my services
as a naval officer have been useful and honourable to my country; and,
referring to those services and to the peculiar opportunities I have
since had of acquiring further professional knowledge, I may say,
without vanity, that her Majesty has no officer in her navy more
experienced than myself; and yet, from the extraordinary circumstances
of my case, I am the only flag-officer in her Majesty's service who, if
called upon to take a command, could not do so consistently with his own
honour and the respect due to those who might be appointed to serve
under him. For where is the officer who could not conveniently call to
mind, that I, who when only a captain was a Knight of the Bath, was
deprived of that honour, and that now, though a flag-officer, I have not
been deemed worthy of having it restored?" "I am sensible," wrote Lord
Dundonald in another letter to the Premier, written eight days later,
"that the act of justice which I experienced from the late King, under
the ministry of Earl Grey, of which your lordship was a distinguished
member, in restoring me to my naval rank, was a great favour, inasmuch
as it evinced a considerate feeling towards me; and I was then fully
satisfied with it, under the impression that it would be viewed by the
public, and especially by the navy, as a testimony of the belief of the
Government, at that time, that I was innocent of the offence that had
been laid to my charge, and also that I should stand as good a chance as
most of my brother officers (and perhaps, from my experience, a better)
of being called to active service. I did not then foresee that the
restoration of my naval rank alone would be viewed as a half-measure.
Still less did I anticipate that, in the event of my being offered an
appointment, I should be incapacitated from accepting it by reason of
the feelings of other officers that I still laboured under some
imputation which would render it derogatory to them to serve under me.
But it is now impossible for me to conceal from myself the fact that,
while the navy generally is kindly disposed towards me, and would
rejoice to see me fully reinstated in all that I once enjoyed, I am
considered by many to remain as completely precluded from active service
as if my name had never more appeared in the Navy List, I trust, my
lord, that it cannot be thought reasonable to reduce me to the
inglorious condition of a retired or yellow admiral at home, and at the
same time to deny me the privilege of acquiring either emolument or
distinction in foreign service."

Lord Dundonald's hope was that, on the occasion of her Majesty's
marriage, there would be a bestowal of honours, which would afford a
convenient opportunity for the restoration of his dignity as a Knight of
the Bath. But in this he was disappointed.

A minor favour was conferred upon him, however, and in a very gratifying
way, eighteen months later. "You are probably aware," wrote Lord Minto
to him on the 3rd of January, 1841, "that the death of Sir Henry Bayntam
has vacated one of the pensions for good and meritorious service. Before
I left town a few days ago I made my arrangements to enable me to confer
this pension upon you, if you should think it worthy of your acceptance,
either as evidence of the high estimation in which I have ever held your
services, or as convenient in a pecuniary point of view. Although you
are one of the few who have not applied for this, I do not fear that any
one of the numerous claimants can show so good a title to it."

That compliment was accepted by Lord Dundonald in a spirit answering to
that in which it was offered. Yet his reasonable anxiety for a
restitution of the Order of the Bath was not abated, and thereupon he
was engaged in a correspondence with the Earl of Haddington, then First
Lord of the Admiralty, during the early part of 1842, which was closed
by the intimation, bitterly disappointing to Lord Dundonald, that the
Cabinet Council declined recommending the Queen to comply with his
earnest request.

Equally disappointing was the result of another application with the
same object which he made to Sir Robert Peel in the autumn of 1844. "Her
Majesty's servants," wrote Sir Robert Peel on the 7th of November, "have
had under consideration the letter which I received from your lordship,
bearing date the 10th of September. On reference to the proceedings
which were adopted in the year 1832, it appears that, previously to the
restoration of your lordship to your rank in the navy, a free pardon
under the Great Seal was granted to your lordship; and adverting to that
circumstance, and to the fact that thirty years have now elapsed since
the charges to which the free pardon had reference were the subject of
investigation before the proper judicial tribunal of the country, her
Majesty's servants cannot consistently with their duty advise the Queen
to reopen an inquiry into these charges."

Lord Dundonald failed to see, in the partial reversal, twelve years
before, of the unjust treatment to which he had been subjected eighteen
years before that, a reason for refusing to inquire whether there was
any injustice yet to be atoned for. He had not, however, very much
longer to wait for the object which he sought.

One of his grounds for desiring a public recognition of the efficacy of
his secret war-plans was a reasonable belief that, if it was seen that
through half a lifetime he had steadfastly avoided using for his private
advantage what might have been to him a vast source of wealth, in order
that the secret might be reserved solely for the benefit of his country,
it would be acknowledged to be incredible that, for insignificant ends,
he could have resorted to the gross and clumsy fraud attributed to him
at the Stock Exchange trial. And in this expectation he was right.
Nearly all the reparation that was now possible quickly followed upon
the investigation into the war-plans that was referred to in the last
chapter.

While the investigation was pending he was pained by a letter from Sir
Thomas Hastings, not unkind in itself, but showing that his real motives
for courting that investigation were not understood. "I made a
communication to-day," wrote Sir Thomas on the 27th of November, 1846,
"that the commission had entered on its duties, and received
instructions to inform you that it would be desirable, before the
commission proceeded further, to ascertain your lordship's views as to
the nature of the remuneration you would expect from Government in the
event of your plans being reported on favourably."

Lord Dundonald's reply was characteristic. "You intimate a wish on the
part of Government," he wrote on the 1st of December, "to ascertain my
views in regard to the 'remuneration' I expect, in the event of my plans
being favourably reported on. I reply that I devoted these plans,
thirty-five years ago, to the service of my country, that I have
reserved them through the most adverse and trying circumstances,
satisfied that at some future time I should prove my character to be
above pecuniary considerations or mercenary motives. I have looked
forward to the restoration of those honours, of which I was most
unjustly bereaved, and to freedom from mental anguish, endured
throughout an isolation from society of one-third of a century. I cannot
contrast with such sufferings, nor with my plans, any sum that
Government could bestow. Nevertheless, I have implicitly relied that
collateral deprivations and losses would be taken into consideration by
some future, just, and impartial Administration. I do most earnestly
hope that the period has now arrived."

That letter was communicated by Sir Thomas Hastings to Lord Auckland. "I
return the letter," he wrote to Sir Thomas on the 16th of December,
"which Lord Dundonald wrote to you upon the remuneration which he would
expect in the event of a favourable report upon his plans; namely,
first, his restoration to the honours of which he was deprived; and,
secondly, a consideration of collateral deprivations and losses. I am
sorry to acquaint you that the first condition is one to which I am not
authorized to promise an acquiescence. It is not necessary that I should
discuss the difficulties which occur to the restoration in question. I
can only express my own deep regret that they should exist, and that the
hopes which have been entertained by Lord Dundonald should be
disappointed. For myself, I personally regard him. I look upon his naval
career as most remarkable and most honourable; and I must lament
whatever may seem to detract from the advantage and grace of his return
to the navy."

"Sir Thomas Hastings," wrote Lord Dundonald to Lord Auckland on the
following day, "has sent me your sympathizing note on the decision of
the Cabinet Council in regard to the first item, designated as 'the
remuneration I would expect in the event of a favourable report on my
plans.' Now, after the expression of my deep sense of gratitude to your
lordship for having brought the question before the Cabinet, I do most
sincerely rejoice that 'the first condition is one to which you are not
authorized to promise an acquiescence.' I could not deem acquiescence a
remuneration, nor could I value it otherwise than as evidence of
conviction, produced by facts and the tenor of a whole life, of my
incapability of descending to base acts for gain at any period of my
existence, especially at a moment when I can prove that I had objects of
the highest national importance and the most brilliant personal
prospects in view. In confirmation of disinterestedness, I further hold
my retention of the 'secret war-plans' for a period of thirty-five
years, notwithstanding frequent opportunities to use them to my
incalculable private advantage. The merit of these plans, though I am
well aware of their value, is yet officially unpronounced by the
commission appointed to report. Therefore, the preceding facts being
doubtful, I repeat that I do most sincerely rejoice that the Cabinet
Council have manifested that their decision neither depends on favour
nor on the value of the plans themselves. Foreseeing that, whatever may
be the ultimate determination, it must be founded on facts and justified
by an exposition of my conduct and character, I am preparing a document
which, whatever may be my fate pending the brief remainder of my
existence, will justify my memory when grievous wrongs shall cease to
prey on a mind which, save from the consciousness of rectitude, would in
brief time have bowed my head with humiliation to the ground." The
document there referred to was a pamphlet entitled "Observations on
Naval Affairs, and on some Collateral Subjects." In it were concisely
enumerated Lord Dundonald's services as a British naval officer, and the
hardships brought upon him by the unmerited Stock Exchange trial. The
pamphlet was published in February, 1847, and immediately excited
considerable attention. "I hope the difficulties which have prevented
the realization of your wishes may be removed shortly," wrote Sir Thomas
Hastings on the 2nd of March. "But services so distinguished, and a
career so splendid and full of professional instruction as your
lordship's, can never be blotted out or rendered dim in the annals of
the naval history of our country." "I have had the kindest note possible
from the Marquess of Lansdowne," said Lord Dundonald, in a letter
written on the 27th of April. "Lord Auckland was at our house on
Saturday, and spoke in the kindest and most feeling manner. I hear from
all quarters that the pamphlet has made and is making a great
impression, and I have every hope that all will end well."

All did end well. The public announcement, on the highest authority, of
the value of his secret war-plans, and the consequent exhibition of his
disinterested patriotism in so long preserving them for his country's
use, followed by the bold appeal made by him to the public through his
pamphlet, brought success at last to his long-continued efforts to
obtain a restoration of his dignity as a Knight of the Bath. His best
friends in the Cabinet, especially Lords Lansdowne and Auckland, had
influence, though not all the influence they desired, upon other Cabinet
and Privy Councillors who were opposed to the tardy act of justice. But
they did not wait for the assent of all. On the 6th of May Lord
Lansdowne represented the case to her Majesty the Queen, and received
her promise that, with or without the approval of her Privy Councillors,
she would confer the next vacant Order of the Bath upon Lord Dundonald.

Fortunately a vacancy occurred immediately, through the death of Admiral
Sir Davige Gould. "Lord Auckland has called," wrote Lord Dundonald on
the 9th of May, "and informed me officially that the Queen has placed at
his disposal the vacant Order of the Bath; and that, in conformity with
the intention with which it was so placed, he was to deliver it to me."
"I have information from the palace," he wrote a few days later, "that
her Majesty has had conversation as to the justice of some further
atonement for the injuries that have been inflicted on me, and that she
said it was subject of regret that such was not in her power; but,
should the subject be entertained by her advisers, her concurrence would
not be wanting."

That further act of justice was never rendered; but Lord Dundonald
rejoiced that the more important measure--that which, by restoring the
dignity wrongfully taken from him, would do more than anything else to
set him right in the eyes of the world--was at last adopted. "It gives
me sincere pleasure," wrote Lord John Russell on the 12th of May, in
answer to a letter thanking him for the conduct of his Administration,
"that the last act of the Government has been so gratifying to you. Your
services to your country are recorded among those of the most brilliant
of a war signalised by heroic achievements. I will lay before her
Majesty the expression of your gratitude, and I can assure you that the
Queen has sanctioned with the greatest satisfaction the advice of her
ministers."

On the 25th of May--the order being dated the 22nd--Lord Dundonald was
gazetted as a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath; and this act
of grace was rendered more graceful by the personal interest shown by
Prince Albert, who, as Grand Master of the Order, dispensed with the
customary formalities and delays, and, on the following morning, caused
a warrant to be sent to him, in order that he might wear the cross at
the birthday drawing-room, which he attended by her Majesty's command on
the 27th of May. Thus another step was made in the way of retribution
for the injuries inflicted on him in 1814 and in the ensuing years.

"To-day," he wrote on the 12th of July, "there was a grand muster at the
palace of all the Knights Grand Crosses, and many inferior Crosses, and
I was installed. Lord Ellenborough was one of my sponsors, and the Duke
of Wellington shook hands with me, and expressed his satisfaction at my
restoration to the Order. I am glad to tell you that the ceremony of
knighting, of which I was afraid, was not resorted to; so my knightship
dates back to the 27th of April, 1809."

In another effort to obtain full justice for himself, however, he was
unsuccessful. The great expenses that sprang out of his long-continued
scientific and mechanical pursuits had absorbed all his scanty sources
of income, and he forcibly urged that in accordance with the precedent
furnished by a similar grant to Sir Robert Wilson, in 1832, he was
entitled to the arrears of pay due to him for the seventeen years during
which he had been kept out of his position in the British navy. But his
request was refused; and the heavy pecuniary loss, as well as other and
much heavier deprivations, consequent on a persecution that has been
since admitted to have been wholly undeserved, has never been
compensated.[20]

  [20] Part of a letter which Lord Dundonald received on this subject four
  years afterwards from Mr. Joseph Hume, though quoted in his
  "Autobiography," is too important to be here omitted. "I considered,"
  wrote the great champion of public economy, on the 10th of May, 1852,
  "that you were incapable of taking the means that were resorted to by
  Mr. Cochrane Johnstone, and for which you suffered; and I was pleased to
  learn that you had been restored to your rank. I considered that act a
  proof that the Government which had restored you to the rank and honours
  of your profession, and had afterwards appointed you to the command in
  the West Indies, must have come to the same conclusion; and, until the
  perusal of your draft petition, I concluded that you had all your
  arrears paid to you as a tardy, though inadequate, return to your
  lordship, whose early exploits did honour to yourself, and gave
  additional lustre to the naval service of the country to which you
  belonged.... His Majesty King William IV. was satisfied with the
  innocence of Sir Robert Wilson, and he was restored to the service--was,
  I understand, paid all the arrears of pay and allowances during his
  suspension, and afterwards appointed to the command of Gibraltar. I was
  pleased at the result; and it would give me equal pleasure to learn that
  your application to her Majesty should be attended with an act of
  justice to you equally merited." Lord Palmerston subsequently, in answer
  to an application from Lord Dundonald--forgetting Sir Robert Wilson's
  case--said there was no precedent for such an act. Lord Dundonald
  answered that there was no precedent for such injustice as had been done
  to him.

Shortly after that event Lord Dundonald sought to be elected one of the
Scotch representative peers in the House of Lords. Now that his load of
unmerited disgrace was shaken off, he desired to resume his old
functions as a legislator--and this with no abatement of his zeal for
the welfare of the people; but with none of the violence which his own
heavy sufferings at the time of their first and heaviest pressure had
partly caused him to show during his former parliamentary career. Being
now a peer, he could not return to his seat in the House of Commons, and
being a Scotch peer, he could only sit in the House of Lords as one of
the delegates from the aristocracy of his native land. Among these he
therefore asked for a place at the election in September, 1847. He did
not, however, begin to seek it early enough. Other candidates had,
according to custom, obtained promises of a majority of votes from the
electors before he thought of canvassing, and he was thus left in a
minority. Many peers, however, who on this occasion were unable to
support him, offered to pledge their votes to him for the next election.

A minor favour was at this time shown to Lord Dundonald, which afforded
him real gratification. In 1835, he had been allowed by King William IV.
to use the insignia of a Grand Commander of the Order of the Saviour of
Greece, conferred upon him by King Otho. In August, 1847, he applied to
the Cabinet for permission to use the title of Marquis of Maranham and
the Grand Cross of Brazil, both of which had been conferred upon him by
the Emperor Pedro I., in 1823. "I have to acquaint your lordship," wrote
Lord Palmerston, then Foreign Secretary, on the 11th of October, "that
under the peculiar circumstances of the case, which have prevented the
application being made earlier, the Queen has signified her pleasure
that you should be permitted to accept the Grand Cross of the Order of
the Cruziero. With regard, however, to the title of Marquis of Maranham,
it is my duty to state to your lordship that, after full consideration,
her Majesty's Government regret that they cannot advise the Queen to
grant you the desired permission. While her Majesty's Government duly
appreciate the services rendered by your lordship to the Crown of
Brazil, they consider it to be on general principles so undesirable that
distinguished officers of the British navy should have foreign titles,
that they feel themselves compelled to decline complying with the
request." "I beg to assure your lordship," wrote Lord Dundonald in
reply, on the 18th of October, "that I feel more gratitude in being
informed of the sentiments of her Majesty's Government in regard to my
faithful and zealous services in Brazil than I ever experienced from the
title conferred on me as the honorary portion of my reward for such
services. As far as relates to assuming the title in my native country,
I entreat your lordship to believe that I never entertained the
intention."

A memorable occurrence soon followed. Now that his honours as well as
his naval rank were restored to him, he had no reason for holding back
from active service in his profession; and the Earl of Auckland, anxious
to make use--as far as use could be made in peace-time--of his great and
varied experience, and also to give further proof of the desire at last
to render him all possible honour, was prompt in offering him fresh
employment on the sea. "I shall shortly have to name a
Commander-in-Chief for the North American and West Indian Station,"
wrote Lord Auckland on the 27th of December, 1847. "Will you accept the
appointment? I shall feel it to be an honour and a pleasure to have
named you to it, and I am satisfied that your nomination will be
agreeable to her Majesty, as it will be to the country, and,
particularly, to the navy."

Lord Dundonald did accept the appointment, rejoicing in it as a further
step in reparation for the injuries by which he had been hindered, a
whole generation before, from rising to the highest rank in the naval
service of his country. He might then have achieved victories over the
French which would have surpassed his brilliant exploit at Basque Roads.
He could now only direct the quiet operations of a small fleet in time
of peace. This, however, being the best that it was now possible for him
to do, he gladly undertook. "Permit me," he wrote to Lord Auckland, "to
assure your lordship that this gracious act has further tended to
obliterate the deep and painful impressions made by thirty years of
mental suffering, such as no language can describe; for, my lord, the
agony produced by false accusations on an honourable mind is infinitely
greater than merited infliction of death itself. I leave your lordship
then to estimate the amount of obligation I fail to convey, and beg you
will allow me to express a hope that your generous recommendation to her
Majesty will be justified by my zealous endeavours to fulfil the duties
I owe to my sovereign and country."

"I have waited for her Majesty's assent to your appointment," said the
Earl of Auckland in a letter written on the 3rd of January, 1848,
"before answering your letter of the 28th ultimo. This assent has been
most cordially given, and you may now consider yourself
Commander-in-Chief of the North American and West Indian Station, and I
may repeat that my share in this proceeding has given me very great
pleasure, and that I am confirmed in my feelings of gratification by the
terms in which you speak of occupying your proper place in the navy. I
am glad for you, and I am glad for myself that I have done this just and
honourable act."

Very hearty was the satisfaction expressed by all classes as soon as
Lord Dundonald's appointment was made public. "I beg," wrote Mr. Delane,
the editor of the "Times," earliest of all in tendering his compliments,
"to offer my very hearty congratulations upon your appointment--all that
remained to efface the stain of such unmerited persecution." "The
communication you have just made to me," wrote the Duke of Hamilton and
Brandon, "is most gratifying, and the First Lord of the Admiralty has
done himself immortal honour in appointing that naval officer commander
in one hemisphere who had previously illustrated his name by his most
brilliant exploits in the other. Everything I think has now been done to
undo the foul aspersions with which you have been assailed; and I am
sure now everything will be done that can most serve to establish the
ability of the officer and the delicacy of the gentleman. I congratulate
you most sincerely upon your appointment, and I hope you will meet with
difficulties when you arrive at your destination. Don't be surprised at
this my wish. It proceeds from knowing the ample resources of my friend
to overcome them, and his constant desire to sacrifice everything to
duty and honour." "I derive the greatest pleasure and satisfaction from
your appointment to the command of a British fleet," wrote Sir George
Sinclair, "an appointment not less creditable to the ministry than
honourable to yourself. I cannot help contemplating with affectionate
sorrow the portrait of our dearest friend, Sir Francis Burdett, now
suspended over the chimney-piece, and thinking how happy he would have
been had he witnessed this most welcome and delightful consummation."
"Permit me the honour," wrote Admiral John White, "to bear testimony to
the high gratification I felt at seeing by the papers the announcement
of your lordship's having taken the command of the West India and
Halifax Stations. The whole British empire has expressed great joy at
this justice having been done to the bravery of your lordship as an
officer and your goodness and honour as a man." That last sentence told
no more than the truth.




CHAPTER XXVII.

LORD DUNDONALD'S DEPARTURE FOR NORTH AMERICA.--EXTRACTS FROM THE
CORRESPONDENCE OF LORD AUCKLAND AND OTHERS RESPECTING WEST INDIAN
AFFAIRS AND EUROPEAN POLITICS.--BERMUDA.--THE FRENCH REVOLUTION OF 1848
AND ITS ISSUES.--IRELAND AND THE CHARTISTS.--THE DEATH OF LORD AUCKLAND.

[1848.]


Lord Dundonald left London for Devonport on the 16th of March, 1848, and
on the following day hoisted his flag on board the _Wellesley_ as
Admiral in command of the North American and West Indian Fleet. On the
25th of March he set sail for Halifax, which was soon reached, and was,
during three years, the head-quarters from which he proceeded on
numerous voyages in fulfilment of the duties of his office. These duties
were not very onerous or various. They were relieved, however, by much
careful study of the circumstances and prospects of our colonies in
British North America, and by correspondence thereupon, and on other
subjects, with influential friends at home, and especially with Lord
Auckland, the First Lord of the Admiralty. From this correspondence some
selections will be made in the ensuing pages.

"I am very much pleased with your letter of the 19th," wrote Lord
Auckland, on the 21st of March, while the _Wellesley_ was still at
Devonport, "and the good spirit with which you look forward to your
coming duties. I know how irksome is the succession of the petty duties
which are incident to places of authority, and how far more attractive
is the excitement of great actions to those who are capable of
performing them. But even the first class of duties is not without
interest, and carries credit as it is performed with justice and
exactness; and I hope that for the second the necessity of great
exertions will not arise. But it is always well that the possibility of
their being called for should be borne in mind; and, while you follow
the peaceful avocations of your station, I should be glad that you
become acquainted with all its points of strength and of weakness. All
the information and advice that you may give to me will be gratefully
received and carefully considered."

"I hope," wrote Lord Auckland, three days later, "that the Mosquito
affair will have been brought to a termination before your arrival, and
that the necessity for the presence of ships in the Bay of Mexico will
have terminated with a cessation of hostilities between the United
States and Mexico. You will then have the slave-trade and the fisheries
mainly to attend to. You will learn from the Consul at Cuba whether the
slave-trade is now actively carried on. It had for some time entirely
ceased, but it may have revived, and, with good information and force
for interception applied at the right time, I should hope that it will
not require many of your ships. The fisheries will, for a season, be a
regular and fixed object of attention. Though I feel that your number of
ships is small, it is difficult for me to increase it. I hate to fritter
away our men and naval strength on a multitude of brigs and sloops and
petty objects."

Lord Auckland communicated to his friend many interesting opinions
respecting the state of politics and the condition of affairs on both
sides of the Atlantic. A letter from him, dated the 30th of April, had
reference chiefly to the troubles occasioned at that time by the
interference of Nicaragua with British commerce, which had necessitated
the sending of Captain Lock, in the _Alarm_, to watch the course of
events and compel proper behaviour by the turbulent state. "A 'little
war' is always a vexatious thing," he wrote, "and our relations with the
state of Mosquito, though they have long and ancient standing to
recommend them, are strange and anomalous. But the insults of Nicaragua
were highly provoking. The detention of British subjects was not to be
borne, and the spirit which has been exhibited by Captain Lock, the
spirit and enterprise with which his operations were directed, the
conduct of all who served under him, and the successful results which
have been achieved, are all highly to be applauded. I am glad, however,
that they have left the river of San Juan. I see that in 1780 Nelson
lost by the climate there fifteen hundred out of eighteen hundred men;
and I well know what is the effect of a low country in the tropics,
particularly after exertion and fatigue."

The rest of the letter related to the turmoil excited in Europe by the
deposition of Louis Philippe in February, 1848, and the less successful
revolutions in other countries. "We continue to be on the very best
terms with the Provisional Government, and there is a better disposition
towards us on the part of the French people than there was at the first
outbreak of the Revolution. I have therefore at present no apprehension
of war. There is, however, this danger; that Germany and Italy are
greatly disturbed, and that Austria and Sardinia are engaged in war on
the side of Italy, and Prussia and Denmark to the north, and it will not
be easy for France and England to be peaceful lookers-on. Besides which,
the Government of France will long be subject to popular gusts, and it
is never easy to say in what direction they may blow. In the meantime,
however, all wears the appearance of peace, and at home the chances of
disturbance both from Chartists and Repealers have become less. We have
only danger from the distress and want of employment which have followed
upon the shock given to credit throughout Europe."

Unfortunately, most of the letters written by Lord Dundonald during
these months have been lost; but something of their purport may be
gathered from the replies to them. "I am very glad," Lord Auckland
wrote, on the 28th of May, "that your thoughts appear to be very
considerately given to the health of those that are under your command.
You will, of course, have consideration for the ships that have served
in the Gulf of Mexico, or other unhealthy places, and give them a turn
in the north. I did not lose a moment in sending to Lord Grey your
suggestions in favour of removing the convict hulks at Bermuda, and he
has promised me that he will, without delay, issue orders accordingly."

Lord Auckland wrote again to his friend on the 23rd of June. "I have
your valuable memoranda on the defences and dockyard of Bermuda," he
said, "and I am greatly obliged to you for them, as will be Lord Grey. I
will promise to give them early and deep consideration. In the meantime
I will press the Board to give immediate authority for the improvement
of the drains of the hospital, and of the supply of water. I am greatly
obliged to you for the steadiness with which you keep considerations of
economy in view. The disinterestedness with which you regard the schemes
which have been proposed for a new Admiralty House at Bermuda will give
you authority in checking expenditure in other objects."

"The affairs of France," we read in the same letter, written while
General Cavaignac was suppressing the June revolution, "are most
unsettled. There is no confidence in any man or party, and there are
discontent, and mistrust, and alarm. All feel that things cannot go on
in their present form; but none can foresee what will follow. It may be
a continuance of internal dissension, but in an aggravated form. It may
be a disposition to external violence. At home the condition both of
England and Ireland is quieter than it was." "There is more brightness
in our prospects at home just now," wrote Lord Auckland, three weeks
later, on the 14th of July, "than has been the case for some months.
Commerce and credit are reviving; Chartism is dormant, and Ireland is
less troublesome. And on the Continent there is a more general
disposition to return to institutions of order. I confess that I should
be glad to hear that just at this moment there were a larger force than
usual at Bermuda. The presence there of Mitchell[21] is apparently
raising some excitement. Though I cannot apprehend any formidable
attempt at rescue, yet the notoriety of a force being at or about the
island may put an end to the vapouring menaces which are proclaimed, and
prevent any rash or foolish enterprise that may be projected."

  [21] The great Chartist who, having been tried and sentenced to
  transportation, had been sent to Bermuda in May, 1848.

"Thanks to you for your letter from Halifax," Lord Auckland wrote again,
on the 21st of July, "and for your last sheets on the defences of
Bermuda. I did not think, when we parted, that the question of these
defences would so soon come under serious discussion, with a view to
their practical efficiency, but I do not yet think they will be put to
the test by any formidable attempt for the rescue of Mr. Mitchell. Such
apprehensions of danger, however, as they occur occasionally, do good,
and lead men to think of and correct their weak points. What you say of
the accessible nature of the southern reef surprises me, and strengthens
your recommendation of gunboats as the means of defence which are least
to be neglected. I only hang back in regard to them, as the Naval
Department could not bear the expense of such defences for the many
colonies that would require them, and they must be provided by the
Colonial Governments. Our arrangements, however, may in some cases be
subsidiary to theirs, and, wherever it is possible, the craft of the
dockyard and other establishments should be so fitted as to be capable
of carrying a gun. I am glad you sent off the _Scourge_ to Bermuda. She
is a handy vessel and well commanded, and the notoriety of her presence
will not be without a useful effect. What you say of the character of
the emigrants that are sent forth from Ireland to our colonies is but
too true. Yet it is better that they should go than accumulate famine
and disturbance at home. The present condition of Ireland menaces
trouble and difficulty."

"I am quite aware," wrote Earl Grey, who was then Secretary of State for
the Colonies, to Lord Dundonald, on the 3rd of August, "of the
unfortunate tendency of the emigration to the North American provinces
being chiefly from Ireland; but I do not see how it is in the power of
the Government effectually to counteract the causes which are leading to
the settlement of so large a proportion of Irish in this part of the
British dominion. I fear this will, hereafter, be attended with very
unfortunate results." "I beg to thank your lordship," he also said, "for
the important information you have transmitted to me, and for the pains
you have taken in considering the subject of the defence of Bermuda,
which I recommended to your attention before you left England. I am in
communication with Lord Auckland upon this subject, and we shall
endeavour to act upon your suggestions so far as we are enabled to do
so, under the financial difficulties with which we have to contend."

In the next letter written by Lord Auckland to Lord Dundonald, on the
18th of August, he again referred to European politics. "There is, with
regard to the Continent, more promise of peace at this moment than there
has been for a long time past, and there is a tone of more moderation on
the part of France towards other countries than I have ever expected to
see. But she yet has within her fearful elements of disturbance; her
Government is yet unsettled, and, whenever determined, it will be
subject to strong popular influences, and there can be no security. I
almost apprehend earlier mischief from the popular influences of the
United States. They have had a task of conquest and annexation, and Cuba
lies temptingly. The uneasiness of the black population of many of the
West India Islands may lead to opportunities, and disagreeable events
may grow out of such circumstances. But these are matters of
speculation, and nothing turns out as men think that they foresee. I
wish that your squadron was stronger; for you are weak in numbers for
the many points that you have to cover. Our home politics are rather
more satisfactory than they were; that is to say, the dangers of Irish
insurrection and of formidable Chartist outbreak are over. But there is
still much uneasiness and disaffection in both countries, and the
various events of Paris have given encouragement to strange enterprises.
I apprehend, however, no serious mischief from these quarters at
present; but we have in prospect a very general failure of the potato
crop, and a very indifferent harvest, and here will be new causes of
embarrassment."

There were many causes of embarrassment to English statesmen during the
ensuing months. "For the present," wrote Lord Auckland, on the 1st of
September, "there is a cordial and friendly understanding between the
Governments of this country and France, and the chances of war seem to
be distant. General Cavaignac seems to be a prudent and moderate man.
But no one can predict into what courses the popular influences of
France may force him, or what changes may on any day occur. The extreme
Communist party is weaker than it was; and a Royalist party--for some
king, but not for Louis Philippe--is growing up; and between these is a
Government of a republic and an army. The first political difficulty
will be that of Italy, where the Austrians will not readily make any
concession, and where the French will not readily see them again
accumulate strength. It is to be seen whether their mediation and ours
will be of any avail."

"The condition of the present French Government is precarious," Lord
Auckland said in another letter, dated the 9th of November. "According
to present appearances, Louis Napoleon will be elected President, not
because he is personally esteemed, but from his name, with some parties,
and because it is anticipated by others that his rule will be short, and
that he will be made to make way for others." "The election of a French
President is over," Lord Auckland was able to say on the 25th of
December, "and has been carried at last with a rush; and we are to have
a new dynasty of Napoleons. Louis Napoleon was supported by the army for
his name, by the bulk of the nation because Cavaignac and the Republic
were hated, and by the Legitimists because they think he may presently
be overthrown. He is pronounced to be a foolish man; but his course has
been lately one of prudence and perseverance, and he will enter upon
power with good auspices. But he will have many difficulties to contend
with, and we may yet see many changes before the condition of France
will be settled."

The Earl of Auckland, one of the worthiest and most generous statesmen
of his time, Lord Dundonald's firm friend, and the friend of all with
whom he came in contact, did not live to see these changes. Just a week
after that letter was written, Admiral John Dundas, who had been his
chief adviser on Admiralty matters, had to write to Lord Dundonald. "It
is with great regret," he said, on the 1st of January, 1849, "I have to
inform you of the death of Lord Auckland, after a few hours' illness. He
was on a visit to Lord Ashburton, near Winchester, on Saturday--seized
with a fit--never spoke after--and died this morning. You may well
imagine the universal sorrow at such a loss; and I am sure you will join
in that, for I know well the friendship that existed between you."

By Lord Auckland's letters, it has been shown that, among much else,
Lord Dundonald made special study of the actual condition and the
possible improvement of Bermuda, both as a convict settlement and as a
centre of defence against any attacks that might be made upon the West
Indies. He suggested various beneficial changes for the strengthening of
its fortifications and for lessening its unhealthy character by better
drainage and other expedients. In all of these he was supported by Lord
Auckland. But from the new First Lord of the Admiralty, Sir Francis
Baring, he met with less encouragement. Bermuda had been made a subject
of inquiry by a Parliamentary Committee, and the House of Commons being
averse to any further expense, Sir Francis Baring was compelled to
countermand much of the action that had been resolved upon.

With Sir Francis Baring Lord Dundonald corresponded on little but
strictly official matters, and therefore their letters are of less
general interest than those which passed between him and Lord Auckland.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

LORD DUNDONALD'S VISITS TO THE NORTH AMERICAN AND WEST INDIAN COLONIES,
AND HIS OPINIONS THEREON.--NEWFOUNDLAND AND ITS
FISHERIES.--LABRADOR.--BERMUDA; ITS DEFENCES AND ITS GEOLOGICAL
FORMATION.--BARBADOES.--THE NEGROS.--TRINIDAD.--ITS PITCH LAKE.--THE
DEPRESSED CONDITION OF THE WEST INDIAN COLONIES.--LORD DUNDONALD'S
SUGGESTIONS FOR THEIR IMPROVEMENT.

[1848-1850.]


The foregoing chapter consists chiefly of extracts from letters
addressed to Lord Dundonald during 1848. In the present one free use
will be made of his own journal of a tour among the colonies and islands
whose interests he was appointed to watch as Admiral of the North
American and West Indian squadron.[22] It furnishes much interesting
information about the places visited, and has also additional interest
as illustrating the writer's tone of mind and method of investigation
concerning every object that came in his way. The journal describes his
occupations during eight months, beginning with the summer of 1849, and
includes reminiscences of less systematic visits to the various
localities made during the previous year. Leaving Halifax, in Nova
Scotia, on the 14th of July, Lord Dundonald proceeded northwards, passed
Cape Breton Island to Newfoundland, the fisheries of which it was part
of his duty to protect.

  [22] Published in 1861 as a pamphlet, entitled, "Notes on the
  Mineralogy, Government, and Condition of the British West India Islands
  and North American Maritime Colonies."

He entered St. George's Harbour, the chief resort of the fishermen and
traders, on the 27th of July. "It is situated," he said, "in the angle
of a deep bay between Aguille and Cape St. George, the town being on the
promontory and having deep water close to it. No village can be better
placed for the herring fishery, as these gregarious fish at the season
of their arrival on the coast enter this harbour, as it were, into the
cod of a net, whence they are lifted into the boats by scoops and
buckets. With such slender means possessed by the inhabitants, the
average catch amounts to twenty-two thousand barrels; but hundreds of
thousands might be taken, were encouragement afforded. Salmon are also
caught in the neighbouring rivers, which are alive with undisturbed and
neglected trout. The barrels in which the herrings are packed are said
to cost two shillings and sixpence each, and some new regulation
requires additional hoops, which, to those concerned, appears a
grievance. It is said the herrings must realise ten shillings per
barrel, in order to repay costs and labour, but the last advices from
Halifax state that eight shillings only are offered by the merchants.
The French, I understand, attend more to the cod fishery. They are not
at liberty, if they adhere to the treaty, to draw nets on the shore.
There is an American merchant here who deals in truck with the English
settlers, and obtains from them about a third part of the herrings
caught, which he sends to the United States in such of the numerous
American schooners employed in the fishery as enter this bay. The
unauthorised British settlers here are said to be very jealous of
intruders, as they consider they have an exclusive right to the land and
fisheries in their actual possession, and from which all are, by treaty,
excluded. They seemed suspicious that the _Wellesley_ might have some
motive in entering the bay contrary to their interests. No person
whatsoever came on board, nor did any one come off to the ship, even to
offer himself as a pilot. Some persons were lately desirous to set up a
saw-mill, which would have been important, as they obtain all their
staves for herring-casks, &c., from abroad; but the sanction of the
inhabitants could not be obtained. There is no magistrate or civil or
military authority, no medical man, and, perhaps fortunately, no
attorney. Indeed, there is no law, though justice is done amongst
themselves after their own manner. There is a neat little church, at
which the bishop is now officiating, and the people who are resorting to
it seem well-dressed and orderly."

On the 30th of July Lord Dundonald left the harbour, to pass round the
sharp promontory known as Cape St. George. "About midway," he said, "a
remarkable change takes place to the northward of the table mountain,
where the vertical strata become in appearance horizontal along the
whole shore of the projecting isthmus. The colour of the strata is
chiefly grey, in parallel layers of varying hardness, as appears from
its projections and indentations. I could not, without delaying the ship
longer than I wished, procure samples of the strata, but there was no
appearance of carboniferous minerals. The same layers were visible in
detached places up to the tops of the hills, which are of considerable
altitude, though that is not denoted in the chart. When we rounded Cape
St. George on the following morning, the strata, which before appeared
parallel, were observed to dip at a considerable angle towards the N.E.,
and seemed, where sufficiently exposed to view, to be split into large
diagonal flakes. There is an island close off the shore, about five
miles to the eastward of the Cape, called Red Island, which is of quite
a different formation seemingly red horizontal layers of sandstone, of a
soft nature, as is obvious from the encroachments of the sea. The
peninsula opposite to this island is of considerable elevation, as far
as Round Head, whence it gradually lowers to a point about ten miles
farther to the eastward. Here the level ground at first seems to be
alluvial, but on closer observation indurated rocks are seen to protrude
in flakes dipping into the sea. The bay formed by this promontory is of
great magnitude. There are several islands at its mouth and in the
interior, but there being no chart, and no motive for entering it, we
stood on towards the mountains on the main shore, some of which are very
high. In many parts the contortion of the strata, and the confusion of
all kinds of materials, are extraordinary. The sides of the mountains on
the shore are clad with moss alone, trees of very stunted growth only
appearing in the sheltered valleys. No visible portion of the shore
seems capable of producing food for man."

From the western coast of Newfoundland Lord Dundonald sailed due north
to visit Labrador. With its natural resources, and the neglect of them,
he was much surprised. "The British possessions in Labrador," he said,
"extend over a tract of country as great as the northern regions of
Russia from St. Petersburg towards the Pole, wherein the Ural Mountains
compensate that Government for the sterility of the soil. I have often
felt surprise at the indifference evinced by the Spanish Government
towards developing the resources of its possessions; but it is with
still greater astonishment I view the supineness of our own Government
in leaving this vast tract unexplored, and its probable treasures
undiscovered."

Similar complaints were suggested to him by his observations on the
eastern side of Newfoundland, to which he sailed down on the 6th of
August. "We passed several ports, wherein there were numerous French
ships and square-rigged vessels dismantled, and schooners and multitudes
of fishing-boats in full activity in the offing. These schooners and
fishing-boats are manned by the crews of the large French vessels which
are laid up in port, and constitute depots as well as the means of
transporting the produce of the fishery to France, an arrangement highly
advantageous to the French marine, and which we erroneously abandoned by
erecting Newfoundland into a Colonial Government, thus surrendering our
deep-sea fishery entirely, even without rendering the inshore fishery
available to the newly-erected colony, throughout which it languishes
from want of stimulus, or an adequate reward, even to induce the
impoverished inhabitants of the shore to avail themselves of their small
and almost costless boats to catch fish, which, by reason of the
bounties given by France and America, are unsaleable with profit in any
country in Europe. It is grievous to observe the difference in the mode
of carrying on the British fishery compared to that of the French. The
former in rudely-constructed skiffs, with a couple of destitute-looking
beings in party-coloured rags; the latter in fine, well-equipped
schooners, which may be called tenders to their larger ships, the seamen
uniformly dressed in blue, with Joinville hats, looking as men ought and
may be expected to look whose interests and those of the parent State
are understood to be in unison, and attended to as such."

At St. John's, Newfoundland, Lord Dundonald made some stay before
sailing down to Sydney, in Cape Breton. Then he returned to Halifax, to
go thence for a second visit to Bermuda.

Respecting Bermuda, as we have seen, he had much correspondence. "This
island," he now said, "ever since the discovery of the opening in the
reefs by Captain Hurd, has been deemed of much naval importance, and
plans were formed by the highest military authorities for its defence. A
naval arsenal also has been designed for the accommodation of a large
establishment of ships of war. Distant islands, however, cannot be
defended on principles which would be the most judicious at home--by the
erection of forts in all quarters that could be occupied by an enemy. It
is obvious that, under the circumstances of Bermuda, troops cannot be
spared from the parent State permanently to garrison the multitude of
forts which, on such a principle of defence, would be requisite. If they
could, the expense would be enormous, and therefore I cannot dismiss
this subject without an expression of my satisfaction at the
intelligence I lately received that such extravagant and unavailing
system of fortification has been suspended. In my opinion it is a great
error to imagine that naval officers are unfit to be consulted
respecting maritime defences; had it not been for so mistaken a notion
many hundreds of thousands of pounds, perhaps I might say a million,
might have been saved. I unhesitatingly assert that gunboats not only
would suffice, but are by far the most available, and infinitely the
cheapest defensive force amongst the rocks around the island of Bermuda.
The coloured population of this island are a fine race, incomparably
superior to the generality of the coloured population in the West
Indies. They are accustomed to navigate in their commercial vessels:
their lives are almost spent in boats, and no better crews could be got
for the defence of their own island than they would prove themselves to
be."

"The existence of this solitary island so far from the continent of
North America," we further read in Lord Dundonald's journal, "is a
circumstance meriting the attention of geologists, as well as the
uniform material of which it is composed. It is all of a calcareous
nature, but differing in condition from any of the other islands of the
same substance. The strata are exposed in the perpendicular cliffs on
the sea-shore in numerous precipices, from a hundred feet to minor
altitudes, and are composed either of the most minute shells, or of
parts of shells so triturated that they scarcely indicate their origin.
In some places, however, there are laminae containing shells in a more
perfect state, all of a white colour, with the exception of one (which I
found on digging a cave) of a semicircular shape, of a red colour, and
almost as large as an oyster shell. The whole of the substance of
Bermuda can be burnt into good lime; but there is an indurated
calcareous stone, often containing many perfect shells, on the island on
which the naval yard is being built, which is preferred as more adhesive
and better in quality. Although there are no indications of volcanic
products on this island, yet it exhibits manifest proofs that volcanic
force has raised it from the depths of the ocean. In what stage of
induration it was at that period it is difficult to conjecture. The
hills and vales throughout the whole extent of Bermuda have the
stratified calcareous material generally conforming on all sides to the
inclination of the surface. There are, however, many situations in which
the strata present themselves as manifestly broken by force. In the deep
cutting in the road which enters into the enclosure around the
Government House, one of these breaks appears at the apex of the hill,
dividing its sides, which here incline towards the centre, exposing a
wedge-formed supplementary part that fills up the interstice. In the
grounds of the Admiralty House curious instances of unconformable strata
are laid bare in old quarries. These indicate some other cause for their
nonconformity than that before assigned, and I am quite at a loss to
imagine how the stratified materials could have been placed one above
another at such different angles by the action of water, or in any other
way, without appearance of disruption. There are caves upon this island
containing large stalactites. There is one on Tucker's Island where
these stalactites reach from the top of the cave far below the surface
of the salt water it contains. I am not aware of any other instance
where similar crystalisations have taken place under the sea water. It
seems to lead to the belief that this island was at some time less
submerged. There are other caves much larger, and one which goes in so
far that the officers who accompanied me did not scramble to its end.
This cave is formed by two large masses of calcareous matter having been
reared up one against the other. I have seen some very beautiful
crystallisations taken from another cave recently found in a quarry at
Ireland Island; but the absence of petrifactions here (for I have never
seen one) constitutes a remarkable difference between this formation and
that on the island of Antigua, where the roads are almost made with
petrifactions.

"In clearing the surface of the rock, as has lately been done at the
quarries, and in laying the foundation of the new convict barracks, the
most irregular formation is exposed. Large holes are found contiguous to
each other in the white calcareous rock, which are filled with a
substance resembling chocolate in its colour, unlike everything else
upon the island."

From Bermuda Lord Dundonald sailed down to Barbadoes, where he arrived
on the 5th of February. "The negroes," he said, "who are much more
numerous on this island than on any other of the West Indies, appear to
be well fed, and cheery in their dispositions. They live in small wooden
houses resting on clumps of wood or blocks of stone, a mode of
construction which enables them, when tired of or displeased with their
locality, to transport them elsewhere. I was told that a street of stone
huts, constructed for their use, is almost abandoned, by reason of the
immobility of such residences. I consider this locomotive propensity a
favourable trait in their character. Behind the barracks we stopped at a
hut on the rising ground whereon the barracks ought to have been placed,
and assuredly I never saw a more contented scene. There was a young
negro, and, I believe, his wife, together with an old woman, perhaps the
grandmother of the child she fondled. We made inquiry as to their mode
of living, and they showed us green peas, seasoned with red pepper,
ready to be cooked, yams, and cassava bread, as good as oatmeal cakes.
These peas grow on large bushes, and vegetables of all kinds surround
their hut."

From Barbadoes Lord Dundonald proceeded by way of Tobago to Trinidad.
"On the morning of the 11th of February," he said, "we weighed and
returned through the Dragon's Mouth, shaping our course for the great
natural curiosity of Trinidad, the Pitch Lake, which I hoped might be
rendered useful for fuel for our steam-ships--so important in the event
of war--as fuel is only obtained at present from Europe. The United
States and Nova Scotia are never resorted to; hence, could this pitch be
rendered applicable as fuel, our vessels would be supplied when an enemy
would be almost deprived of the use of steam in these seas. We arrived
at La Brea, and before daybreak on the following morning we were on the
road to the lake, or rather on a stream of bitumen (now indurated) which
in former ages overflowed the lake. Indeed the bitumen beneath this road
seems still to be on the move, as shown by curvilineal ridges on its
surface, like waves receding from a stone thrown into water. The
appearance of the lake is most extraordinary. One vast sheet of bitumen
extends until lost amidst luxuriant vegetation. Its circumference is
full three miles, exclusive of the creeks, which double the extent. The
bituminous surface is of a dark brown, waxy consistence, except in one
or two places where the fluid still exudes; obviously this spring is in
full vigour beneath, for the whole surface of the lake is formed into
protuberances like the segments of a globe pressed together, having
hollows between filled with rain-water, which (except in the immediate
vicinity of the bituminous springs) is inodorous and without taste--an
extraordinary fact, showing that this bitumen is of a nature quite
different from that of pyrotechnic mineral or vegetable tar. In its dry
state it is quite insoluble in water, though when charged with essential
oil, as it exudes from nature's laboratory, it imparts a pungent and
unpleasant taste. A considerable quantity of gas bubbles up through
these bituminous springs, showing that decomposition is still active
amongst the materials whence it exudes. Some of the recent bitumen has
an odour resembling vegetable gum. Mr. Johnson, the very obliging
proprietor of a neighbouring estate, had the goodness to cause some of
his labourers and a cart to bring samples to the beach. Means of
transport, however, were so inadequate, that we had recourse to digging
the more impure pitch on the beach, in order to prosecute our trials for
its substitution as fuel. This bitumen, which had flowed upwards of a
mile from the lake, was combined with earthy and other substances which
it had encountered in its course. Various attempts have heretofore been
made to apply the bitumen to useful purposes, but without success, as we
may judge from the total abandonment of those trials and expectations
which for a brief period induced its shipment to England with a view to
its application to the pavements of London and other cities. All
excavation has consequently ceased, and so low is the estimation in
which the bitumen is held, that the duty on embarkation is only one
halfpenny per ton. The nature of this bitumen is very different from
that of coal. When exposed to a naked fire it becomes fluid, and runs
through the bars before gas is disengaged, or at least before it is
raised to a temperature at which it will ignite; perhaps it requires
more or purer air than enters through the bars of steamboat furnaces--a
conjecture which seems to be confirmed by the dense smoke speedily
produced."

"The plains of Trinidad," wrote Lord Dundonald, "have a fertile soil,
which, simply by clearing the ground, is capable of being rendered the
most productive in the West India Islands for the growth of sugar and
whatever can be cultivated in a climate most uniform in its temperature,
most congenial to tropical plants, free from the evils of hurricanes and
from all impediments to vegetation. I am confident that, if the hands of
the Governor were not bound by restrictions and routine, the progress of
Trinidad would soon verify this opinion. Lord Harris, the present
Governor, nobly tendered a portion of his official income in alleviation
of the burthens which are so severely felt in the present depressed
state of agriculture and commerce, but from some cause his lordship's
liberal intention was not realized. The example would have proved
salutary, as it must have been followed by reductions throughout other
West India Islands, whose resources are even in a worse state than those
of Trinidad. Is it reasonable, whilst the ground has ceased to be
cultivated because production is unprofitable, not only that the land
should continue to be taxed at the rate it was in prosperous times, but
that a duty should be levied on the exportation of its produce? Is it
reasonable that whilst householders can obtain no rent, and have no
income save the bare means of providing a scanty subsistence, they
should be assessed at the rack-rent of former valuation? Can any
property be more entitled to protection than that of the owners of the
soil or of the dwellings they inhabit? And yet all these, as appears by
the numerous gazetted sales, are sacrificed to the collection of sums,
the bulk of which is uselessly and prejudicially expended. Whilst the
Government of the parent State has alleviated the burdens on the
productive classes, is it just that taxes on food and on all the
necessaries of life should be continued throughout the colonies, and
that even their productions should be intolerably burdened with local
imposts, whilst complaints are loud and true of the absence of all
remuneration from the sources which once constituted the prosperity of
those now impoverished and oppressed possessions? The above observations
do not apply exclusively to Trinidad, but to the whole of the islands,
which scarcely differ in degree in the causes of ruin which seem
irremediable by any authority except the legislature of the parent
State. I am persuaded that the chief of the Colonial Department at home
would endeavour to counteract the causes of widely-spread and increasing
ruin, were he in possession of correct information; but popular
representations of grievances, often embodying misapprehensions as to
their true origin, and accompanied by suggestions of impracticable
remedies, are denied or disputed in counterstatements by interested
officials, so that the Colonial Minister is bewildered, and can form no
correct judgment from such conflicting statements. I hold it to be
impossible that the monstrous absurdities and violations of every
principle of good government which exist throughout these western
colonies could be tolerated an instant, were their consequences known
and believed by those in power, or were they laid before the British
public by any person on whose judgment and opinion they could rely. Can
it be credited that even in the island of Trinidad, not only multitudes
of valuable properties are brought to sale from the inability of their
owners to pay the fiscal demands, but that properties are consigned to
the Government auctioneer even for so small an assessment as
three-fourths of a dollar? This is, nevertheless, the fact. The
emancipation of the slaves was a glorious act, but the rescue of these
noble possessions from ruin, and the restoration of prosperity to an
integral part of the empire, would redound to the honour of any one who
would successfully advocate the cause of reason and justice, not only on
the principles of equity, but with the less noble view of gain to the
parent State, as it is certain that the consumption of British
manufactured articles has fallen off in these colonies to an extent
which has not been counterbalanced by the increase of exports
anticipated from the questionable policy of concession to Brazil, in
which I have reason to believe the supply of articles required for the
slave trade constitutes a large proportion."

Reflections of that sort occurred to Lord Dundonald again and again, as,
passing round from Trinidad, he visited all the principal British West
India Islands, the last at which he called on his way back to Halifax
being Jamaica. "No doubt," he said, "the generous and noble act by
which, in the reign of his late Majesty, slavery was abolished, produced
a prejudicial change in the economy of the sugar plantations,
notwithstanding the large amount awarded to the proprietors, as the sums
so paid were for the most part immediately transferred to mortgagees,
leaving the proprietors in possession of the soil, but without the means
of paying the expense of its cultivation by free labour. This is an evil
which time has not remedied, and, of course, in the estimation of those
who are, in consequence, losers, furnishes the pretext for imputing to
the black population a degree of reluctance to labour far exceeding the
reality. Those who pay a reasonable price for work, and are punctual in
their payments, do not fail to get as many labourers as they require. I
assert this not from any vague hearsay, but from various unquestionable
and authentic documents, amongst which are the examinations taken by
Committees of the House of Assembly appointed to inquire into the causes
and difficulties alleged to exist in the cultivation of estates. Whilst
the poverty of the planters and the destitution of the labouring
population is so universal, it seems most extraordinary on inspecting
the Custom House returns to find almost every article of necessary
consumption brought from abroad paying high duties on entry; whilst the
concession of small patches of land to the negroes, whom there is no
capital to employ, would, if accorded, produce food, and in a great
measure dispense with such injurious importations. Is it reasonable to
instruct the negroes in their rights as men, and open their minds to the
humble ambition of acquiring spots of land, and then throw every
impediment possible in the way of its gratification? I perceive by the
imposts and expenses on the transfer of small properties, that a barrier
almost insurmountable is raised to their acquisition by the coloured
population. I have learnt that small lots of Crown lands are scarcely
ever disposed of, though three-fourths of these lands are still in the
hands of Government.

"It is lamentable to see the negroes in rags, lying about the streets of
Kingston; to learn that the gaols are full; the penitentiaries incapable
of containing more inmates; whilst the port is destitute of shipping,
the wharves abandoned, and the storehouses empty; while much, if not
all, of this might be remedied. It may be asked, how is this to be
effected? and I answer--by justice, resolution, patriotism, and
disinterestedness. Never can this wretched state of affairs be remedied
so long as taxes on the necessaries of life are heaped on an
impoverished population. Never can the peasantry raise their heads with
a contented aspect, whilst every animate and inanimate thing around them
is taxed to the utmost. Not only is there a tax on land, and on the
shipment of its produce, on houses, outhouses, and gardens, on horned
cattle and horses, but on asses and pigs; and the severest penalties are
enacted for concealment or suppression in the returns. Officials are
employed for the gathering of pittances which do not defray the expense
of collection. The harbour dues and exactions are such that no vessel,
when it can be avoided, is brought into the Port of Kingston;
consequently, though Jamaica is admirably situated, even more favourably
than St. Thomas, the former port is abandoned, whilst that of the latter
is filled with the shipping of all nations."

Lord Dundonald detailed the substance of these opinions in a letter to
Earl Grey, the Secretary for the Colonies. "I have to thank your
lordship," Lord Grey replied, "for your letter. The observations of a
person of your lordship's knowledge and experience upon the present
state of our colonies are most interesting and useful to me. I am aware
that there exists much distress in the West Indies at present; but I am
sorry to say I do not see what Parliament can do towards removing it,
beyond freeing their trade from the remaining restrictions by the repeal
of the Navigation Laws, which I hope will now be soon accomplished. I
own I quite differ from your lordship as to the propriety of restoring
to the planters the monopoly in the British market they formerly
enjoyed, and I believe that the permanent interests of these colonies
would be injured instead of being advanced by doing so."




CHAPTER XXIX.

LORD DUNDONALD'S RETURN FROM AMERICA.--HIS ARGUMENTS FOR THE RELIEF OF
THE NEWFOUNDLAND FISHERIES AND THE WEST INDIA TRADE.--THE TRINIDAD
BITUMEN.--LORD DUNDONALD'S OTHER SCIENTIFIC PURSUITS AND VIEWS.

[1851-1853.]


The Earl of Dundonald's time of service as Admiral of the West Indian
and North American Stations expired in April, 1851. On the 31st of
December, 1850, Sir Francis Baring wrote to inform him that Sir George
Seymour had been appointed his successor. "It is with some regret," said
Sir Francis, "that I have performed this duty, as it has been my
pleasure to have been in communication with you, and to feel that an
important command has been placed in the hands of an officer of your
lordship's high professional character and merits. You must permit me,
in making this announcement, to add my sincere thanks for the manner in
which you conducted the duties of your position, and particularly for
the valuable information you have communicated to the Board, and the
attention you have paid to the many points you had brought before you."

On the 14th of May Lord Dundonald left Halifax, and he reached
Portsmouth in the beginning of June. During the next few years his mind
was much occupied with the further consideration of various topics
suggested by his observations and explorations on the other side of the
Atlantic. It will be enough to make brief allusion to the most important
of these.

Subjects of hearty regret to him, repeatedly brought under his notice
during his three years' stay in the North American and West Indian
waters, were the great depression of the British fisheries in the
neighbourhood of Newfoundland, and the yet greater depression of trade
consequent on the remission of slavery in the more southern colonies.
For both he sought to provide a remedy. He urged, as has already been
shown in the extracts from his journal, which was published, and
attracted much attention, in the summer of 1852, that special help
should be given to these colonies, not only by the removal of all
restrictions upon their commerce and manufactures, but by protective
enactments in their favour.

His reasons for this view, as regards the Newfoundland fisheries, in
which he thought not alone of the interests of the colonists, were set
forth by him in a letter addressed to the "Times," in August, 1852.
"Were not the question of maintaining our nurseries for seamen," he
there said, "more important than commercial considerations, I should not
venture, through your favour, to trespass on public attention regarding
the North American fisheries; but, perceiving that impressions are
likely to be made by writers, avoiding responsibility for erroneous
opinions by withholding their names, I feel it a duty explicitly to
state that it is not to the amount of fish caught and cured, to the
price at which it can be sold at home or abroad, or to the number of
persons employed in the fishery, but to their nationality and vocation,
to which I attach importance, in order that our fisheries shall form
hardy British seamen in oceanic vessels, like those employed under the
bounties paid by North America and France. These being the
considerations, the question is not whether it is consistent with the
enlightened theory of free trade to pay a premium which shall transfer
capital from the pockets of one class to those of another, but whether
it is wiser and more economical for the community at large to uphold
such nursery, or to maintain even a skeleton of warlike
establishments--perhaps to build, equip, and employ additional ships of
war, squadrons, or fleets, to watch, perchance to contend with, power
thus cheaply developed by rival nations. I ask whether the bounty given
to enable steam-packets to cross the ocean is more consistent with
free-trade principles than a bounty awarded to our fisheries as a
nursery for seamen. A colonial premium is indeed talked of, and by those
unacquainted with facts, who do not foresee its operation, it may be
deemed a substitute for a bounty by the parent State; but I advisedly
assert that such colonial premium would not rear one disposable seaman
for our naval service, and that even the colonial fishermen would derive
no commensurate advantage, such is the impoverishing effect of the
inveterate system of truck-dealing that boat fishermen, even from the
harbour of the capital of Newfoundland, are chiefly paid by daily wages;
the advantages derived from the employment of two half-idle fishermen
being greater to the truckmaster, in the absence of an available market,
than the like amount of fish caught by one customer. It is manifest, by
the true theory of free trade, that it is unimportant whether the French
and Americans obtain their bait and catch fish within our limits or not,
or even whether the world is supplied by them or by us; but it is not so
if foreign nations thereby rear, employ, and maintain in time of peace
fifty thousand seamen, who, in the event of war, are at the beck of
their respective Governments, while Britain, the rightful owner, has not
one available seaman from the fisheries. On subjects of such vital
importance it is essential that general theories, however good, shall
not be supported in detail by false reasoning, or by captivating
appellations inconsistent with truth. Nine-tenths of our western
colonies are still taxed on every article of food, and on all existing
property, animate and inanimate; a state of things alike adverse to
production and trade. Is it reasonable to imagine, if the interests of
colonists are not considered jointly with those of the parent State,
that they can continue to administer to our wants, comforts, and
luxuries--above all, to our commercial nursery for seamen, the source of
our national greatness? A Parliamentary investigation is indispensable
to afford a chance of escape to these noble possessions of the Crown
from impending ruin."

For the relief of the West Indian colonies Lord Dundonald was also
anxious to obtain the intervention of Parliament; but he believed that
he had himself discovered one source of possible advancement for them.
His remarks concerning the pitch lake of Trinidad have already been
partly quoted. Having first explored that lake in the beginning of 1849,
he at once recognized the importance of its stores of bitumen, and much
of his leisure from official duties was employed in observations and
experiments with a view to its being utilized. He was soon convinced as
to its great and various importance. The decomposed bitumen that lay in
vast beds around the lake he found exceedingly valuable as a manure; and
he perceived that the liquid mass, of which boundless supplies might be
obtained, could be put to many very valuable uses. Here he discerned the
presence of a new material of commerce which might prove of incalculable
benefit not only to Trinidad but also to all the other West India
Islands; therefore he urged its employment, and, though but little heed
was paid to his advice, the successful results of the few cases in which
it was adopted fully justified his opinions.

After his return to England he also sought zealously to make his
discovery beneficial to himself. He was to a great extent baffled by the
obstacles common to new projects; but his projects afford curious
illustration of the activity of his mind and the fertility of his
inventive powers. "Used as a mastic," he said in a concise enumeration
of the uses to which he found that the bitumen might be put, "it is
peculiarly suited to unite and ensure the durability of hydraulic works.
It renders the foundations and superstructure of buildings impermeable
to humidity. It is admirably adapted, by its resistance to decomposition
by the most powerful solvents, to the construction of sewers, and, being
tasteless, it is an excellent coating to water-pipes, aqueducts, and
reservoirs. When masticated and prepared, it is a substitute for costly
gums as applied to numerous purposes. Combined with a small portion of
ligneous matter, it constitutes a fuel of greater evaporating power than
coal, and, when pulverized and scattered over growing potato-plants or
other vegetables, it prevents their destruction by insects or blight,
and acts also as a fertiliser of the soil. Essential and viscid oils are
obtained by various well-known processes from bituminous substances, but
from none in such abundance and possessing such valuable properties as
the oils extracted from the bitumen of the lake of Trinidad, as well as
from the petroleum of springs still in activity."[23]

  [23] The following patents, for the use of the Trinidad bitumen, were
  taken out by Lord Dundonald:--1851. "Improvements in the construction
  and manufacture of sewers, drains, waterways, pipes, reservoirs, and
  receptacles for liquids or solids, and for the making of columns,
  pillars, capitals, pedestals, bases, and other useful and ornamental
  objects, from a substance never heretofore employed for such
  manufactures."--1852. "Improvements in coating and insulating
  wire."--1852. "Improving bituminous substances, thereby rendering them
  available for purposes to which they never heretofore have been
  successfully applied."--1853. "Improvements in producing compositions or
  combinations of bituminous, resinous, and gummy matters, and thereby
  obtaining products useful in the arts and manufactures."--1853.
  "Improvements in apparatus for laying pipes in the earth, and in the
  juncture of such pipes."

  The "Observations on the long-desired, yet still unaccomplished
  proceeding, whereby to effect the embankment of the Thames and free the
  river from pollution," by the Earl of Dundonald, are especially
  interesting at the present time:--"It will probably be admitted that the
  Thames above bridge is unnecessarily broad, unless considered as a
  recipient for back-water; and that the long margin of shallow water
  between London Bridge and that of Vauxhall is of little importance, even
  for that purpose, as gravel, sand, and other substances, may
  advantageously be removed from the central bed of the river, fully to
  compensate for the water that would be excluded by an embankment of
  one-sixth on both sides of the channel.

  "An easy method of accomplishing this object would be to cut a ditch on
  each shore, equidistant from the centre, and fill it with bituminous
  concrete, as the foundation of a parapet or wharf to be formed of
  similar materials. Within this a main sewer might be excavated, and
  constructed in like manner of conglomerated gravel and sand from the
  spot.

  "It will of course occur that, although roads may be carried over the
  entrances of the various docks by swing-bridges, yet these entrances
  present obstacles to a direct line of sewers.

  "To enable this difficulty to be overcome, very solid tunnels, floored
  with hard pavement stones, set in bitumen, may be caused to descend in
  subverted curves below the entrances of the docks, whence all matters
  deposited may occasionally be removed by see-saw locomotive dredges on
  wheels, worked either by mechanical power, or by the current acting
  directly on the dredge."

While thus urging the importance of bitumen, and initiating many
mechanical operations which have quickly and extensively been turned to
the great advantage of society, Lord Dundonald was not unmindful of his
older inventions and the arguments by which he had long sought to
promote the naval strength of England. Of these inventions one in
particular--that of his improved steam-boilers--had been largely
adopted, and found highly beneficial during his absence from England,
and its use continued after his return. From them he hoped, and not in
vain, that good would result to the general extension of naval science.
He was cheered during the last years of his life by seeing the adoption
of many of the views on these matters which he had advocated long
before. Others have yet to be enforced.




CHAPTER XXX.

THE RUSSIAN WAR.--LORD DUNDONALD'S PROPOSALS TO EMPLOY HIS SECRET PLANS
AGAINST CRONSTADT, SEBASTOPOL, AND OTHER STRONGHOLDS.--HIS
CORRESPONDENCE THEREUPON WITH SIR JAMES GRAHAM AND LORD
PALMERSTON.--THEIR REJECTION.--LORD DUNDONALD'S APPOINTMENT AS
REAR-ADMIRAL OF THE UNITED KINGDOM.--PRINCE ALBERT'S INVITATION TO HIM
TO BECOME AN ELDER BROTHER OF THE TRINITY HOUSE.--HIS CORRESPONDENCE
WITH LORD PALMERSTON RESPECTING THE RESTITUTION OF HIS HALF-PAY.--HIS
LAST WORK.--HIS DEATH AND BURIAL.--CONCLUSION.

[1851-1860.]


When in June, 1851, he returned to England and surrendered his office as
Commander-in-Chief of the North American and West Indian squadron, the
Earl of Dundonald was in his seventy-sixth year. That he was still young
and vigorous in mind is sufficiently shown by the illustrations of his
inventive genius and philanthropic earnestness that have been given in
the last chapter. The most striking proof of this, however, so far as he
was allowed to prove it, has yet to be given.

Very soon after his return he sought to impress upon Sir James Graham,
then First Lord of the Admiralty, under the Earl of Aberdeen's
administration, the value of his secret war-plans, and before long a
special reason for advocating their adoption arose. Their efficacy had
been frequently acknowledged by the highest authorities, but as England
was at peace, nothing more than an acknowledgment was made. The outbreak
of our war with Russia induced Lord Dundonald to bring them forward
again in 1853. At first Sir James Graham declined to entertain the
subject. The Government believed that Russia would be easily and
promptly defeated by the ordinary means of warfare, and therefore
contented itself with them. In this decision Lord Dundonald acquiesced
perforce; but, on its appearing that the fight would be harder than had
been anticipated, he again claimed a hearing for his proposals,
believing that by their acceptance he could not only bring his own
career as a British seaman to a glorious termination, but also--a yet
dearer object to him--by so doing render inestimable service to his
country.

In this spirit he wrote again to Sir James Graham on the 22nd of July,
1854. "Important aggressive enterprises," he said, "being now suspended
by Russia, whose armies, on the defensive, may indefinitely prolong the
war, and thereby expose our country to perilous consequences, resulting
from protracted naval co-operation, I am desirous, through you,
respectfully to offer for the consideration of her Majesty's Cabinet
Ministers a simple yet effective plan of operations, showing that the
maritime defences of Cronstadt, however strong against ordinary means of
attack, may be captured, and their red-hot shot and incendiary missiles,
prepared for the destruction of our ships, turned on those they protect;
a result of paramount importance, now that the forces in the Black Sea
have been diverted from the judiciously-contemplated attack on
Sebastopol, compared to the success of which any secondary enterprise in
the Baltic would prove of very small importance to the successful result
of the war. Permit me, therefore, in the event of my plans being
approved, unreservedly to offer my services, without command or
authority, except over the very limited means of attack, the success
whereof cannot fail in its consequences to free and ensure, perhaps for
ever, all minor states from Russian dominion. Personal acquaintance with
Vice-Admiral Sir Charles Napier and Rear-Admiral Chads warrants my
conviction that no feeling of rivalry could exist, save in the zealous
performance of the service."

Sir James Graham's reply was complimentary. "You offer for the
consideration of her Majesty's Government," he wrote on the 26th of
July, "a plan of operations by which the maritime defences of Cronstadt
may, in your opinion, be captured; and in the most handsome manner you
declare your readiness to direct and superintend the execution of your
plan, if it should be adopted. When the great interests at stake are
considered, and when the fatal effects of a possible failure are duly
regarded, it is apparent that the merits of your plan and the chances of
success must be fully investigated and weighed by competent authority.
The Cabinet, unaided, can form no judgment in this matter, and the
tender of your services is most properly made by you dependent on the
previous approval of your plan. The question is a naval one, into which
professional considerations must enter largely. Naval officers,
therefore, of experience and high character are the judges to whom, in
the first instance, this question ought to be submitted. Let me
therefore ask you, before I take any further step, whether you are
willing, in strict confidence, to lay your whole plan before Sir Bryan
Martin, Sir William Parker, and Admiral Berkeley, who, from his place at
this Board, is my first naval adviser? If you do not object to this
measure, or to any of the naval officers whom I have named, I should be
disposed to add Sir John Burgoyne, the head of the Engineers, on whose
judgment I place great reliance. I am sure that you will not regard this
mode of treating your proposal as inconsistent with the respect which I
sincerely entertain for your high professional character, resting on
past services of no ordinary merit, which I have never failed to
recognise. But my duty on this occasion prescribes caution and
deliberate care; and you will do justice to the motives by which this
answer to your request is guided."

To this suggestion Lord Dundonald readily acceded, and his secret
war-plans were once more referred to a committee of investigation.
Nothing, however, was gained by this step. "I have received," wrote Sir
James Graham on the 15th of August, "the report of the committee of
officers to whom, with your consent, the plan for the attack on
Cronstadt was submitted. On the whole, after careful consideration, they
have come to the unanimous conclusion that it is inexpedient to try
experiments in present circumstances. They do full justice to your
lordship, and they expressly state that, if such an enterprise were to
be undertaken, it could not be confided to fitter or abler hands than
yours; for your professional career has been distinguished by remarkable
instances of skill and courage, in all of which you have been the
foremost to lead the way, and by your personal heroism you have gained
an honourable celebrity in the naval history of this country."

That letter was disappointing to Lord Dundonald; but, as the value of
his plans was not disputed, he hoped that he might yet be allowed to put
them in execution. "Be pleased," he said in his reply to Sir James
Graham, "to accept the sincere assurance of the high estimation in which
I hold the kind and favourable expression of your sentiments towards me.
It is indeed gratifying to perceive that the experienced admirals to
whom you referred the professional consideration of my secret plan have
not expressed any doubt of its practicability."

The report of the admirals, however, had as unfavourable an effect as
could have resulted had they declared openly against the project. Week
followed week without any successful issue to the efforts of the Baltic
fleet; and added to Lord Dundonald's chagrin at not being permitted to
achieve the desired success, was his distress at finding unmerited blame
thrown by the Government, and by nearly all classes of the public, upon
a brave and skilful seaman, for not doing what, with the means at his
disposal, it was impossible for him to do. Admiral Sir Charles Napier
had failed, through no fault of his own, in the project for attacking
Cronstadt, a fortress of almost unrivalled strength, and, by reason of
the shallow water surrounding it, unapproachable by the heavy
line-of-battle ships and frigates which constituted all his force; and
during the months of his necessary inactivity, and after his return to
England, Lord Dundonald was almost his only defender. "In justice to
Admiral Napier, against whom 'the indignant dissatisfaction of the
nation' is said to be directed," he wrote in a letter to the "Morning
Post," on the 21st of September, "permit me to say that success could
not have attended the operations of ships against stone batteries firing
red-hot shot, however easily unresisting walls may be leisurely
demolished. There is but one means to place these parties on an equal
footing, and that I confidentially laid before the Government."

"The unreasoning portion of the public," he wrote to Sir James Graham on
the 11th of November, "have made an outcry against old admirals, as if
it were essential that they should be able to clear their way with a
broadsword. But, my dear Sir James, were it necessary--which it is
not--that I should place myself in an arm-chair on the poop, with each
leg on a cushion, I will undertake to subdue every insular fortification
at Cronstadt within four hours from the commencement of the attack." And
Sebastopol, he urged, could be as easily captured, if he were only
allowed to put his plans in operation. But it was not allowed. "Nothing
new can be attempted at the present moment," answered Sir James Graham.
"Winter will put an end to all active operations in the Baltic; and I
still venture to hope that at Sebastopol our arms will be triumphant."

Lord Dundonald, though pained, not so much on his own account as in the
interests of the nation, at the way in which his offers were treated,
persevered in making them. It was now too late in the season to effect
anything in the Baltic; but the siege of Sebastopol was being carried on
without any immediate prospect of success; and he yearned, with all the
ardour that he had displayed half a century before, for an opportunity
of rendering success both certain and immediate.

To this end he wrote again to Sir James Graham, and also for the first
time to the Earl of Aberdeen, on the 30th of December. "The pertinacious
resistance made at Sebastopol, and the possibility of events that may
still further disappoint expectation," he said to Sir James, "have
induced me to address Lord Aberdeen, saying that 'if it is the opinion
of the Cabinet, or of those whom they consult on military affairs, that,
failing the early capture of Sebastopol, the British army may be in
danger, I offer to the discernment of the Cabinet my still secret plans
of attack,' whereby the garrisons would be expelled from the forts or
annihilated, in defiance of numerical force, and possession obtained, at
least during sufficient time to enable the chief defences to be blown up
and the harbour fleet to be destroyed. If you will so far favour me, I
should be gratified by having an opportunity of demonstrating to your
strong mind, free from professional bias, the fact that combustible
ships may be not only placed on a parity with stone forts fitted to fire
red-hot shot, but secured from injury more effectually than if incased
in iron."

Sir James Graham's answer was, like its forerunners, complimentary, but
nothing more. "I can never cease," he wrote, "to do justice to your
patriotic desire to serve your country, which is evinced by your desire
to encounter, in your own person, the dangers attendant on your
experiment, and not to transfer the hazard of the enterprise to others."
But to the enterprise itself he would give no sanction. "Your plans," he
said, "by my desire were submitted to the consideration of most
competent naval and military officers, whose impartial judgment cannot
be impugned, and, on the whole, they did not recommend the trial of the
experiment which you are anxious to make. Neither Lord Aberdeen nor I
can venture to place our individual opinions in opposition to a recorded
judgment of the highest authority on a question which is purely
professional. I see no advantage, therefore, in renewing the discussion
with you at the present moment."

Had the "impartial judgment" by which Sir James Graham held himself
bound been adverse to the principle of Lord Dundonald's plans, or
declared them to be anything more than "inexpedient in present
circumstances," more weight might have been attached to it; although
even then he could have pointed to the opposite verdict, given in 1847,
by other judges quite as impartial and competent, who, while objecting
to part of them on the score of their deadly efficacy, had officially
announced their belief in the applicability of another part--the part of
which Lord Dundonald now proposed to make most use--and recommended its
adoption "when the opportunity of employing it may occur."

He therefore refused to be thwarted in his efforts to render to his
country the great service that he considered to be in his power, and Sir
Charles Napier's removal from the command of the Baltic fleet, in
January, 1855, gave him an opportunity of offering to use that power
under conditions that would relieve the Admiralty of all direct
responsibility in the event of his failure. "I am much gratified," he
said in another letter to Sir James Graham, "to learn that her most
gracious Majesty has been pleased to reserve the high dignity of Admiral
of the Fleet as a reward for services. Under this impression, permit me
to solicit the favour of being allowed to contend for that distinction,
not by reference again to opinions, which may prove fallacious, but by
actual experimental proof of the safety and facility of assailing
fortifications by my secret plans. By them, the damage and loss of life
sustained by the allied squadron in their late attack on the
fortifications of Sebastopol might have been partly if not wholly
averted, and probably a tenfold destruction inflicted on the enemy. If
this is admitted--and I do not think it can be disputed--I hope you will
allow me to demonstrate the general applicability of these simple,
comparatively costless, and in my opinion infallible means of
annihilating the power of all kinds of batteries that can be approached
to windward within half a mile. These plans have been entertained and
pondered over by me during forty years, and now again I offer to
explain, to test, and to put them in execution."

Sir James Graham's answer was very terse. "I have had the honour," he
wrote on the 23rd of January, "of receiving your lordship's letter, in
which you tender your services to take command of the Baltic Fleet. I
consider the tender highly honourable to you; but I cannot give any
other assurance."

No other assurance would have been of any avail. The Earl of Aberdeen's
Cabinet, having lost the confidence of the country, was dissolved almost
immediately after that letter was written, to be replaced by an
Administration in which Lord Palmerston was Premier, and Sir Charles
Wood First Lord of the Admiralty.

To Lord Palmerston the Earl of Dundonald wrote on the 13th of February.
"The high position of our country being at stake on the result of the
war," he said, "and our long-established naval renown pledged on the
successful conduct of affairs in the Baltic, I addressed my kind friend
Lord Lansdowne, who has been long conversant with the objects which, by
his advice, I now offer to your lordship's notice as First Minister of
the Crown, conjointly, if you judge proper, with that of the Cabinet
over which you preside." He then briefly described the principle of his
secret plan, adding, "I respectfully offer to execute this plan, and
answer for its success, against Cronstadt, and against all minor
strongholds in the Baltic."

Four weeks elapsed before that letter was answered. In the meanwhile
Lord Dundonald, beginning to despair of a satisfactory hearing from any
Minister of State, unless he was induced thereto by a popular demand,
addressed a petition to the House of Commons, urging the importance of
his plans, and praying for "a searching inquiry, to ascertain whether
the aforesaid secret plans are capable speedily, certainly, and cheaply
to surmount obstacles which our gallant, persevering, and costly armies
and fleets have failed to accomplish." His reasons for so doing he
explained in a letter addressed to the "Times" on the 10th of March.

"Peace," he there said, "being desirable not only for the interests of
our country, but for those of the world at large, and the negotiations
now pending being doubtless injuriously influenced by the obstinate
resistance of Sebastopol (which could be overcome in a day), and by the
impossibility of successfully attacking Cronstadt by naval means (which
might be as speedily reduced), I have drawn up a petition to Parliament
in order that secrecy and silence on my part, and deficiency of
information on that of the public, may no longer prove injurious to the
success of our arms. Hostilities having proceeded so far, assuredly it
is more expedient to reduce a restless nation to a third- or fourth-rate
power, than be ourselves reduced. Let not my motive be mistaken. I have
no wish to command a fleet of 100-gun ships, or to attack first-rate
fortresses by incased batteries or steam gunboats. That which I desire
is, first, secretly to demonstrate to competent persons the efficiency
of my plans, and then to obtain authority, during eight or ten days of
fine weather, to put them in execution. The means I contemplate are
simple, cheap, and safe. They would spare thousands of lives, millions
of money, great havoc and uncertainty of results. Their consequences
might, and probably would, effect the emancipation of Poland, and give
freedom to the usurped territories of Sweden. Those who judge
unfavourably of all aged naval commanders assuredly do not reflect that
the useful employment of the energies of thousands and tens of thousands
of men can best be developed and directed by a mind instructed by long
observation matured by reflection;--an advantage to which physical
power, that could clear its way by a broadsword, can bear no comparison.
My unsupported opinion in regard to a naval enterprise in 1809 proved to
be correct. Every other undertaking in the British service, and as
Commander-in-Chief in Chili, Peru, Brazil, and Greece, was successful,
and so would the protracted and unaccomplished undertaking, so injurious
to the result of negotiation, have succeeded, had I possessed sufficient
influence to be patiently listened to."

The petition aroused much interest among the public, but was unheeded by
the House of Commons, and therefore produced very slight effect on the
Ministry. "My published petition," wrote Lord Dundonald to Viscount
Palmerston on the 17th of March, "has brought me numerous letters, and,
amongst others, a communication, I believe from high authority, that if
I do know any means whereby to spare the slaughter that must take place
on storming Sebastopol, I ought to make it known. I wish I could impart
to your lordship what I feel under the present circumstances, and how
anxiously I desire that a speedy decision may succeed the lingering
delays that I have so long endured."

A few days after that, chiefly through the assistance of his friend Lord
Brougham, Lord Dundonald obtained an interview with Lord Palmerston, at
which he further detailed his plans, and urged that they should be
promptly employed in hastening a conclusion of the war with Russia. To
Lord Palmerston he also wrote again on the 31st of March. "It has
occurred to me," he said, "that the supposed inhumanity of my plans may
have caused the use of the word 'inexpedient' in the report of the
commission appointed in July last by the Admiralty, and may even now
influence the decision of the Cabinet. Perhaps another view may have
been taken of the consequences of divulging my plans, as regards the
security of this kingdom." To these possible objections he urged that no
conduct that brought to a speedy termination a war which might otherwise
last for years, and be attended by terrible bloodshed in numerous
battles, could be called inhuman; and that the most powerful means of
averting invasion, and, indeed, all future war, would be the
introduction of a method of fighting which, rendering all vigorous
defence impossible, would frighten every nation from running the risks
of warfare at all.

Those arguments appear to have had some weight; but, after further
correspondence, Lord Palmerston's Government, like all the other
Governments to which they had been offered, refused to put the plans in
execution. Further evidence in their favour was obtained from some
eminent scientific men; and it was put beyond dispute that, though they
might not have such deadly efficacy as Lord Dundonald anticipated--on
which point the critics spoke with hesitation--they could not fail, if
properly applied, in producing very important results. But it was all in
vain. All that Lord Palmerston would agree to was to have the experiment
tried on a small scale at Sebastopol, and by two Engineer officers who
were to be instructed in their work by Lord Dundonald. Lord Dundonald
consented to the trial, if it was conducted by his son, Captain the
Honourable Arthur Cochrane, R.N. But this was not agreed to, and the
whole project fell to the ground.

At that result Lord Dundonald was hardly more disappointed than was a
large section of the English public. Friends and strangers, soldiers,
sailors, newspaper writers, and merchants, wrote to him from London,
Edinburgh, Liverpool, Birmingham, Belfast, and all other parts of the
kingdom, urging that, if the enterprise was not undertaken by
Government, it should be executed by means of a private subscription. "I
am perfectly convinced," wrote one, "that you can do all the injury to
the Russian fortifications that you say you can do. If miserable
jealousy at the Admiralty refuses you the means, take them from those
who, like myself, are very proud to be your countrymen. I am not a rich
man, but I shall gladly subscribe one hundred pounds to any scheme that
you will propose and carry out yourself." "If your lordship will appeal
to the country," wrote another, "in less than a week you will receive
subscriptions to any amount. You will then be independent of Government
routine, and the public will, without further delay, have an opportunity
of testing the value of your invention, towards which the eyes of all
Europe are anxiously turned at the present juncture."

Those suggestions, and the evidence afforded by them of a widespread
sympathy in his efforts to render a last great service to his country,
afforded real satisfaction to Lord Dundonald; but their adoption was
quite impossible. As a British officer, he could not for a moment think
of entering upon a warlike project independently of the State. Therefore
he left the work on which his heart was set undone, and soon--though by
no means so soon as he could have made it--the Russian war was brought
to a conclusion.

Whatever may have been the cause of the rejection of his offer to hasten
that conclusion by means of his secret war-plans, the Earl of Dundonald
experienced no lack of personal courtesy during the period of the
correspondence, or throughout the brief remainder of his life. His
closing years were cheered by many acts by which was nearly completed
the tardy reparation for former injuries which was begun with his
reinstatement in the navy by King William IV., and in which the most
gratifying circumstance of all was the restoration of his honours as a
Knight of the Bath by her gracious Majesty Queen Victoria.

"The death of Sir Byam Martin, and the promotion of Sir William Gage to
the office of Vice-Admiral of the United Kingdom," wrote Sir James
Graham on the 23rd of October, 1854, "vacate the appointment of
Rear-Admiral. It is an honorary distinction; and your standing in the
naval service and your gallant achievements entitle you to this reward.
I have taken her Majesty's pleasure, and the Queen has graciously
approved my recommendation. I propose, therefore, with your lordship's
permission, that you shall be gazetted Rear-Admiral of the United
Kingdom." "I accept the proposed honour with gratitude to her Majesty
and with thanks to you," answered Lord Dundonald, on the 24th. "Permit
me, however, to express a hope that such distinction shall not preclude
my further service to the Crown and country, which long and matured
consideration on professional subjects assures me I could now perform
even more effectually than at an earlier period."

A month later he was honoured by a compliment from one who, kind and
gracious in all his acts, had never failed in showing towards him
special grace and kindness. "My dear lord," wrote Prince Albert on the
26th of November, "a vacancy has occurred in the list of Honorary
Brethren of the Trinity House, by the lamented death of Sir Byam Martin.
It has always been customary in that corporation to have the Royal Navy
represented amongst the Elder Brethren by one of its most distinguished
officers. I therefore write to inquire whether it would be agreeable to
you to be elected a member of that body; as I should, in that case, have
much pleasure in proposing, as Master of the Corporation, your name for
the election of the Elder Brethren. Believe me always, my dear lord,
yours truly,--Albert."

"May it please your Royal Highness," Lord Dundonald wrote in reply, on
the 27th, "to accept my dutiful and most grateful thanks for the honour
your Royal Highness is pleased to confer. I assure your Royal Highness
that I shall ever look forward with anxiety to prove my devotion and
gratitude to her most gracious Majesty, for signal acts of justice and
favour, and to your Royal Highness for this highly-appreciated mark of
your consideration."

A token of the estimation in which Lord Dundonald was at length held by
all classes of his countrymen may here be recorded. After frequent
refusal, on the ground of his age and love of privacy, he consented, in
May, 1856, to seek admission to the United Service Club. Its members,
thereupon, at once resolved, at the proposal of Vice-Admiral Sir George
F. Seymour, which was seconded by Lieutenant-General Sir C. F. Smith, "to
invite that highly-distinguished officer, Admiral the Earl of Dundonald,
to become an honorary member of the Club, until the time of his
lordship's ballot takes place."

In spite of compliments like these, however, it was his earnest desire
that, before his life was ended, every shadow which had darkened it
might be cleared away, and that he might not pass into the grave without
the assurance that he was formally, and in every respect, acquitted of
the unjust charges brought against him nearly half a century before.
While one single consequence of those charges remained in force, he
considered that he was not so acquitted, and with this object he
laboured to the last.

"I venture to remind your lordship," he wrote to Lord Palmerston, on the
26th of May, "that the undeviating rectitude of my conduct through a
long life has already induced the Crown, in the exercise of its justice,
to restore my rank and honours. There yet remains, my dear lord, a
gracious and important act to perform, namely, to order my banner to be
replaced in King Henry VII.'s Chapel, and to direct the repayment of the
fine inflicted by the Court of King's Bench, and the restoration of my
half-pay suspended during my removal from the naval service. Unless
these be done, I shall descend to my grave with the consciousness, not
only that justice has not fully been done to me, but under the painful
conviction that its omission will be construed to the injury of my
character in the estimation of posterity. Independently of the justice
of this claim on its own merits, I venture to express a hope that your
lordship will admit that, during my temporary absence from the naval
service, my exertions tended materially to promote the interests of our
country by opening to commerce the ports of the Pacific and those of all
the northern provinces of Brazil."

The appeal was unsuccessful. The part of it having reference to the
replacement of Lord Dundonald's banner in Westminster Abbey was
considered by Lord Palmerston to be a question with which it was not in
his province to deal. "With regard to the fine," he said, "I am afraid
that there are no funds out of which it could be repaid, and I should
doubt there being any precedent for such a proceeding; and I find, on
inquiry, that pay or half-pay has not been granted to any naval officer
for any period during which he may have been out of the service." That
reply induced Lord Dundonald to write again to Lord Palmerston on the
7th of June. "I submit," he then said, "that, the fine being imposed for
an alleged offence of which I was wholly innocent, it ought to be
repaid, even if there be no special fund appropriated to such a purpose.
The peculiarity of my case may account for there being no precedent for
such a proceeding, if none there be. The same peculiarity may
distinguish my case from that of all other naval officers to whom no pay
or half-pay has been allowed for any period during which they may have
been out of the service. I may have been the only naval officer unjustly
expelled, and assuredly I have been the only one so expelled after
manifesting, by various acts, a truly patriotic zeal for the honour and
interest of our country. No other naval officer, after such acts, was
ever expelled the service and otherwise punished on mere conjectural
evidence, since demonstrated to have been utterly groundless. I submit
that instances have occurred of military officers recovering pay or
half-pay after unjust expulsion, as in the case of Sir Robert Wilson;
and I am not aware of the existence of any cause for a distinction in
this respect between the two services. I feel the deepest gratitude and
satisfaction that my life has been spared to a period when I may
reasonably hope that the portion of justice yet due to me for the
erroneous verdict and its injurious consequences will not be withheld.
Of that justice, the first instalment, namely, the restoration of my
naval rank, was granted by his late Majesty King William, and the second
by her present most gracious Majesty, who, on the representation of my
noble friend the Marquess of Lansdowne, was pleased to reinstate me in
the Order of the Bath. For the third and conclusive portion of justice
still remaining due to me, I cannot desist from looking to your
lordship."

It is not necessary to detail the later correspondence that ensued upon
this subject. Lord Dundonald found that the final reparation which he
sought was not, then at any rate, to be conceded to him by the
Government; and therefore he resolved to employ his last remaining
powers in seeking from his countrymen that thorough justice which he
rightly considered would result from an honest review of the incidents
of his life.

During 1858, and in the beginning of 1859, he was engaged in the
preparation of his "Narrative of Services in the Liberation of Chili,
Peru, and Brazil from Spanish and Portuguese Domination."[24] That work
was immediately followed by his "Autobiography of a Seaman," of which
the first volume was completed in December, 1859, the second in
September, 1860; bringing down the story to the date from which it has
been continued in the present work.[25]

  [24] The following letter, dated "Buckingham Palace, March 4, 1859,"
  gave pleasure to Lord Dundonald:--"My Lord,--I have received the
  commands of His Royal Highness the Prince Consort to return you his best
  thanks for the copy of your 'Narrative,' which you have been good enough
  to send to his Royal Highness, and upon which his Royal Highness will
  place a high value. I am directed further to say that it would add
  materially to that value if you would have the kindness to write in the
  first page of the accompanying volume that it was presented by your
  lordship to the Prince. I have the honour to be, my lord, your most
  obedient humble servant,--C. B. Phipps."

  [25] Almost the last letter written by Lord Dundonald was this to Lord
  Brougham:--"My dear Lord Brougham,--I have the pleasure to forward you
  the second volume of my 'Autobiography,' in which you will find that use
  has been made of the kind expressions towards myself contained in your
  works. Of the injustice done to me I need not tell you, who are so well
  acquainted with the subject. If the accompanying volume succeeds in
  impressing on the public mind the sentiments so unflinchingly set forth
  in your works, it will have answered its purpose; and that it will do so
  I see no reason to doubt, now that the subject can be canvassed apart
  from political rancour. I am, my dear Lord Brougham, ever faithfully
  yours,--Dundonald." Lord Brougham's answer was dated from Paris, on the
  31st of October, the very day of his friend's death. "I have just
  received your very kind letter, and I daresay the volume will very
  speedily reach me.... One thing I fear you do not come down late enough
  to relate. I mean the impression made upon all present when I took you
  to the Tuileries; and when the name of Cochrane, so well known to them
  (and which I cannot bring myself to change for your present title), was
  no sooner heard than there was a general start and shudder. I remember
  saying, as we drove away, that it ought to satisfy you as to your
  disappointment at Basque Roads; and you answered that you would rather
  have had the ships."

That his mind was full of vigour to the last is best proved by that
autobiography. But the body was worn out. After two years of great
physical suffering, passed in the house of his eldest son at Queen's
Gate, Kensington, he died on the 31st of October, 1860, eighty-five
years old.

He was buried in Westminster Abbey, where in his last moments he had
expressed a desire to rest, in company with other great servants of the
nation. A public funeral was not granted to him; but his son was
permitted to conduct that funeral in a way worthy of his great
reputation, and agreeable to the wishes of all classes of his
countrymen. Through the personal intervention of her most gracious
Majesty and the Prince Consort, moreover, who counteracted the efforts
of subordinates, his insignia of the Order of the Bath, which had been
ignominiously spurned from King Henry the Seventh's chapel,
one-and-fifty years before, were restored to their place on the 13th of
November. Thus his last and most cherished wish was fulfilled, and
another precious boon was added to the many favours for which his family
can never cease to be grateful to their Sovereign and her noble husband.

The burial was on the 14th of November. The pall-bearers were Admiral
Sir George Seymour, the Brazilian Minister, Admiral Grenfell--who
five-and-thirty years before had been associated with Lord Dundonald in
securing the independence of Brazil--Captain Goldsmith, Captain
Schomberg, Captain Hay, and Captain Nolloth. Among the mourners was Lord
Brougham, who had come from Paris to render this last honour to one who
had been his friend through fifty years. Standing over the grave, and
looking round upon the assemblage, he exclaimed, "No Cabinet minister
here! no officer of State to grace this great man's funeral!" But the
funeral was graced by the reverent homage of hundreds gathered within
the Abbey walls, and of the thousands who, though absent, acknowledged
that England had lost one of her bravest warriors and most unselfish
patriots, one whose warfare had been marked by acts of daring rarely
equalled, and whose patriotism had brought upon him sufferings such as
few in modern times have had to endure. The solemn anthem chanted over
his grave, "His body is buried in peace, but his memory shall live for
ever," echoed far and wide, and awakened in every breast keen sentiments
of sympathy for what he had borne and of pride in what he had done.

  Ashes to Ashes! Lay the hero down
    Within the grey old Abbey's glorious shade.
    In our Walhalla ne'er was worthier laid
  Since martyr first won palm, or victor crown.

  'Tis well the State he served no farthing pays
    To grace with pomp and honour all too late
    His grave, whom, living, Statesmen dogged with hate,
  Denying justice, and withholding praise.

  Let England hide her face above his tomb,
    As much for shame as sorrow. Let her think
    Upon the bitter cup he had to drink--
  Heroic soul, branded with felon's doom.

  A Sea-King, whose fit place had been by Blake,
    Or our own Nelson, had he been but free
    To follow glory's quest upon the sea,
  Leading the conquered navies in his wake--

  A Captain, whom it had been ours to cheer
    From conquest on to conquest, had our land
    But set its wisest, worthiest in command,
  Not such as hated all the good revere.

  We let them cage the Lion while the fire
    In his high heart burnt clear and unsubdued;
    We let them stir that frank and forward mood
  From greatness to the self-consuming ire,

  The fret and chafe that wait on service scorned,
    Justice denied, and truth to silence driven;
    From men we left him to appeal to Heaven,
  'Gainst fraud set high, and evidence suborned--

  We left him, with bound arms, to mark the sword
    Given to weak hands; left him, with working brain,
    To see rogues traffic, and fools rashly reign,
  Where Strength should have been guide, and Honour lord--

  Left him to cry aloud, without support,
    Against the creeping things that eat away
    Our wooden walls, and boast as they betray,
  The base supporters of a baser Court,

  The crawling worms that in corruption breed,
    And on corruption batten, till at last
    Mistaken honour the proud victim cast
  Out to their spite, to writhe, and pant, and bleed

  Under their stings and slime; and bleed he did
    For years, till hope into heart-sickness grew,
    And he sought other seas and service new,
  And his bright sword in alien laurels hid--

  Nor even so found gratitude, but came
    Back to his England, bankrupt, save of praise,
    To eat his heart, through weary wishful days,
  And shape his strength to bearing of his shame,

  Till, slow but sure, drew on a better time,
    And Statesmen owned the check of public will;
    And, at the last, light pierced the shadow chill
  That fouled his honour with the taint of crime.

  And then they gave him back the knightly spurs
    Which he had never forfeited--the rank
    From which he ne'er by ill-deserving sank,
  More than the Lion sinks for yelp of curs.

  Justice had lingered on its road too long:
    The Lion was grown old; the time gone by,
    When for his aid we vainly raised a cry,
  To save our flag from shame, our decks from wrong.

  The infamy is _theirs_, whose evil deed
    Is past undoing; yet not guiltless we,
    Who, penniless, that brave old man could see,
  Restored to honour, but denied its meed.

  A Belisarius, old and sad and poor,
    To _our_ shame, not to _his_--so he lived on,
    Till man's allotted fourscore years were gone,
  And scarcely then had leave to 'stablish sure

  Proofs of _his_ innocence, and _their_ shame,
    That had so wronged him; and, this done, came death,
    To seal the assurance of his dying breath,
  And wipe the last faint tarnish from his name.

  At last his fame stands fair, and full of years
    He seeks that judgment which his wrongers all
    Have sought before him--and above his pall
  His flag, replaced at length, waves with his peers.

  He did not live to see it, but he knew
    His country with one voice had set it high;
    And knowing this he was content to die,
  And leave to gracious Heaven what might ensue.

  Ashes to ashes! Lay the hero down,
    No nobler heart e'er knew the bitter lot
    To be misjudged, maligned, accused, forgot--
  Twine martyr's palm among his victor's crown.[26]

  [26] These lines, by Mr. Tom Taylor, were published in "Punch."

"Victor and Martyr." Those are the words fittest to be inscribed on the
monument that will be set up in the hearts of Englishmen in honour of
the Earl of Dundonald. Entering life with great powers of mind and great
physical endowments for his only fortune, he made his name famous, and
won immortal honour to himself by daring and successful enterprises in
the naval service of his country, which none have surpassed at an age so
young as his, and which few have rivalled during a long life-time spent
in war. But he sought to follow up those triumphs of his prowess on the
sea by peaceful victories at home over private jealousy, official
intrigue, and political wrong-doing, and thereby he brought on himself
opposition which, boldly resented, caused the unjust forfeiture of the
rewards that were his due, and weighed him down with a terrible load of
disappointed hope and undeserved reproach. Seeking relief from these
grievous sufferings, and opportunity of further work in a profession
very dear to him and in generous aid of nations striving to throw off
the tyranny to which they had long been subjected, he entered the
service of three foreign states in succession. But in helping others he
only brought fresh trouble on himself. He rescued Chili and Peru from
Spanish thraldom, only to find that the people whom he had freed
therefrom were themselves enthralled by passions which even he could do
nothing to overcome, and which drove him from their shores, barely
thanked and quite unrecompensed. He fought the battles of the young
empire of Brazil against Portugal, doubled her territories, and more
than doubled her opportunities of future development, only to be cruelly
spurned by the faction then in power, and denied the fulfilment of
national pledges which a later generation has but tardily and slightly
regarded. Harder yet was his treatment by the Greeks, who, having asked
him to lead them in their contest with their Turkish masters, refused to
follow his leadership, gave him no assistance in his plans for fighting
on their behalf, and, in return for the services which, in spite of all
the difficulties in his way, he was able to render them, offered him
little but insult. Thus more than half his life was wasted--wasted as
far as he himself was concerned, though the gain to others from every
one of his achievements was great indeed. Returning then to peaceful
work in England, he chiefly spent the years remaining to him in efforts
to win back the justice of which he had been deprived, and in efforts,
yet more zealous, to benefit his country by exercise of the inventive
talents in which he was almost as eminent as in warlike powers. But
those talents were slighted, though from them has, in part, resulted an
entire and wholly beneficial revolution in the science and practice of
naval warfare. And, though many of his personal wrongs were redressed,
he was allowed to die without the complete wiping out of the stain that
had been put upon his honour.

Of this long course of suffering, it must be admitted, he was himself in
some measure the cause. Endowed, as few others have been endowed, with
the highest mental qualities, he lacked other qualities necessary to
worldly advancement and the prosperous enjoyment of life. Truth and
justice he made the guiding principles of all his actions; but he knew
nothing of expediency, and was no adept in the arts of prudence.
Unrivalled strategy was displayed by him in all his warlike enterprises;
but against the strategy of his fellow-workers he was utterly
defenceless. He made enemies where a cautious man might have made
friends, and he allowed those enemies to assail him, and to inflict upon
him injuries almost irreparable, with weapons and by onslaughts which a
cautious man would easily have warded off. Judged by the harshest rules
of worldly wisdom, however, it must be acknowledged that these faults
brought upon him far heavier punishment than he merited. And perhaps it
will be deemed by posterity that they were faults very nearly akin to
virtues.

The same want of prudence caused trouble to him in other respects. It
led him, in furtherance of the inventions and other projects by which he
sought to benefit the world, into expenses by which his scanty sources
of income were very heavily taxed. It also sometimes made him the victim
of others. Guileless himself, he was not proof against the guile of many
with whom he came in contact. Every kind word sounded in his ear, every
kind act appeared in his eye, as if it proceeded from a heart as full of
kindness as his own, and he often lavished sympathy and gratitude on
unworthy objects. But shall we blame him for this?

Kindness, indeed, was as much a characteristic of him as valour. While
the world was full of the fame of his warlike achievements, all who came
within the circle of his acquaintance marvelled to find a man so simple,
so tender, so generous, and so courteous. When he was bowed down by
sorrows that nearly crushed him, he sought comfort in zealous efforts
for alleviating the sufferings of others.

Fortunate circumstances would have placed him in a station of universal
honour, which he could have occupied to the admiration of all
on-lookers. But the circumstances of his life were unfortunate; and
therefore he had to endure such hardship as falls to the lot of few. The
harsh judgment by which he suffered has already been reversed. It will
be atoned for when his worth is properly acknowledged by his fellow-men.




APPENDIX.

(Page 161.)

CAPTAIN ABNEY HASTINGS'S LETTERS TO LORD COCHRANE


So much had to be said in the body of this volume in evidence of the
insurmountable difficulties raised by the Greeks themselves to Lord
Cochrane's efforts to aid them as efficiently as he desired, that there
seemed no room, without wearying the reader, for there citing more than
two or three of the letters addressed to him by Captain Abney Hastings.
They have, therefore, been reserved for quotation here. Their
publication is desirable for two reasons. In the first place, they show
how Captain Hastings, whom all the historians of the Greek Revolution
join in praising, was harassed, and his work rendered almost useless, by
causes which Lord Cochrane, in a much more difficult position, was
blamed for not overcoming. In the second place, they will serve as a
contribution to the biography of a high-minded and valiant man, a sharer
in Lord Cochrane's zealous efforts on behalf of Greece, and in the
misfortunes incident thereto, of whose memorable career the world knows
little.


I.

                         _Karteria_, Hydra, March 26th, 1827.

MY LORD,

The usual contrarieties of the machine prevented my following you
yesterday according to your desire. Observing you went to Poros, I
thought I should act in conformity with your wishes by coming here to
take in coals, and avoid all possible delay. I have got on board enough
for about four days more. I have expected you all day, and not seeing
you I have taken upon myself to depart for the service you destined me
for; although I am not quite certain I know the exact station. I shall
go off Grabousa and endeavour to find Captain St. George. I leave a
letter here for the primates, requesting them to load a small vessel
with coals for my return, which I wish to take in on the opposite side.
This measure, far from occasioning delay, would be advantageous in that
respect as well as having less close connection with the Hydriots, whose
presence always has the effect of setting a bad example to the Greeks I
have on board. I should feel obliged to your lordship to insist on this
measure. Perhaps it would be advantageous for your lordship to decide
upon the port you intend to occupy immediately, and send there all the
coals and other stores wanted for your naval force. Since you object to
an island in the Great Archipelago, I am of opinion, with Colonel
Gordon, that Ambalaki is the best suited for your station. If all the
coals were there, much delay would be saved to the steam-vessels. One of
the causes our engine went so badly was that some fire-bars being burnt
the fire fell through, and we could not keep up the steam; another was,
I had taken up the paddles (which previously had two-feet dip) six
inches; the engine consequently went faster, but the pumps would not
supply sufficient water. I have lowered them again. Pray leave your
further orders for me here, as I shall touch for coals as aforesaid on
my return.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


II.

                         _Karteria_, Poros, April 9th, 1827

MY LORD,

I have the honour to transmit you an account of the _Karteria_
steam-vessel up to March 16th, by which you will perceive that with the
500l. credit I have on Messrs. Baif at Zante, I still have a credit of
363 dollars in my favour. Not accustomed to keep such accounts, there
may be errors, but if any they are certainly against myself, as I may
have omitted charging expenses; whereas, I have never charged but what
has really been expended, nor have I ever charged anything for myself,
directly or indirectly. Wages will become due again the 16th of this
month, for which I shall require about 800 dollars. Having but a few
days' salt meat on board, I beg your lordship to cause an order to be
written, enabling me to receive such quantity as you may deem requisite.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


III.

                         _Karteria_, Scopulo, April 19th, N.S., 1827.

MY LORD,

Northerly winds prevented my passing Cape Doro until the 15th. Having
spoken a vessel from Skyro, I learnt that an Austrian merchant vessel
loaded with corn and ammunition for Negropont was laying at that island
under convoy of an Austrian vessel of war, and that the corvette of
Tombasi was there watching the merchant vessel. I touched at Skyro the
night of the 15th, and found that the Austrian was gone, supposed for
Syra, followed by an Hydriot schooner of Konduriottes, who is supposed
to have made some arrangement with the Austrian to deliver the cargo to
him. The Greek corvette had sailed, as I was told, for this. I arrived
here the night of the 16th, and found that the brig and schooner were
zealously employed on the service they had been sent upon. Having
steamed more than I had at first intended, I was in want of fuel, and
set them at work here to obtain me wood, which they have done with more
alacrity than I expected during Easter holidays. The engine of course
required repairs. I sent off the schooner to inform the vessels of the
blockade, when I should join them, and appointing a rendezvous. I sail
immediately, and hope to take or destroy the vessels at Tricheri and
Volo tomorrow. I send this by the primates of this island, who carry a
letter to your lordship offering their services. They have been
apparently much oppressed in all these islands by the heroes of the
earth, and are anxious to obtain protection from the naval force. This
island is fertile, and could (and could be made to) pay well for
protection. The others have claims equally strong for protection. St.
George, De Skyro, Scopulo, Skatho, &c., &c., have more than 2,000 Liapis
quartered upon them at this moment. If Athens is relieved, these
worthies might be turned into Negropont with much effect. I am told the
Turkish transports are still at Tricheri and Volo, not doubting to clear
the Gulf of Greeks _a force d'argent_--however, I hope to be with them
to-morrow.

I suspect fuel could be obtained cheaper here than at Megara; and I see
no reason for incurring the expense of transport of wood to Poros for
construction of gunboats when a great majority of the Greek vessels are
constructed here. The wood does not grow here. It is brought from Agora
on the main. The deputies--_tout betes comme ils sont_--can inform your
lordship of these things.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.

P.S.--Having taken the coals out from between the boilers and side of
the ship, I am anxious to fill this space with wool, as a protection
against shot. The coals stowed there are an inconvenience for many
reasons, and something is necessary to replace them as a protection for
the boilers. If your lordship would be good enough to order Tombasi to
procure me wool for that purpose, I think you would be ultimately
satisfied of its utility.


IV.

                         _Karteria_, off Tricheri, Monday,
                         April 23rd, N.S., 1827.

MY LORD,

I have the honour to inform you that in pursuance of your orders, I
carried the squadron under my command, consisting of corvette
_Themistocles_, brig _Aris_, schooner _Aspasia_, and schooner _Panayia_,
before the port of Volo, the evening of the 20th. I found eight vessels
at anchor in the port; immediately I directed the _Themistocles_ and
_Aris_ to anchor off a battery at the point, and cannonade it whilst I
entered the harbour with boats and schooners. At 4.30 P.M. they anchored
with much gallantry, and soon silenced the musket-shot from the battery.
At the same moment I entered the harbour with the boats and schooners,
and we shortly took possession of seven brigs: they were all on shore,
and most without sails bent. However, by 9 P.M. we succeeded in getting
out five prizes, three loaded with provisions and ammunition, two light;
and this most fortunately without the loss of a man killed or wounded,
although we lay at anchor in the harbour four hours and a half, exposed
to the fire of the Castle of Volo. The ship has received no material
injury, although several shot struck her. We set fire to two prizes we
could not succeed in getting out; one light brig remains, but we shot
away her foremast and did her such damage in her hull as will (I hope)
prevent her putting to sea again. Last night I entered Tricheri with the
boats of _Themistocles_, _Aris_, and _Aspasia_, to endeavour to carry
out a brig of war, Turkish, of sixteen guns and two mortars, but found
her protected too advantageously by batteries and musketry. I send the
prizes to your lordship under the convoy of the _Aspasia_, and shall
remain here a few days to endeavour to destroy the Turkish brig of war,
and shall then return to join your lordship. I beg leave to assure your
lordship before I conclude that in these affairs I have met with the
most cordial support from the captains of the vessels under my orders,
and that their conduct, as well as that of all the officers and men of
the squadron, has been highly meritorious.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.

P.S.--As the schooner _Panayia_ will participate in the prizes, I have
ordered her to remain on the blockade, although not sent by your
lordship.


V.

                         _Karteria_, at Sea, April 24th, 1827.

MY LORD,

An hour after I had the honour of sending you my last letter, detailing
the affair of Volo, I stood into Tricheri with the vessels under my
command, viz., _Themistocles_, _Aris_, _Panayia_.

The Turks in this place had one brig-of-war which (erroneously in my
last I rated at sixteen guns) mounted but fourteen long 24-pounders and
two mortars; she was made fast in a small bight, with a plank on shore
and high rocks on each side of her, behind which were posted a strong
corps of Albanian troops; she was likewise protected by a battery close
under her bow and five other batteries in other parts. Four small
schooners lay quite hauled up on the beach. To attempt to carry away
vessels so posted and defended by men who wanted neither alacrity nor
resolution would have been exposing the lives of the crews in a very
unwarrantable manner. I therefore resolved to burn the brig, which we
effected in less than an hour. I did not make any attempt upon the
schooners, which I considered too inconsiderable to justify a loss in
capturing them. In this affair the captains, officers, and crews
conducted themselves all much to my satisfaction.

Inclosed I have the honour to transmit to you a return of the killed and
wounded in this affair, which, I am happy to say, is trifling. I have
left the rest of the squadron to maintain the blockade.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.

A return of the killed and wounded on board of the Greek squadron, at
Tricheri, April 23rd./11th.

  _Karteria_, killed . . . one seaman, Ralph Hall.
  _Aris_, killed . . . . . one seaman.
   "   wounded . . . . . . two seamen.
  _Panayia_, wounded . . . one seaman.
       Total . . . . . . . two killed and three wounded.
                                                 F. A. HASTINGS.


VI.

                         _Karteria_, at Sea, April 26th, N.S., 1827.

MY LORD,

Passing by Kumi, I observed several vessels at anchor there, and a great
number of large kyekes, &c., hauled up on the beach. I stood in, and
overhauled them, and found, as I suspected, that a most scandalous and
extensive commerce in grain is carrying on to that place with the Turks,
chiefly in Greek vessels. A brig under Russian colours was chiefly
discharged; a Psarian schooner was nearly full, and the magazines on
shore were full. I set about loading the grain from the magazines, but
was unable to take off more than one-third of what was in them; and I
have good reason for supposing that other magazines equally stored are
to be found in the town, about an hour's distance.

Here there were only a dozen Turks, who fled at our approach. In the
evening no less than nine small vessels were seen standing in to Kumi. I
weighed and boarded six of them; three being entirely empty, I allowed
to pass; two I detained and have brought with me.

The want of men, of time, &c., has prevented my putting a finishing hand
to this infamous traffic; but I have no doubt your lordship will see the
propriety of sending a vessel of war without delay to destroy these
depots. It is idle to talk of blockading the Gulf of Negropont whilst
such an extensive commerce is carrying on at other points of the island.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


VII.

                         _Karteria_, Poros, April 28th, 1827.

MY LORD,

Captain St. George going to join you, I take the opportunity of
informing you, besides what my other letters contain, that my
information from Kumi imports that Negropont contains two months'
provisions for the army of Kutayi and fortress, and that all their hopes
are in the Turkish fleet, expected daily. It seems to me of the first
importance that the Greek fleet should be ready to encounter the Turks;
and the Gulf is a place particularly favourable to the smaller, lighter,
and more skilful party. Might I suggest, my lord, the propriety of
sending a couple of light vessels upon whom you could depend to cruise
off the Dardanelles, and give information in time? The corvette, brig,
and schooner off Tricheri requested me to represent their want of
provisions, and the necessity they have of paying their crew regularly;
many I suspect have already quitted them: with Greek sailors no arrears
of pay can exist--hitherto they have been accustomed to receive their
wages in advance; if they can be made to go to sea without that advance
it is a great point gained; to omit fulfilling the engagement would be
to ruin all confidence and oblige the sailors to return to their ancient
demands.

With respect to Kumi, I beg leave to urge the necessity of sending a
vessel (perhaps better Captain St. George than a Greek, who probably
would not dare do his duty there, was he so disposed) to destroy the
infamous traffic existing there. May I beg of your lordship to order
here the Marine Tribunal from Napoli to adjudge the prizes taken; also
to issue a public order respecting the distribution of prize-money, by
which I may be guided in my payments? You will observe that in my letter
respecting the affair of Tricheri I mention simply having burnt the
brig-of-war without saying how. That letter being a despatch for
publication, I thought it as well not to proclaim to the enemy the use
we made of red-hot shot. It was by those I burnt the brig, and could
quite as easily burn by the same means the largest ship ever built.
Might I suggest the advantage that would result from using the same
projectile from almost every ship? each vessel might as well as me have
a furnace in her hold for the feeding of two of her guns--the effect
would be tremendous. If the fleet was ready before the Turks came out, a
slight excursion to Salonica might be attended with profit and
advantage. I shall require a little time to repair damages. I have lost
my larboard cat-head, my jib-boom, second topmast, main-gaff, bowsprit
shot through, and the engine requires various repairs--the steam
waste-pipe is completely gone, and I must get another made. I hope and
trust your lordship has still the intention of forming a national fleet
and a dockyard; without this your difficulties will be multiplied beyond
measure. I merely mention this because I hear intrigues are on foot to
prevent such measures. I, a stranger, who belong to no party, and who
neither fear nor love the Hydriots and Spetziots, will tell you the
truth on these points. Although your orders prescribed for me to remain
a fortnight on the blockade of the Gulf of Negropont, I was forced to
return--wanting ammunition, fuel, provisions, and various repairs. I
shall use my endeavours to be ready for sea as speedily as possible.
Before I conclude, give me leave to congratulate your lordship upon your
brilliant success at the Piraeus. I have no doubt it is but a prelude to
more important successes.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


VIII.

                         _Karteria_, Poros, April 30th, 1827.

MY LORD,

May I beg leave to present to you my very particular friend, Mr. Nicolo
Kalergy? You will find him a young man of good education, talent, and,
what is of still greater value, of great probity. I have known him many
years, and esteemed him equally long. By his private fortune he is
independent, and has consequently always refused to meddle in the
intrigues he regrets so much to see cause the misfortunes of his
country. So much for introduction. Mr. Nicolo Kalergy has been good
enough to wait upon you to receive your orders respecting the prizes I
have lately captured. These vessels contain grain chiefly, and therefore
would in that state be of no use to you. Your commissaries must turn it
into biscuit before it is sent to the Piraeus. The Government has sent
for the Admiralty Court from Napoli to sit here upon the judgment of
vessels detained. As to the sale, I am of opinion that to appease the
jealousy of the seamen a public sale should be held, and your
commissaries purchase it if they please. They will thus always obtain it
cheaper than they could buy it at Syra, and thus nobody can complain. I
am anxious to receive from your lordship an order respecting the
distribution of prize-money, and this, I think, should be public.
Hitherto the Government has received fifteen per cent. upon all prizes.
Of course your lordship will arrange as you think proper upon this
subject; but if any part of a prize goes to the public purse, it is only
but just it should aid in the payment of the wages of seamen. I am now
paying a month's wages out of my own pocket, which I hope and trust your
lordship will reimburse me, as I cannot continue this system. Anything
can be done in Greece by prompt payments; with arrears nothing is to be
done. My friend has much and various information respecting every part
of Greece, and can furnish you with much useful matter. I do not doubt
but you will shortly appreciate his merit.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.

P.S.--May I beg of you, my lord, to furnish me with a commission of
lieutenant for Mr. Darby, the only officer doing duty as a sailor on
board--in truth, he is no sailor, and does not pretend, but he is brave,
diligent, and a gentleman, and has served with me for about four months?


IX.

                         _Karteria_, Poros, April 30th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I had the honour to receive your orders of the 28th inst. Your lordship
will have observed, by the letters I had the honour of transmitting to
you, that the condition of this vessel is such as to render it
impossible for her to put to sea immediately. Dr. Gosse last night was
occupied sending you off 68-pounders, and I am happy to hear this
morning that the monastery has fallen without them. I must again repeat
how indispensable it is that this fleet should be in readiness to
encounter the Turks, who cannot now delay long their departure.

It is with deep regret I see the extreme discontent existing on board
the _Sauveur_ brig, which seems to me to be greatly augmented, if not
entirely owing to the Greeks being paid in advance and the English being
in arrears of wages. In this country, my lord, I must repeat, nothing
can be done without regular payments. By paying out of my own funds,
when others could not be obtained, I have established the confidence of
the Greeks and English in this vessel, as far as money is concerned; but
I cannot continue to pay out of my own pocket. If funds are not
forthcoming for the wages of this vessel, I must beg leave to resign.
Whilst I am on board my people will always consider me personally
responsible for their wages; and I must again remark I have suffered
already much too severely in my private fortune to admit of my making
further sacrifices. Besides wages for the crew, I have various expenses
here to repair damage sustained by the vessel.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.

P.S.--It seems to me necessary to relieve the vessels at Volo, or they
will quit their station. Greek sailors on board their own ships will not
remain more than a month at sea.


X.

                         _Karteria_, Poros, May 6th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I do myself the honour of enclosing for your perusal two different
extracts from public papers sent me lately from Zante. I am now ready
for sea, excepting powder, of which I have only two quarter-casks of
very vile French stuff, received from Captain St. George. Mr. Hesketh,
amongst the other prizes made at Napoli, has brought some flannel
cartridges for our guns filled, and forty casks of powder. Would your
lordship have the goodness to cause an order to be sent me to receive
this powder? There is still a great quantity of the stores sent out from
England missing. I have the bills of lading, and can give copies to Mr.
Hesketh, if you think proper to send to Hydra, Spetzas, and Napoli again
to collect them. I suspect the Hydriots have now in their possession
about one hundred and sixty carbines such as I have on board.

It appears strange to everybody here that all the Commissary Department
should be absent. I am informed provisions are wanted, and yet nobody
comes to buy the prize provisions. As every Greek is by nature a thief,
things disappear daily; and if they remain much longer, nothing will be
forthcoming. Already my Greeks have petitioned me about the prizes; and
everybody acquainted with Greek sailors must be aware they will not go
to sea again until they have been paid their prize-money. Till now there
never was no example of a ship quitting her prize until sold and the
proceeds distributed. I am sorry to be obliged to remind your lordship
again that on my arrival here I paid my crew one month's wages, due the
16th of last month, and in ten days more another month's wages are due,
and pay I must, for, as I have frequently remarked to your lordship, no
arrears can exist in this country. The wages also is not the only
expense. I was obliged to purchase about one hundred tons of firewood at
Scopulo. Fresh meat in harbour runs away with great sums; and when the
engine works, it consumes about half a dollar a day of oil. Besides all
this, I have been obliged to hire three carpenters for ten days to
repair damages done in late expedition. I had a fluke shot off a bower
anchor at Tricheri, and ought to have another one. I must get a new
main-sail made here. It is disagreeable to me to torment your lordship
with all these statements, but you must be aware that a vessel like this
cannot be sailed without great expense. There are here a number of
seamen from the brig who want to enter with me. I have as yet refused to
receive them; but, if you thought proper to give me an order, I should
then be justified in so doing.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XI.

                         _Karteria_, Spetzas, May 30th, 1827.

MY LORD,

Having lost my two masts in a squall off Cape Malea, and having business
at Poros requiring my presence, I have thought it the most expeditious
way to go myself to purchase other masts at Hydra, and settle my affairs
at Poros. I therefore do myself the honour to transmit to your lordship
a report of my proceedings after you left me near Stamphane. At sunset I
lighted the fires, and, as soon as steam was up, steered for the passage
between Zante and the Morea. The wind freshening much in a contrary
direction, I found myself about ten miles to the southward of Zante in
the morning. About three A.M. we perceived a large vessel standing
towards us from the Morea, and we went to quarters for her. I thought at
first she might be the _Hellas_; but on approaching she stood back to
the mainland, which made me conclude that it was a stranger; the wind
increasing, I could not remain head to wind, and made sail under the lee
of Zante. In the forenoon I saw a large ship under the land far off
steering to the south, which I concluded was a Turkish or neutral ship
of war. The wind abating, I steamed up round the eastern point of Zante,
and not finding the _Hellas_ on the other side of the island, I stood
towards Cephalonia, opening out the two Turkish frigates laying at
Clarenza. In the evening I saw a large ship very far astern coming
northward, and supposed she was the _Hellas_ and the same I had seen in
the forenoon under the land. At sunset I altered course and steered for
Clarenza, and in the first watch we saw a good deal of firing in that
direction. The wind and sea augmenting, I was unable to keep the ship
head to sea, and therefore bore up for the _rendezvous_ of Oxia. Not
finding the _Hellas_ at this station, the wind augmenting, the starboard
wheel being out of repair, and threatening to come to pieces if not
looked to, the water requiring to be drawn off the boilers, &c., all
these things made it necessary for me to search a port. I looked inside
Oxia, but found it unsafe, and therefore bore up for the Port of Petala,
where I put things to rights as well as I could; but found on
examination we had but three days and a half's coals, little water, and
only a few days' bread. Under these circumstances, I felt myself called
upon to return whilst the means were still left me of hoping to
accomplish it. Having obtained an offing west of Cephalonia, I took off
the paddles and sailed, which gave us an opportunity of again repairing
the wheels--again in an unsound condition--and saved our fuel. The wind
and sea calming, I got up my steam; and there being every appearance of
calm weather, I stood within five or six miles of Modon, hoping to meet
the two frigates we saw off there when we passed northward. However, we
saw nothing but a brig inside the harbour, sailing close along the land.
Late on the evening of the 28th, when rounding Cape St. Angelo, a squall
from the high land carried away our fore and second masts, and left us
in a very unenviable situation, considering we had but a few hours'
coals on board. However, a breeze favouring us all night, we arrived
here at ten A.M., 29th May. Upon the foremast we lost one man--Jani
Patinioti.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XII.

                         _Karteria_, Spetzas, June 7th, N.S., 1827.

MY LORD,

I had the honour of sending you a report of my proceedings since I left
you, and hoped to have found you here on my return from Poros, that I
might receive your further orders. I returned last night, having been
subjected to more delay and vexation than can be imagined or expressed,
respecting the prizes taken at Volo. I could only procure one mast at
Poros, sold me by Tombasi--others there were both at Hydra and Poros,
but the proprietors would not part with them; I have therefore been
obliged to purchase one here, considerably too large and expensive, but
there is no remedy. I hope to be ready for sea in three days, but fear I
shall have some embarrassment about money matters. The purchase of
masts, of salt provisions, sails, &c., besides the pay due to crew, puts
me to considerable straits, particularly as I had lent all the ready
money I possessed to Kalergy to redeem his brother; however, I shall do
my utmost to get to sea, and I am anxious to know how, when, and where,
I can have the honour of rejoining your lordship. A fireship that
departs to-day will deliver you this letter, and your lordship may
perhaps think it worth while to send a vessel here with orders for my
further guidance. May I beg of you also to add a private signal by which
I may know all Greek vessels at a tolerable distance by day--also a
night private signal?

The British squadron is assembled at Smyrna, awaiting the admiral. The
camp at Phalerum is broken up, and General Church is returned to Egina.
The puppet of Government is occupied voting for the nomination of
ministers, if possible more incapable than themselves; they talk of
going to Napoli--Griva and Fotomana propose this. The former as usual
seized upon an American ship; and Dr. Howe, charged with the
distribution of the cargo, applied to Captain Patterson of the
_Constitution_, who is now at Napoli guarding it. I am sorry to add that
Mr. Lee received a letter from England announcing that the _Enterprise_
having sailed, her boilers burst opposite Plymouth, and she was towed
into that port by a brig-of-war.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XIII.

                         _Karteria_, Spetzas, June 9th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I had the honour to receive your order of the 7th, enjoining me to
repair to your lordship without delay, if ready for sea. A variety of
circumstances (unavoidable in a country deprived of even the shadow of
organization) has prevented my being yet ready to sail. I received my
foremast on board to-day, but the majority and best of my crew has left
me. I must look for others, and intend to weigh to-night and go to
Poros, where I was tormented by hundreds to take them. Here I can get
men--but shall confine myself to half-a-dozen, as I find it necessary to
mix my crew. In going to Poros I shall not delay anything, since I shall
be occupied getting up my masts and rigging there, making sails, &c.,
&c., _en route_, and I can water more easily at Poros than here. I have
informed the captain of the brig that brought this, that if I am ready
to sail before any further orders of yours arrive, I shall repair to
Cerigotto, and there await instructions from you; if I am not at
Cerigotto I shall be found here.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XIV.

                         _Karteria_, Syra, August 1st, 1827.

MY LORD,

In hopes of seeing your lordship here I have waited two days, since
which, although not finished, all the work of our machinery can be done
on board. There are two things which retain me, namely, money, of which
I require about seven hundred dollars, and the fire-bars, which they
continually civilly refuse me--acting the true Greek or in other words,
the dog in the manger. If your lordship remains long absent, I shall be
sadly puzzled how to act. Without new fire-bars we cannot steam again.
The local authorities here are so afraid of the Hydriots and Spetziots
that they dare not take any steps against them. To leave this without
the fire-bars is useless. If I can obtain these bars, and your lordship
does not arrive, I will pay myself the necessary sums to get the vessel
out of this port, hoping you will reimburse me--but to go without the
bars is only going to return again. What I can do to forward the service
I will readily perform, and anxious enough I am to get away from this
place.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XV.

                         _Karteria_, Poros, August 19th, 1827,

MY LORD,

On my arrival here I wrote to Hydra to request the local authorities
there to send me the necessary coals, since you do not wish the last
cargo to be used. I have received no answer, and upon inquiring
yesterday from persons arrived from Hydra, I find they are not taking
any measures to forward them to me. My officer wrote me under date of
the 15th from Napoli that he hoped to be able to cast the bars there, in
which case I shall have to wait for the coals from Hydra. The
impertinence of these shopkeepers has at length attained a pitch that is
scarcely endurable--it is to be hoped your lordship will make them send
the coals--[The remainder is lost.]


XVI.

                         _Karteria_, Poros, August 20th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I am delighted to find you have an expedition in progress. This vessel
shall be ready to accompany your lordship, whether I can get the bars
cast at Napoli or not. The ones we now have can be made to answer for
twenty-four hours. I shall write to Napoli to order the engineers to be
here by the 23rd, whether they succeed in casting the bars or not. The
coals I wrote for from Hydra are Government coals; and it is well they
should be used the first, as I have been informed they are greatly
diminishing without our consumption. I should like to complete as
speedily as possible, and there is no time to spare between this and the
24th for shipping 100 tons of coal from Hydra.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XVII.

                         _Karteria_, Poros, August 22nd, 1827.

MY LORD,

I am making a sail according to your lordship's plan, to becalm the hull
of the ship, but want sailcloth for completing it. I understand M.
Koering has some in store; would your lordship be kind enough to allow
me to take a hundred piques? I have a good deal of very bad French
powder on board, and even of Turkish, I suspect, put into French
barrels, which I received from Methana--could your lordship permit me to
exchange it against English powder? It is of very great importance that
our cartridge powder should be good.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XVIII.

                         _Karteria_, Gulf of Lepanto, Sept. 27th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I have the honour to transmit you a report of my proceedings from the
day I left you till this moment. Captain Thomas, of the _Sauveur_,
joined me the 21st, and proposed with much gallantry to go into the Gulf
in the daytime. The wind being usually out at night I consented with
some difficulty, in consequence of the little dependence I can place on
my engine, which might render it impossible for me to follow him
immediately. The _Sauveur_, with gunboat _Bavaroise_ in tow, and
accompanied by two schooners (you had left to keep the blockade at
Missolonghi, but who, contrary to my knowledge, thus disobeyed your
orders), passed into the Gulf the evening of the 21st in most gallant
style, in despite of the enemy's very formidable batteries and one brig
of war and two schooners at the Morea Castles, and several vessels at
Lepanto. I attempted to steam in that night, but the engine failed me
within two miles of the Castles. The next day, the wind being strong in,
I attempted to sail in, but when within gunshot of the Castles the wind
failed me, and it was not until the evening of the 23rd that I could get
passed, towing after me the _Philhellene_ gunboat, of whose commander I
have always had particular occasion to be satisfied. All our damage
amounted to a few ropes cut. On communicating with the Morea, the 24th,
I was informed that the enemy had nine vessels at Salona, and there were
three Austrians there, that Captain Thomas had attacked them the 23rd,
but in consequence of unfavorable weather he had not made any
impression, and that he retired to Loutraki. I immediately despatched a
mistico to desire Captain Thomas to join me with all the vessels he
could collect; but not seeing him on the 26th, and fearing that the
Turks might strengthen themselves during a delay, I stood in on the 26th
with the gunboat _Philhellene_; but we no sooner approached than the
wind came so strong out that we could not keep the ship head to wind,
and found it necessary to retire. The Turks have at Salona a very fine
Algerine schooner brig, of fourteen guns, brig of sixteen guns, bearing
an admiral's flag, three smaller schooners, two armed transport brigs,
and two large boats with guns, and they have a battery on shore. There
are also three Austrians. While under their fire one of my engineers was
slightly wounded. I am now waiting for the arrival of Captain Thomas,
for whom I have sent again, and preparing for a final trial.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XIX.

                         _Karteria_, Loutraki, Oct. 7th, 1827.

MY LORD,

Captain Thomas arrived here after our affair at Salona with the prizes,
and sent off immediately to Poros for provisions and ammunition. I could
not (notwithstanding your orders for him to remain only seven days in
the Gulf) allow him to depart in the state he then was--having only five
days' provisions, and four cartridges a gun. He received some powder and
provisions yesterday, and in consequence of your order of the 27th,
which he received yesterday, departs immediately. If the length of time
Captain Thomas has remained in the Gulf is contrary to your intentions,
I am alone responsible; he was always anxious to depart. My crew is in a
very discontented state, in consequence of the month being expired
without their receiving their wages. Twelve have left me, and if I do
not get money I fear the whole crew will follow their example. I have
sent an officer to Poros for provisions, ammunition, and money, if
possible. I understand the English are about to prevent any offensive
operations of General Church, and if not, he would never be able to
undertake any, situated as he is for money and provisions. This seems to
render my remaining here any longer of no use. As soon as I can get any
money and provisions and arrange about the prizes I will quit the Gulf;
but as I have no orders from you where to go, I shall return to Poros
unless you contrive to send me some directions in the interim.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XX.

                         _Karteria_, Loutraki, Oct. 8th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I have the honour to receive your letter of the 3rd, and am happy to
hear that the _Enterprise_ is arrived. I have also received one thousand
dollars with the stores, &c., which are very acceptable. I despatched
the _Sauveur_ yesterday, according to your order of the 27th ult. I
still retain the gunboats, which are very useful. I wish further orders
from your lordship to know whether we are to remain in the Gulf, and if
you wish us to go out. There is yet at the Castles a brig and three or
four Turkish schooners. I do not exactly know their position. I intend
to run down there one of these days and see what can be done with them;
if close under the walls of the Castles, which are very strong, we could
burn them some dark night if you would send me a dozen rockets. I would
go with a small boat close to them and do their business. Mr. Hane
announces to me that your lordship proposes coming up to Corinth, in
which case I will do myself the honour of waiting upon you, and
receiving your further orders. I have despatched a gunboat to General
Church to inform him of your intention, and to bring him here if he
wishes to confer with your lordship.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XXI.

                         _Karteria_, Loutraki, Oct. 14th, 1827.

MY LORD,

Mr. Hane writes me that the Turkish fleet is off Patras. From time to
time I have received vague accounts of vessels off there, but nothing
certain. I shall fortify myself either here or at the port on the other
side, under the village of Pera ora--I think the latter. I want fuzes
for shells. A box was sent (I suppose in mistake for fuzes), but it
contained blue lights. Pray give an officer an order to send me at least
five hundred fuzes. In my last to your lordship I mentioned of what
service rockets would be to us as means of attack on the enemy's vessels
at the Castles; they will be of no less service as weapons of defence.
Pray, my lord, let me have as large a quantity as possible. I understood
you were coming to Corinth, which has detained me here, or I would by
this have been at the other end of the Gulf to gain information, and see
after the brig, for I fear Thomas is not too prudent. I have just been
informed that much cannonading was heard in the quarter of Lepanto the
day before yesterday. I hope no misfortune has befallen him. I have the
two gunboats and one mistico out to bring me information, and I can
receive nothing. Pray let me have the rockets.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XXII.

                         _Karteria_, Port Strava, Gulf of Lepanto,
                         Oct. 17th, 1827.

MY LORD,

Not having received any orders from your lordship, I am still in the
Gulf. In consequence of an order from your lordship to Captain Thomas, I
despatched the _Sauveur_ on the 7th inst., and sent the gunboat
_Philhellene_ with her with letters to General Church, and orders to
wait and bring me information how the _Sauveur_ got past the Castles;
for I was a good deal anxious on her account, and should have gone
myself to give her any assistance in case of need, but that I understood
you intended coming over to Corinth. Mr. Hane bringing me letters for
General Church, I despatched the other gunboat, _Bavaroise_, with these,
and also some for the _Sauveur_, in case she was still in the Gulf. Mr.
Darby, the commander of the _Bavaroise_, had directions to bring General
Church if he was anxious to communicate personally with your lordship.
Day after day I awaited anxiously an answer, till at length the mistico
I had sent three days ago to General Church, to learn something of the
fleet outside, which Mr. Hane wrote me for certain was Turkish, returned
yesterday evening, informing me that the _Sauveur_ and two gunboats had
gone out on Wednesday. General Church writes me that he positively
intends passing into Roumelia, and wants my aid; but I am now quite
alone (except the mistico, with whom I know not what to do). He
continually applies to me for provisions, and will soon probably for
money. What am I to do about him? Although wishing to aid General Church
and the service in all I can, I must acknowledge I have no confidence in
his intended movement, more particularly as he tells me he has no
provisions, and wants me to seize by force what I find in boats. All I
could get by this discreditable way of raising provisions would not
certainly feed one hundred men for three days, and therefore could not
aid General Church, and would be a gratuitous vexation of these
miserable peasantry. If General Church had money and provisions, much is
to be done in Roumelia, but without these nothing can be achieved
anywhere. As soon as I have got the prizes back to Loutraki, and formed
batteries, I will go and visit General Church, and learn more
particulars. But I am very anxious for some orders from your lordship,
having received nothing but the official letter of thanks since I left
you. I write in haste, and beg your lordship to let me have an answer as
soon as possible.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. Hastings.


XXIII.

                         _Karteria_, Loutraki, Oct. 27th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I am ready to do all and anything for the good of the service, but I
fear General Church has no means. I had him on board for two days,
making reconnaissances round the Gulf, and from what I can gather, the
money said to be at Corfu is a chimera. I suspect he has not a shilling
anywhere, and cannot stir. He talks, it is true, of expeditions, and I
have always assured him of my readiness to aid him, but we cannot be
consuming months after months in the hopes of his receiving supplies. I
must limit the period of his embarkation, and if he cannot then act, I
think I shall be justified in quitting him. I shall try, however, to
destroy the other vessels in the Gulf first. We are in great want of
fire-bars. I am laying in a stock of wood, but we have not yet been able
to succeed perfectly with it. I have taken out the bars and filled the
ash-pits; this we find does better than with any bars in, but we cannot
as yet keep up steam with it. I hope, however, ultimately to succeed--in
fact our coals are nearly finished. To show you how General Church goes
on--his gunboat has only advanced twenty feet from the beach, and yet he
will not send away that swindler Allen, who commands her. I told him I
would not meddle with her until he dismissed that man, and things remain
thus. General Church, while on board, received letters announcing the
unlooked-for destruction of the Turkish fleet; still I have not entirely
credited it, and I am in anxious expectation of some decisive
information about it. I am obliged to your lordship for the fuzes, and
hoped to have had also some rockets. We are beginning to get short again
of provisions, viz., biscuit. The loaded prize is condemned, with a
ridiculous clause for me to pay the crew. They say nothing of the other
vessels. I send Captain Hane to Egina, to hasten the condemnation of the
light vessels and counteract the intrigues which I have no doubt Tombasi
has recommenced. I shall also endeavour by him to have more biscuit; we
have now but for a fortnight.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. Hastings.


XXIV.

                         _Karteria_, Loutraki, Nov. 8th, 1827.

MY LORD,

The General Church has at length put himself in motion. Some provisions
and money have arrived on the other side for him (I mean at Calamachi),
and I hope to sail with it to join him to-night. I fortunately received
a fortnight's provisions yesterday, when I had only one day's biscuit on
board. After destroying, or ascertaining that I cannot destroy, the
vessels at Lepanto, I will go outside the Gulf and blockade Missolonghi,
Patras, and the Gulf, hoping the General will blockade them by land. I
fear much, however, for provisions; I will endeavour to get some from
the Ionian Islands; but money and everything else is scarce with
me,--but I hear your lordship is in the same predicament, and therefore
I cannot complain. May I beg of your lordship to grant a commission of
naval lieutenant to M. Falanga, who has served on board this vessel from
29th March, 1827, and is a most deserving officer? he is the only sailor
officer I have, and was always the only one of any use in that capacity.
He behaved extremely well both at Volo, Tricheri, and Salona, at which
latter place he was wounded in the neck with a musket-ball, while
setting fire to one of the abandoned vessels. I may really say he is the
only Greek I ever saw who seems to conceive what an officer ought to be.
Although he would be a great loss to me, and I should be sorry to part
with him but for his own advantage, I can strongly recommend him for
promotion in the command of a vessel, since (as I hear) your lordship is
in such dreadful want of officers to command. I am sure he would give
you the highest satisfaction.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. Hastings.


XXV.

                         _Karteria_, Nov. 17th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I have the honour to announce to you that, after much delay and
disappointment--usual in Greece--I am about to proceed to Lepanto
to-morrow, and endeavour to destroy the Turkish vessels there. I then go
outside, to pass General Church over into Roumelia, and afterwards
blockade Missolonghi, Patras, and Lepanto. The want of the gunboats here
is much felt by me at this moment, as, in going out, I must leave the
Gulf to the Turks; who, even should I be fortunate enough to destroy the
enemy's vessels at Lepanto, will always have here armed boats enough to
command the Gulf.

I must also beg of your lordship to consider us in money matters. I am
now seven thousand pounds out of pocket by Greek affairs, and I am daily
now expending my own money for the public service. Our prizes are
serving for transports for the army, and I must either shortly abandon
this important position or be paid.

It is most likely that if all the important points I have mentioned
could be blockaded, the Turks would be soon reduced, from the blockade
being so much more easily maintained than elsewhere. Without money, you
must be aware I cannot maintain this vessel; and all to be expected from
General Church, you must be aware, is plenty of promises. The General is
already overwhelmed with expectants, and if he had millions would not be
able to command a farthing. I will do all I can; but I must repeat, it
is not quite fair I should end a beggar after all the labour, vexation,
and disappointment I have experienced for so many years.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XXVI.

                         _Karteria_, off Cape Papas, Nov. 20th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I have the honour to inform you I passed the Castles on the 18th, with
the three prizes and mistico in company. I lost two men killed and one
wounded in passing; the other vessels passed without suffering any
damage. It had been my intention to attack the Turkish squadron at
Lepanto, but the wind was so strong on the land, that I felt I could not
effect my object; and, anxious to profit by the same wind to go out and
aid the operations of the army outside, and blockade the fortresses, I
passed through without waiting a more favourable moment of attack. At
Patras I found a schooner, whose suspicious conduct--in abstaining for a
long time from hoisting any colours, and, when she afterwards showed
Austrian, persisting in drawing closer under the Turkish
battery--induced me to fire and bring her out. After waiting a little,
and finding no attention paid to my warning, I fired again, and sunk
her. I hear she was Austrian.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XXVII.

                         _Karteria_, Petala, Dec. 2nd, 1827.

MY LORD,

I had the honour to write to you from Cape Papas, informing you that I
had come out of the Gulf of Lepanto, and was waiting to embark the
troops of General Church. I now beg leave to acquaint you that I arrived
at Dragomestre the day before yesterday with the three prizes, which
have been serving as transports to General Church's army for six weeks.
We brought over six hundred soldiers, artillery, horses, &c.; and I am
now returning to Cape Papas to embark a second division. I heard of the
gunboat _Helvetia_, M. Fabricius, being at Kataculo, and I sent
immediately to order him to join me, which he did, and is now at Cape
Papas. While at Kataculo, the gunboat was attacked by a Turkish brig of
twenty-four guns. M. Fabricius defended himself with much spirit, and
obliged the brig to retire. I have since heard that the same brig is now
off Previsa. If the service here will permit my absence, I think of
going to look after her. The Gulf of Lepanto is now left entirely in the
hands of the Turks, and I wish to send the gunboat in to assist the
expedition against Salona, but the crew having been so long about here,
suffering much hardship and without pay, are very dissatisfied. I have
given the boat a new mast, anchor, cable, provisions, ammunition, &c.,
and I will even advance them a little money, if they will go into the
Gulf. I should hope, however, that your lordship will reimburse me for
these expenses, extra of my own vessel. As you may imagine, I am almost
entirely without coals, and cannot get a sufficient quantity of the
pitch-pine to burn; the other pine will not answer, and therefore I am
reduced to sails. General Church had ordered round here a Psariot brig
he had at Kenkness, and I wrote to M. Koering to request him to put
coals on board of her, which, I understand, M. Koering refused. From the
manner in which I have been frequently treated, one would imagine that
this vessel was not a Greek but an enemy's vessel. I trust your lordship
will remedy this, and put me on a fair footing with the other Greek
national vessels. I wish your lordship could also contrive to let me
have some money, to cover the expenses of this vessel, which, for three
months that we have been absent from Poros, cannot be supposed trifling.
As I conceive it important, under existing circumstances, to keep the
blockade of Patras, Missolonghi, and the Gulf, I will remain as long as
my destitute situation will permit me. Since I have been here I do not
think any vessels have entered the Gulf.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XXVIII.

                         _Karteria_, Dragomestre, Dec. 8th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I have the honour to inform you that I have passed over the army of
General Church to this port, amounting to about twelve hundred men, with
six pieces of artillery, and about sixty horses, mules, &c. The General
has been joined by Maori and some other captains, which may have
increased his force to two thousand men. He is in hourly expectation of
being joined by Zouga, and even Varnachioti is expected to come over.
The Monastery of Ligovitza, on the road from Arta to Lepanto and
Missolonghi, is said to have been possessed by the troops of the
General. This post is of importance. The troops have all marched from
Patras to Navarino, and nothing remains but some Albanians and the
inhabitants. Lepanto is thinly peopled; all have little provisions as
well as Missolonghi. From what I know of Lepanto and the Castles, I am
confident that, if your lordship was to attack it with the squadron you
command, and General Church was to make even a demonstration of attack
by land, it must fall in forty-eight hours' time. Lepanto lies on the
face of a hill open to the sea; every shot and shell and rocket must
tell somewhere, and they would readily capitulate. We must not take the
Monastery of the Piraeus as an example. At Lepanto the Turks have their
families--this particular always operates upon them; but whether it did
or not, the place would be taken, and I am not one who overrates the
capabilities of the Greeks. I fear, however, that General Church has
other projects, and such as, according to my opinion, are very unlikely
to succeed. So much so that, if your lordship does not arrive or send me
orders, I shall return to the Archipelago, rather than lend myself to
measures which appear to me worse than useless. I must again beg of your
lordship not to forget us in the way of money, provisions, ammunition,
coals, &c. We are now more than three months absent from Poros.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XXIX.

                         _Karteria_, off Vasiladhi, Dec. 27th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I have now been twelve days before Vasiladhi, and since our arrival I
have every reason to believe they have neither received provisions nor
water. The weather has usually been so bad, that I have only been able
to bombard it twice, and the gunboat having few shot, I have exchanged
her 32 for one of our 68's, with shells; since which I have not been
able to batter it, owing to the weather. I am satisfied they are now at
their last shifts in the fort; and if I could remain before it a week
longer, and bombard it for a couple of days, I doubt not it would fall
into our hands. I regret of all things not having the flat-bottomed
gunboat here; with her we would have had the fort before this. General
Church was to have attacked Anatolico, and might have taken it, in the
first instance, with little or no resistance; but he delayed till too
late, and then came without an ounce of provisions, and returned the day
after to Dragomestre. This man is such an insufferable quack, that I
cannot act any longer with him; he affects to command the navy as well
as the army; and although I have given him one or two rather rough
lessons, he, the other day, captured with a boat of his a spy of mine,
on his way to me, and carried him off without mentioning a word of it to
me. The man merely came here the other day, supposing Vasiladhi about to
surrender, that he might say he took it. God knows there is no merit
due, unless to the boats blockading inside. I have received letters
to-day from the Gulf, and I find the expedition at Trisonia is in alarm
of being blockaded by the Turkish vessels at Lepanto. The loss of the
gunboats from the Gulf is almost irreparable. If your lordship could
send them round here with a brig, it would be of infinite service. I am
so in want of ammunition, provisions, fuel, &c., that I hardly know what
to do, but if possible I will re-enter the Gulf to assist them there. I
wrote by Mr. Finlay, announcing to your lordship that if the whole
squadron was to come round here, I am satisfied that Missolonghi,
Patras, Lepanto, and the Castles might be taken. They are much
straitened for provisions at all, but particularly at Missolonghi and
Lepanto, and the Castles could be taken by force. Patras is now
provisioned daily by one of Church's generals, Neneka, from Zante, _via_
Clarenza. Dr. Gosse informs me how much you are in want of money. I
trust, however, if you obtain any, I shall not be forgotten. I have only
received six hundred dollars from General Church, and my expenses have
been enormous, for fuel, provisions, &c.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.


XXX.

                         _Karteria_, off Vasiladhi, Dec. 29th, 1827.

MY LORD,

I have the honour to inform you that, after having transported the
troops of General Church from Cape Papas to Dragomestre, I undertook the
blockade of Vasiladhi, for which purpose I put in requisition the small
craft after-mentioned, and employed them to intercept all communication
with Vasiladhi. This flotilla I placed under the orders of my first
lieutenant, M. Falanga; and on the night of the 16th they entered, and
commenced the blockade, which has been so strictly observed up to this
day, that nothing had entered Vasiladhi. One boat, with a letter and
fresh provisions, was captured by our flotilla. I anchored, the gunboat
_Helvetia_ in company, outside Vasiladhi. Your lordship is aware that
the _Helvetia_ was armed with a long 32-pounder, which, in my opinion,
is very inferior in every point of view to a 68, but indisputably so for
cannonading a fort only to be reduced by shells. For this reason I
changed her 32-pounder long gun for a 68-pounder cannonade. On the 22nd
I bombarded Vasiladhi alone (the gunboat having been detached), with
little effect, the weather being unfavourable; nor could I recommence
until to-day, when, considering the distance we were off (about one and
three-quarter mile), and the diminutive size of the object fired at,
better practice has rarely been displayed: four shells out of seven from
this ship and gunboat exploded in, and one blew up, their magazine. I
immediately ordered an assault, in which all the boats took part. The
Turks, intimidated by the explosion, and by our attitude of attack,
called for quarter, which I granted them, although they had previously
forfeited their lives by firing on a flag of truce I sent to them with
terms of capitulation. I embarked the prisoners on board this ship, and
from thence conveyed them in safety to near Missolonghi. They were
thirty in number; and one Greek badly wounded I have retained on board
to be treated by our surgeon. The original number was from forty to
fifty, the deficit having been killed off by our previous cannonading
and by the explosion. I am happy, my lord, to testify to the exemplary
conduct of the Greeks during the whole of this service; they have borne
the fatigues and privations of a winter's blockade in open boats with
extraordinary patience, and the forbearance they displayed towards the
Turks rendered any interference of mine in their favour superfluous. Of
my officers, Lieutenant Falanga and Captain Hane, M.A., I have only to
repeat the often-told tale of their meritorious conduct. To M.
Fabricius, commanding the gunboat _Helvetia_, I feel much indebted for
his zeal and activity, and I am happy to have so deserving an officer
under my orders. The fort of Vasiladhi mounts twelve guns, three of
which are of that remarkably useful piece of ordnance, the Turkish
licorne. I have offered to deliver the Fort of Vasiladhi to General
Church upon his remunerating for their services those employed in taking
it.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.

  List of small vessels employed in taking Vasiladhi.

  A mistico, Galaxidhiote, Captain Urgaki; the same sent with me into
  the Gulf of Lepanto, and who has served with me ever since.

  A mistico, Galaxidhiote.

  A bonee.

  An armed row-boat.

  Two of my prize launches, armed each with a 9-pounder.

  A bratsiera.

  Five monoxolies, or canoes, for the shallows.


XXXI.

                         _Karteria_, Dragomestre, Jan. 7th, 1828.

MY LORD,

I have the honour to acquaint you that General Church arrived before
Vasiladhi on the 2nd inst.; and I resigned to him that fort on the
third, requesting him to refund the expenses of taking it; these consist
of five dollars per man bounty, besides the provisions of the flotilla
employed in the blockade. The General has promised to repay this,
although not without expressing some surprise at the demand; yet the
guns he receives in the fort would pay the whole sum.

On the same day I received an official letter from General Church,
requesting me to inform him what co-operation he might expect from the
navy in a projected attack of his on Anatolico. According to the wish of
General Church, I agreed to send all the boats at my disposal that
night, to attempt to capture an island named Poros, commanding the
entrance into the Lake of Anatolico, where the Turks had a post, and we
heard he was filling up the passage, and about to place guns on another
island, which would render him entirely master of the entrance. I soon
discovered that what General Church calls the cooperation of the navy is
in reality the navy executing the service, and the army looking on at
its leisure, ready to take possession if success attended the arms of
the former. I had understood that I was to be supported by two
rocket-boats of General Church, and by the launch of the Psarian brig,
carrying a carronade to throw grenades; but these did not appear. A
dozen policaries arrived from General Church, and were embarked in the
expedition. At half-past three A.M. of the 4th inst. I arrived with five
boats out of nine (the rest having unaccountably kept behind) at a
narrow part of the passage of the lake, across which the Turks had built
a wall, and stationed a gunboat behind it. The Turkish boat was soon put
to flight; the sailors jumping into the water soon cleared away a
passage for the boats, and the five of our boats rowed upon Poros, the
Turks keeping up a brisk fire of musketry from that island, and of
cannon from Anatolico. We were now within pistol-shot of Poros, when I
found, to my surprise, a fort on it--which I had been assured there was
not, or I would not have attempted the attack, knowing that in our
warfare their holds are not to be thus taken. Seeing no reasonable hope
of succeeding, I ordered a retreat; and having repassed by the way we
entered, found General Church's detachment lying flat in the bottom of
their boats out of gun-shot. To say that my officers, Captain Hane,
M.A., and Lieutenant Falanga, also M. Fabricius, commanding the gunboat
_Helvetia_, accompanied me, is to commend them for their accustomed zeal
and gallantry. I cannot conclude without mentioning the name of
Chrysanto, who, after having aided at Vasiladhi, was with me here in his
own boat, and displayed much courage. He had one man wounded, the only
loss we sustained. Perceiving that Anatolico was not to be taken by us;
that General Church's troops were (without provisions) somewhere in a
marsh, where our boats could not get to embark them, and that they might
have marched on the mainland close to Anatolico; being without
provisions in this ship, and seeing no possibility of rendering any
service by remaining longer before Vasiladhi, I returned to this port to
provide for our immediate wants, and in the hopes of meeting Dr. Gosse,
and procuring from him some funds for the maintenance of my crew, which
I think your lordship will see the necessity of providing me with, as I
have not received more than two thousand dollars during five months, and
I have latterly been maintaining this ship in provisions and fuel,
besides furnishing money and provisions to the gunboat and flotilla
inside Vasiladhi.

                         I have the honour to be, &c.,

                              F. A. HASTINGS.

       *       *       *       *       *

LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING
CROSS.




Transcriber's note:

The following typographical errors were corrected:

    * Chapter VII, page 25: "intrusted" changed to "entrusted"
    * Appendix, letter IX, page 380: "vessel," changed to "vessel."






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of Thomas, Lord Cochrane,
Tenth Earl of Dundonald, Vol. II, by Thomas Lord Cochrane and H. R. Fox Bourne

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE OF LORD COCHRANE ***

***** This file should be named 26067.txt or 26067.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/6/26067/

Produced by Stefan Cramme, Ted Garvin, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
