The Project Gutenberg EBook of Parks for the People, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Parks for the People
       Proceedings of a Public Meeting held at Faneuil Hall, June 7, 1876

Author: Various

Release Date: July 17, 2008 [EBook #26084]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARKS FOR THE PEOPLE ***




Produced by Betsie Bush, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain works at the
University of Michigan's Making of America collection.)






PARKS FOR THE PEOPLE.

PROCEEDINGS OF A PUBLIC MEETING
HELD AT FANEUIL HALL,

JUNE 7, 1876.

BOSTON:
FRANKLIN PRESS: RAND, AVERY, & CO.
1876.




CONTENTS.

ORGANIZATION OF MEETING                    5

SPEECH OF MR. JOSEPH S. ROPES              7

  "    "  MR. GEORGE B. CHASE             10

  "    "  MR. RICHARD H. DANA, JUN.       11

  "    "  DR. OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES       20

  "    "  REV. ROLLIN H. NEALE, D.D.      26

  "    "  REV. J. P. BODFISH              27

  "    "  COL. CHARLES W. WILDER          31

  "    "  MR. JOSEPH F. PAUL              33

  "    "  HON. P. A. COLLINS              36

LETTER OF DR. EDWARD H. CLARKE            38

COMMITTEE OF ONE HUNDRED                  45




FANEUIL HALL MEETING IN FAVOR OF PUBLIC PARKS.


Pursuant to a call published in all the daily papers, and signed by a
large number of prominent citizens and tax-payers of Boston, a public
meeting was convened in Faneuil Hall on the evening of Wednesday, the
7th of June, 1876, to take action on the recommendations contained in
the Report of the Park Commissioners. The hall was crowded by an
intelligent and enthusiastic audience; and the proceedings as reported
_verbatim_ in the columns of the "Boston Morning Journal," were as
follows:--

The meeting was called to order at eight o'clock by Mr. JOHN W. CANDLER,
who said,--

GENTLEMEN,--As Chairman of the Committee of Arrangements, I have been
requested to call this meeting to order. It is usually the case, that,
when a mass meeting of citizens is to be held, a great deal of labor has
to be performed in preparing for and organizing the meeting. But I am
glad to say, that, on this occasion, the important advantage of having a
public almost entirely in our favor was enjoyed by the Committee. We
found a strong and intelligent and deep-seated sentiment almost
unanimous throughout the community, in favor of having the City
Government take prompt and favorable action upon the report of the Park
Commissioners. [Applause.] We found the community earnest and
enthusiastic in the desire that a system of parks should be projected
for the city of Boston, to insure the health, and to make certain and
positive the prosperity, of our citizens in the future. The Committee
had only to present the call or address through the press, which some
of you have read, to find hundreds ready to indorse it; and the
authorities had only to open wide the doors of Faneuil Hall to have the
people throng here, as they have to-night, to manifest the sentiment
which they feel so generally.

Gentlemen, we have with us to-night men of science, philanthropists, the
representatives of the learned professions. We have the capitalist; we
have the merchant; we have the mechanic; and we have the daily laborer,
who toils from the rising to the setting sun,--we have them all here, to
give out a voice to-night, expressing the opinions of the people, which
can neither be misrepresented nor misunderstood. [Applause.]

It is not my duty, gentlemen, to make a speech. You have here this
evening to address you, the representatives of every class, the best
that can be afforded in any city, the leading men of the city of Boston
in the different professions. It is only necessary, in the discharge of
my duty, that I should read to you the names of the gentlemen whom you
will be asked to elect as the officers of this meeting. They are as
follows:--


                              PRESIDENT.

                       THE HON. JOSEPH S. ROPES.

                           VICE-PRESIDENTS.

     CHARLES FRANCIS ADAMS, WILLIAM AMORY, RICHARD FROTHINGHAM, PETER C.
     BROOKS, MARTIN BRIMMER, GEORGE C. RICHARDSON, BENJAMIN F. THOMAS,
     EDWARD S. RAND, HENRY P. KIDDER, THOMAS J. GARGAN, EBEN D. JORDAN,
     C. A. RICHARDS, JOHN C. CROWLEY, WILLIAM B. BACON, AARON D.
     WILLIAMS, CHARLES F. DONNELLY, WM. W. CLAPP, BENJAMIN DEANE,
     RICHARD OLNEY, WILLIAM ATHERTON, THOMAS GOBIN, WILLIAM ENDICOTT,
     JUN., ALBERT BOWKER, DANIEL J. SWEENEY, PATRICK T. JACKSON, R. M.
     PULSIFER, ROLAND WORTHINGTON, JOHN G. BLAKE, M.D., J. H. CHADWICK,
     LEWIS COLEMAN.

                            SECRETARIES.

               HAMILTON A. HILL.      WILLIAM E. PERKINS.


The list of names was unanimously approved; and the announcement of the
election of the gentlemen named therein was received with applause.

Mr. CANDLER continued, I have the honor of introducing to you JOSEPH S.
ROPES, Esq., a merchant of Boston, who has been called to fill a great
many places of trust, and who has always been found able in the
discharge of every duty, and faithful in every trust committed to him.




SPEECH OF MR. JOSEPH S. ROPES.


FELLOW-CITIZENS,--I thank you for the honor you have done me in inviting
me to preside on this auspicious occasion. You have come together
to-night, not to quarrel with one another's politics, not to abuse one
another's rival candidates, but to hold a friendly consultation upon one
of the most important and interesting and agreeable subjects which can
engage your attention,--the subject of public parks for the city of
Boston. [Applause.]

Gentlemen, I was born in Boston; and I well remember the time when our
cows were pastured on Boston Common, when the Back Bay was not a myth,
but a reality, and when at least a portion of the summit of Beacon Hill
was covered with green fields, on which were seen sometimes "raree
shows" and travelling menageries. Since that time, our city has grown
and swelled, and stretched itself north and south, and east and west,
striding over one arm of the sea, filling up another, swallowing the
neighboring towns one by one, taking two mouthfuls for Roxbury, and one
for Dorchester, and one for Charlestown and Brighton together, until it
has expanded its population sevenfold, and its area almost seventy times
seven, within fifty years. Yet there stands Boston Common just where and
just what it was--no larger, and thank heaven! as yet no smaller [loud
applause]--than it was fifty years ago.

Where are the breathing-places for this enlarged metropolis? Where are
the places of common resort for quiet and healthful enjoyment and
peaceful recreation for this expanded population? Where are the noble
parks and the wide-spreading groves? Where are the places fit for public
entertainment, which we find in every other large city in the civilized
world?--such as we see in London and Paris and Berlin and Vienna and
Florence and Rome and Naples--yes, even for the few brief months of
summer, in the northern capitals of Stockholm and St. Petersburg? And
echo answers, "Where?" [Laughter and applause.]


                      "Gone like a vision!"


My friends, I need not tell you that this matter has excited the
interest of our philanthropic and public-spirited citizens, and
especially of the medical faculty, to whom it is, in its sanitary
aspect, a matter of most important practical interest. And, through
their representations to the city government and to the state
legislature, a bill was brought before the legislature, which I had the
honor myself to report in the House of Representatives a little more
than a year ago, and which was passed by large majorities in both
houses, authorizing the city of Boston to purchase and to take lands
within its own limits for laying out public parks, and to co-operate
with adjacent towns in laying out conterminous parks for the common
benefit and advantage of citizens on both sides of the line.

This measure was opposed (as all such measures are opposed) on the
ground that "it would lead to jobbery and extravagance." And the answer
was ready at hand, that all public enterprises are liable "to lead to
jobbery and extravagance," but that the abuse of a good thing is no
argument against its valid use [applause]; that it is for the citizens
themselves, and for the government of the city of Boston, to see that
their trust is rightly and honestly carried out.

Again: it was argued that the people of Boston possess already, in their
beautiful suburbs, all that is required in pure air and beautiful
scenery. And this, again, is most true as regards those who live in
those suburbs, and those whose wealth enables them to pass to and fro in
their carriages, and regale their senses with the luxury of what they
there find. But what application has this, my friends, to the
working-man, to the masses of our population, whose sole idea of the
suburbs consists of an hour's rattling drive in a crowded street-car,
and an hour's seat by the side of a dusty thoroughfare?

Again: it was argued that the city of Boston could not afford this
expensive luxury of parks. And to this again it was easy to reply, that
so long as the city of Boston could afford prisons and jails, and any
number of millions spent for liquor and for hurtful indulgences, and for
the repression of vice and crime, it could afford to spend money for
this peaceful and healthful and elevating enjoyment for the people.

In a word, gentlemen, this bill became a law; and, in pursuance of that
law, a Commission was appointed by the city of Boston, the names of the
gentlemen composing which Commission I need not repeat to you; for they
are in all your hearts, as well as on all your lips. The Report of that
Commission is now, and has been for weeks, in your hands; and it is the
object of this meeting to indorse that Report, and to stimulate and
incite the government of the city of Boston to act in accordance with
its suggestions. We cannot expect that all its details will be approved
by every one; nor are we to suppose that all its details will be carried
out in action by the government. But it is not too much to say that it
is so well digested, so full and complete, and in every way so
satisfactory to the city and the citizens, that we cannot do better than
recommend it as a whole to the municipal authorities. [Applause.]

Now, my friends, it is not for me to do what will be so much better done
by those who succeed me on this platform,--to give you the reasons, and
enforce the arguments, for your action at this time. But as a
representative of the city of Boston, as an almost constant resident
within it for nearly thirty years past, as in my humble sphere a
representative of the merchants of Boston, as a taxpayer of Boston, and
in every way identified with the best interests and all the highest and
best aims of our city, I call upon you to-night to adopt and to indorse
and to commend this admirable system to our city government. [Applause.]
I have now the pleasure of introducing Mr. GEORGE B. CHASE, who will
present the resolutions.




SPEECH OF MR. GEORGE B. CHASE.


MR. PRESIDENT,--On behalf of the committee who have had in charge the
arrangements for this meeting, I have the honor to offer for its
acceptance several resolutions which have been prepared for it by a
gentleman, than whom none is more versed in all that relates to the
business questions and interests of the city of Boston, and who, during
long and faithful service as secretary of the Board of Trade, became
familiar with all subjects relating to the development and prosperity of
the city. It is hardly necessary, Mr. Chairman, in such a connection, to
mention the name of Mr. HAMILTON A. HILL. [Applause.]

Mr. CHASE then read the resolutions as follows:--

_Resolved_, That this meeting would hereby emphatically re-affirm the
opinion which has been expressed, at the polls and elsewhere, by the
citizens and tax-payers of Boston, that the time has arrived when this
city should be provided with a park or parks similar to those which have
been projected by the other great cities of the United States, adapted
to the wants of our large and steadily increasing population, and on a
scale commensurate with the growing commercial importance and
metropolitan influence of the city.

_Resolved_, That the plan for a system of parks and parkways, prepared
and recommended by the Park Commissioners, commends itself to this
meeting as broad and comprehensive in its general features, fair to all
sections of the city in its details, admirably suited to meet all the
necessities of the case, and promising, when carried out, to make Boston
one of the most healthful, attractive, and beautiful cities in the
world.

_Resolved_, That the pressing need which exists for a radical
improvement of the sewerage in some parts of the city, the present
cheapness and abundance of labor, the diminished value of land, and the
exceptionally favorable terms on which the city can now negotiate for
money, render it of the first importance that there should be no delay
on the part of the city government in the acceptance of the proposed
plan, and in the adoption of decided and vigorous measure for carrying
it into execution.

_Resolved_, That this meeting would therefore respectfully and
earnestly ask for immediate and favorable official action upon the
Report of the Commissioners, and that the chairman and secretaries are
hereby authorized and requested to communicate a copy of these
resolutions, properly authenticated, to his Honor the Mayor, and to each
branch of the City Council.

_Resolved_, That a committee of one hundred be appointed by the Chair,
to represent this meeting before the city government, and to secure the
desired action by it without loss of time.


THE CHAIRMAN. Gentlemen, you have heard the resolutions, which evidently
meet with your unanimous approbation. You will now be addressed in
behalf of those resolutions by one who needs no introduction from me,
Mr. RICHARD H. DANA, Jun. [Prolonged applause.]




SPEECH OF MR. RICHARD H. DANA, JUN.


FELLOW-CITIZENS,--I thank you from the bottom of my heart for this very
kind welcome I have received at your hands to-night on coming upon the
platform. I assure you, gentlemen, if I felt at liberty to waste the
precious hours of this evening upon any thing relating to myself, I
could say much more than I do to thank you for your great kindness.

But, gentlemen, we are met here on public business. You have heard what
we are asked to do. We are asked to petition the city government, and
send a committee of force to the city government (not as if the
government were at all reluctant, but that they may know the feeling of
the people of Boston), and ask the city government to go to work at
once, and see that Boston has, as soon as possible, these necessities
for her honor, her health, and her beauty. [Applause.]

In thinking of this subject, Mr. President and gentlemen, it occurred to
me that it was a very singular fact, and not altogether to the credit of
human nature, that great numbers of persons cannot live together without
extreme inconvenience. Now, Robinson Crusoe, when he lived on the Island
of Juan Fernandez alone, was not troubled with any question of public
parks, or drainage, or health. Things took care of themselves. But when
you get two or three or four hundred thousand Robinson Crusoes in a few
square miles, you find the whole state of things is reversed, that you
require all the patience, all the science, a large part of the money,
and a large part of the industry, of the population, that you may live
at all, and on any terms. The lower parts of our nature, the animal
parts, tend to produce certain results which the intellectual parts are
expected to meet and control. If they do not that, men become savages;
if they do, they are enlightened.

Now, in this great and enlightened city of Boston, the pride of us all,
the "Athens of America," as we all know we are [laughter], and, as our
friend Dr. HOLMES there has told us, the "Hub of the Universe"
[laughter], it would hardly be respectful to say that one of the
questions before us was, Which of those two roads we were going to
take,--whether we were going to let the intellectual and moral parts
have the upper hand, or whether we were going to sink beneath the
material part. And yet, gentlemen, that is a good deal the question that
is before us to-night.

Why, look at the progress which is inevitably made where you get great
numbers of human beings together. You must have drainage, you must look
to the health of the population, and then you must look to their
recreation and their amusements (for they will have them); and, if they
are not good and creditable and honorable, they will not cease to exist,
but they will come before us in the most shameful and unwholesome form.
We used to be told, gentlemen, that Boston had natural parks all about
her, and she did not need any artificial parks. Well, now, I am not in
favor of any artificial parks. All I ask is, that the beauty of the
environs of Boston may be preserved. [Applause.]

We are on the defensive. We are defending the wholesomeness and the
beauty of our beloved city against this encroachment of population. Why,
the time was--Mr. ROPES will tell you when the time was--when the Back
Bay was a beautiful sheet of water, filled at high tide, carrying the
healthful air through the whole city. But then the necessity of
population called for its filling up, and it is now piled in upon, and
we have there now what Dr. CLARKE called "a natural cesspool."

We changed the Back Bay from a beautiful bay, where the wholesome tides
of the ocean swept in, to a natural cesspool.

Well, now, look at the lanes and roads in the suburbs of
Boston--beautiful. As you ride over them, there are trees hanging over
them, and there are bushes on each side: you say it is charming. Well,
go out there the next year. The selectmen if it is a town, the city
government if it is a city, have changed all that. They have made a
straight line right through it, and widened the streets sixty feet; cut
down every tree, and made it one of the most disagreeable and painful
spectacles that the eyes could rest upon. It is their duty so to do: it
is a necessity. And so you go on destroying the beauties of the city,
destroying its wholesomeness, destroying its charm; and now we have got
to meet that tendency, and we have the power to meet it. We have the
intellect, we have the money, we have the will, and we have the taste;
and we would be incensed if any one should suggest that we do not. And
yet we have allowed every city in the United States to get in advance of
us. [A voice, "That's so."] Chicago has three thousand acres of parks;
Philadelphia, five thousand; New York, one great park of about one
thousand acres; and almost every city in Europe has better, more
handsome and attractive accommodations than the city of Boston. I am
ashamed to say it; but it is so. I trust, however, gentlemen, that,
before I ever have the honor of addressing you again, we shall have
taken the first step to remove this odium from the city of Boston.
[Applause.]

Some six years ago, I think it was, the people got greatly in earnest
that this park should be undertaken. They saw that the progress of the
manufactories was fast destroying the beauties of Boston; that they were
taking up the land in the suburbs rapidly: and, when I said that your
green lands were destroyed, with their beautiful curved lines, I forgot
to mention that your beautiful sheets of water are in the same danger.
Why, look at Fresh Pond, look at Jamaica Pond! They are beautiful
objects to gaze upon: but when manufactories begin to surround them,
when there are soap manufactories and tanneries, and I do not know what,
draining into the pond, the result is, that the water is unwholesome,
that the fish die, the water cannot be drunk, and then physicians begin
to tell their patients, "You had better move out of that neighborhood."
Are you aware, gentlemen, that that is coming upon us, that we must meet
it, and avert it?

Some years ago, the people of Boston were earnestly in favor of a park,
or system of parks. The legislature, for some reason or other, required
that the project should receive a vote of two-thirds of the people. That
was extraordinary and hard. But it did receive a vote of two-thirds of
the people of Boston proper, and more than two-thirds; but from the
accident of a newly added portion of the city, for some reason or other,
taking a slant in a certain direction, they voted very largely against
it, and it fell through. We must take warning from that; for land that
would have made then a handsome park, which we could have had, we cannot
have now at all. It would cost altogether too much to take
dwelling-houses and factories and railroad beds, if we could, for a
park.

Well, after six years of restlessness, at last we went before the
legislature again; and we got an act passed, authorizing the appointing
of commissioners with powers. That act passed, helped by our most able
fellow-citizen, MR. ROPES, chairman of this meeting; and it was
submitted to the votes of the people of Boston; and the park project was
carried by the votes of this entire population,--Boston, East Boston,
Charlestown, South Boston, Dorchester, Brighton, which make, all
together, a very large and most decisive majority. And therefore,
gentlemen, the question is not, Shall we have parks? you have decided
that; but the question is, Whether, having determined to have them, we
shall rest content with saying so? whether we will have our paper parks,
as we have our paper money, with nothing to rest upon [laughter], or
whether we shall have genuine parks, with life and trees, and have
sheets of water? Now we are here to-night to say it is the latter that
we want. [Applause.]

Fellow-citizens, that statute authorized the appointment by the MAYOR,
subject to approval, of three commissioners. Well, that was wise. It
was not nine, seven, nor five; but it was three. Well, his Honor the
Mayor, who has presided with so much dignity, wisdom, and integrity
[applause] over the city of Boston for two years,--and we would be glad
to get him for a third year, if his health would permit it
[applause],--his Honor the Mayor appointed three gentlemen as
commissioners, in whom this community have entire confidence. There are
no politics among the Board of Commissioners; there is no jobbery in the
Board of Commissioners; and I will venture to predict, gentlemen, that,
when they finish their task, there will be no investigation. [Great
applause.]

I was amazed on looking over their charge. Why, I found an item of
coach-hire for the whole period of their service, nine dollars. Why, it
would not have been enough to take three common councilmen from Parker's
or Young's. [Laughter.] But it is all they have charged; and how, on
that sum, they succeeded in riding around Boston, I do not know. Their
experience with persons who let carriages must have been much more
favorable than mine has been. But not only have they done honorably,
economically, and frugally, they have put into their work an amount of
brain-labor, an amount of patient investigation and of good judgment,
which no one can have an adequate opinion of who has not read their
book; but, if he has not, I hope he will. And at least this I may be
allowed to say, I do not think any citizen of Boston has the right to
object to those parks, or to be silent or indifferent on the subject,
unless he has read the report of the Commission, and knows what is
proposed, and has been done. [Applause.] They have consulted the best
authorities. They have consulted Mr. FREDERICK LAW OLMSTEAD, who laid
out Central Park in New York, and he is the highest authority on the
construction of parks in the country; and he has been all over this
neighborhood, viewing the localities, and they have taken every thing
into consideration; and, gentlemen, what is the result? They do not
propose to us one great park of a thousand acres, at an almost
unattainable distance; they do not propose a great park that nobody can
get to, unless he gives a day to it, and a good deal of money: but they
have adopted a system based upon the natural characteristics of the
neighborhood of Boston. And what better could they do? At East Boston,
they have given them a park upon the water-side, where they will always
have the fresh breezes of the sea. At South Boston, they have given them
a park upon the water-side, one directly opposite Fort Independence, and
then another one, called the South Park, larger; and Chester Park, which
you are all familiar with, is already extended, and nearly ready to be
used as far as Beacon Street; and thence it is to go over to Cambridge,
and be the quickest means of access to the University. That same avenue
is to be extended easterly till it strikes the farthest of the South
Boston parks, opposite Fort Independence; and, when that is done, you
will be able to drive or walk, according to your powers of walking, from
the park opposite Fort independence, into the city, and across it, to
Harvard University.

Now that is a good deal; but they have taken another step. They propose
to take the water-front of the Charles River basin; and there is nothing
in Nature so beautiful, so well adapted to the needs of a city, as a
park, or boulevard, or promenade, directly on a water-front, especially
if that water is sea-water,--if it is brought in and carried out by two
daily tides. What more beautiful, what more wholesome, what more
invigorating, during the hot season of the year, than to have an open
boulevard, where you can sit, or walk, or ride,--a place for the fresh
sea-water of the ocean brought in pure to you every day! Well, they mean
to preserve that, and give us about two hundred feet for a driveway, a
saddle-horse way (a saddle-pad, I think they call it), and footpath, a
place for flowers and trees, as it extends along the water-side,
beginning by Leverett Street, and going out as far as Brighton. Then
from there they mean to take this great Back Bay, which Dr. CLARKE
properly called a natural cesspool, and keep a large part of it under
water, the ocean to be let in and let out at our option, so that it can
be always kept pure; and yet such a quantity of it, that it will be a
sort of inland sea, where we can have regattas, and where every
gentleman may keep his boat, and every boy may keep his scull; and
perhaps it is just as well a boy's skull should be there as anywhere
else a large part of the time. [Laughter.]

Then, gentlemen, they are going to take Jamaica Pond, and have a park
or driveway around the pond; then the Chestnut Hill Reservoir, that has
a parkway one hundred feet in width, where you can drive or walk at your
pleasure. In West Roxbury they are to have a mountain-park, which will
be the largest (about five hundred acres); and it is well called a
providence, because it is high, it is rocky, it has a thoroughly sylvan
look, like a forest. You would feel as if you were fifty miles from
Boston, if you were where you could not see the city. At the same time,
it is beautiful for a park. There are very few houses there; and it is
difficult to make it salable for residences. But they have selected this
spot; and they are going to give us the best park of the city, and then
have all these parks connected by parkways, thus making them so
convenient of access, that every poor man in Boston can take his child
by his hand, and for five cents a head can be carried out to any one of
those parks by the railroads. [Applause.]

And, when he gets there, he can show this poor boy or girl, who has
passed all the winter, and all the opening spring, in an alleyway,--he
can show them, by a wholesome ascent of two hundred feet only, slow,
gradual, one of the noblest prospects in the world,--the ocean pouring
up into these great bays, and floating the great ships that come and go,
the Bunker Hill Monument and the Navy Yard, the University, and the
great series of cities that surround us. And, more than that, he can
show him or her Wachuset Mountain, and over the top of Mount Monadnock
in New Hampshire.

Now I ask you, fellow-citizens, if it is not worth while for the city of
Boston to improve these opportunities. We have been most fortunate in
our Commissioners,--in their wisdom, in their frugality, in their
intelligence, and their public spirit; and I hope, gentlemen, you will
study their Report. It is easy reading, pleasant reading; and if, when
you get home, you find your boy or girl engaged over some novel,
especially if it is a yellow covered one, take it right out of his or
her hand, and ask them to read that Report.

You may think it absurd; but, ten to one, it will interest the children
more than the novel would. It will certainly give them more valuable
instruction; and I venture to say it will interest them more. I felt
quite carried away by it. It seemed to me it must be a fancy; but, when
I turned to their accounts (and they are all mercantile men), I was
amazed to see at what small cost it could all be done. And, gentlemen, I
want to detain you a moment longer on statistics, and show that it has
increased the value of property in every city that has had a park, by
bringing houses all about the parks, and by detaining as inhabitants of
the city, to be taxed in the city, those men who skulk in small towns to
throw the burden of the expense of their own city on those who stay
behind. [Applause.] All we want to do to-night is to say to the city
government that we are in earnest about this matter, and that we want
the work done now. [Applause.]

I tell you, gentlemen, it is very doubtful, if this fails, whether you
will have another Board of Commissioners to compare with the present. I
tell you it is doubtful, whether there will be a state of things in
Boston which will be any thing like as favorable as the state of things
we are in now. But I can tell you one thing that is certain; and that
is, if you postpone it, you cannot have the parks that they propose. The
growth of population will be crowding over it; speculators will buy it;
the ponds will become injured; and the expense will be so great, that
you will shudder at the thought of it. And, more than that, the parks
that you ask for in another ten years will be four or five miles from
the centre of population now, and I confess that one great argument with
me for instant action is, that I want the parks to be as accessible as
possible to all those persons especially who do not own their private
carriages, and cannot give a day to it. [Applause.]

And last of all, Mr. President and gentlemen, it should be done for
economical reasons, as has been stated very well by the address and in
the resolutions, because there never was a time, and I hope there never
will be a time again, when the land was so cheap as it is now; and, when
we take this land for parks, we take it at its present price. There has
not been a time for many years, and I hope there never will be a time
again, when the price of labor is as low as it is now [applause]; and
that labor we would employ at once, and the laborers are begging for
employment. Why, there is not one of you who has not often and often,
within the last two years, perhaps it is not extravagant to say, felt
his heart bleed when he has been stopped in the way by evidently honest
men, who would say, "We can't find any thing to do. We have looked
everywhere; and there is no work for us." [A voice, "That's so."] Yes,
that is so. Now, some philanthropists, and some political economists,
have told us that the government ought always to find employment for
everybody; it is the duty of the city to see that everybody has work:
but, though I do not advocate any such doctrine as that, I advocate this
doctrine,--that whenever the community has any thing it ought to do, and
which will employ laborers (and this is a hard time on the laborers),
then is the time that they ought to do it. [Applause.] So that it is not
only good economy, but it is humanity, that dictates an instant advance
upon this work. To save the land that we can get now in a low market,
and to employ laborers who are paid low wages, but are glad to get even
that, and to prevent the entire failure of this scheme so carefully and
beneficially made, we shall ask the city government to work at once.

Now, there are others much more able to speak of the finances of the
city government than I am; but we always do find, that, when a thing
ought to be done, there is a way of doing it; and we sometimes find,
that, when things ought not to be done, there is a way of doing them. I
wish to say one word more, before I take my seat, on the report and
scheme of these Park Commissioners; and that is its entire equitableness
in its attention to localities. It has left no part of the city that is
not benefited. Charlestown cannot have a park, because it is built over,
and there is no room for one. If there was room, they would have one.
They must annex; and then they can have a park. [Laughter.] East Boston
has a park; South Boston has a park; then comes the great West Roxbury
Park; then comes the Bussey Farm, which I omitted to mention; and then
comes Jamaica Pond and Chestnut Hill Reservoir Park, and the park roads
connecting them all, and uniting them; and then the water-front on all
that part of the city of Boston where the water-fronts are not needed
for commerce.

I say, therefore, this plan is equitably divided among the citizens
according to their residence; and it is accessible to all, and the plan
is economical, and the time is auspicious. Therefore I hope that you
will with unanimity adopt the resolutions, and call upon the city
government to proceed at once. [Applause.]


THE PRESIDENT. Allusion has been made to the "Hub of the Universe;" and
you will all understand, that, when any thing is the matter with that
Hub, the diagnosis must be made not only by an able physician, but by an
able spokesman. [Laughter and applause.] I have great pleasure in
introducing to you one who combines both, and a hundred other qualities,
Dr. OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES. [Applause.]




SPEECH OF DR. OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.

You will not ask for rhetoric or eloquence in the few remarks upon a
vital subject to be offered you by a member of the silent profession.
What could be so eloquent as the hollow voice which announces the Boston
annual death-rate as being 26.18 against 23.7, that of the great paved
nation of London; against 19.3, that of Philadelphia; and approaching
that of our two unhealthiest cities, New York and New Orleans? This high
death-rate has been shown to be largely due to the excessive mortality
among infants and children under five years of age. The most fatal of
the diseases which assail them is that destruction which wasteth at
noonday, to which our American practitioners give the name of
cholera-infantum. And this disease prevails chiefly, almost entirely,
from June to October, the season when all out-of-door influences are
most tempting and most needed. The weekly record of August and September
is that of a pestilence. The destroying angel carries off the firstborn,
and, oftener still, the last-born, out of almost every household in
certain districts, as in the heaviest curse laid on Egypt. Thousands
have fled the city, as they deserted London in the season of the
plague; but thousands are left to follow in the funeral procession of
those who were the hope of their households.

A considerable part of this mortality, it may be feared, is unavoidable.
Our climatic influences are permanent factors, and must always count in
the bills of mortality. But there are certain agencies which we can, to
a great extent, control. We can and do submit the dwellings of our
citizens to inspection and sanitary regulation; we can and shall provide
our city with proper drainage; we can and do inspect the food in our
market, and condemn it if unfit for use; we can and must secure for our
citizens the influences of unroofed and unwalled Nature,--air, light,
space for exercise and recreation, the natural birthright of mankind.

Of the uses of these larger breathing-spaces, which we call parks,--for
the relief of the imprisoned dwellers in crowded streets, for the
recreation of poor and rich alike, for the health of mind and body which
they offer to all,--it seems almost needless to speak from the medical
point of view; for all know what cities would be without open areas,
where children can play in the shade, and old people warm themselves in
the sun. I wish to call your attention to a single point intimately
connected with the alarming fact of the excessive death-rate of which I
have spoken. That point is the influence of the air they breathe on the
health of children, with the bearing of this on the question before us.

If a child is found to have been starved to death in a cellar or an
attic, a cry of horror is raised over it. If two or three wandering
boys, as it happened the other day at Lowell, come upon some noxious
roots, and, in obedience to their omnivorous instinct, devour them, and
pay the forfeit, the whole country hears of it. If a family or two get
hold of some ill-conditioned meat, and suffer for it, the groans of
their colics are echoed all over the land. If a milkman misrepresents
his honest cows by falsifying their product, the chemist detects him,
and the press puts him in the pillory. If the Cochituate or Mystic water
is too much like an obsolete chowder, up go all noses, and out come all
manner of newspaper paragraphs from "Senex," "Tax-payer," and the rest.
But air-poisoning kills a hundred where food-poisoning kills one. Let me
relate a circumstance which happened in Ireland, to which circumstance,
in all probability, I owe the pleasure of being listened to at this
moment by some among our hard-working, adopted citizens who are before
me.

When I say to you, meaning to speak the words of sober truth, that a
single physician, by a single and simple measure, saved more lives than
were lost at Waterloo by the British army and all its allies, leaving
out the Prussians, you will suspect me of exaggeration, not very
uncommon in public speakers. I will therefore intrench myself behind
certain details which I have often before cited, but not in the presence
of a gathering of this kind.

Dr. ROBERT COLLINS was Master, as it is called, of the great Dublin
Lying-in Hospital, where the annual rate of births was between two and
three thousand, from the year 1826 to 1833. A work of his, containing
the results of his practice during his seven years of service, was
published in Boston in 1841, by order of the Massachusetts Medical
Society, for the use of its members. I consider him vouched for as
authority, therefore, by men in whom you can put confidence. Dr. COLLINS
makes the following statement:--

When his predecessor, Dr. JOSEPH CLARKE, was in office, in the year
1784, he found that seventeen children in the hundred, nearly one in
six, died within the first fortnight after birth, nineteen-twentieths of
these of one particular disease peculiar to very early infancy. Looking
for the cause of this frightful mortality, he thought he found it in a
foul and vitiated state of the air of the hospital. So he had some
openings of considerable size made in the ceiling of each ward, and
three holes, of an inch in diameter, through each window at top: the
doors, too, were perforated with numerous holes. In this way, a free
circulation was secured, and so arranged, that the nurses could not
control it; for some of the old-fashioned nurses would not have opened a
window in the Black Hole at Calcutta, for fear the inmates should catch
a cold.

What was the result of this simple proceeding? Why, the mortality fell,
from seventeen in a hundred, down to between five and six; and Dr.
Collins gives us the result up to his time in these words, "Thus, by his
valuable suggestions, 16,371 lives have been saved, as, had the
mortality of infants continued one in six to this day (1833), the number
of children dying of the 131,227 (which is the total number born in the
hospital) would be 21,871, as the hospital registry now shows." In the
battle of Waterloo, the British and their allies lost 16,186 men; that
is, 185 less than the great army of very light infantry saved from death
by letting out the smoke of the battle of life, and letting in the sweet
air of heaven, through the walls of the Dublin hospital.

So much for what air alone can do for children. Now, it is not the
"nine-day fits" of that hospital in its unventilated condition which
kills our poor children in the hot months, but that other disease of
infancy, which to name is like sounding a funeral knell in the ears of
many a parent. This one malady, more than any other, gives Boston its
place on the black list of unhealthy towns. All parents having young
children leave the city during the worst part of the sickly season, if
they have the means of so doing. Our best streets look as DEFOE tells us
London streets looked during the Great Plague. But thousands of families
must remain; and we are bound to do what we can for them in their
dearest interests,--the lives of their children.

With regard to cholera-infantum,--the deadly scourge of which I have
spoken,--the testimony of experience shows that change of air, even
temporary, often effects the cure of which the apothecary, who "pestles
a poisoned poison behind his crimson lights," cannot bring about with
his drugs, though the wisest of physicians had written the prescription.
This point is so important, and bears so directly, not only on the
necessity of park-spaces, but upon their distribution so as to bring
them within reach of all the crowded and unhealthy districts as far as
possible, that I shall borrow a few sentences, enforcing it, from
writers recognized as authorities on the diseases of children.

"Even in cases in which a removal to a healthy and airy situation in the
country is impracticable," says Dr. CONDIE of Philadelphia, long and
well known by his writings, "much benefit may be derived from carrying
the patient frequently into the open air in a carriage, or in the arms,
or, when its residence is near a large river, sailing it daily in an
open boat." And Dr. JOHN BELL of the same city says, "The restorative
effects of fresh air in cholera-infantum are strikingly evinced in the
relief procured by many hundreds of children every summer in
Philadelphia, by their simply crossing and recrossing the River Delaware
in steamboats once or twice a day. New life is restored to the little
beings, who, on leaving their homes in the city, seemed almost
exanimate, and in the last stage of incurable exhaustion." Dr. JAMES
STEWART of New York, in his treatise on the diseases of children, and
our own honored patriarch of the profession, the late Dr. JAMES JACKSON,
in his letters to a young physician, speak in similar terms of the great
advantage of change of place and of air. The "aquatic jaunts"
recommended by Dr. STEWART, and spoken of as so efficacious by Dr. BELL,
are among the advantages to be secured by the plan proposed by our Park
Commissioners. I wish twenty tons of little children could be shipped
every fine summer day for a good sail.

There is one particular region which I will mention as like to be
specially benefited by the plan referred to,--a region which would get
the advantages of the fresh air coming over the wide estuary of Charles
River without the expense and trouble of taking boats. The narrow and
crowded streets of the northern slope of Beacon Hill, and a wide region
extending northward from it, are inhabited by the very class most
exposed to cholera-infantum and diseases of that nature. Having lived
for many years in Charles Street, where I am no longer an owner, I had
occasion to learn the incomparable comfort and delight to be got in a
hot summer's day, when the wind is from the southwest, by turning the
corner of Charles and Cambridge Streets, and getting into the current of
air cooled by passing over the water. Some of the poor mothers with sick
children had found out where to bring them for relief; and I often
thought, if there were an open green filling up that corner, with shade
trees and seats, what a priceless _sanatorium_ it would be to all that
suffering quarter of the city! The proposed green margin, beginning at
Leverett Street, and extending along the river, will meet this very
want; and this is only one locality of many which will thus turn its
natural advantages to account.

I have preferred to insist on a single point rather than to expatiate on
a larger number. But I trust that the eloquence of others will enforce
and illustrate the innumerable advantages our city will derive from the
only chain she would submit to,--a chain of pleasure-grounds all around
her. The Bostonian has looked up at the gilded dome of the State House,
and down at the reflection of his own features in the Frog Pond, long
enough. Our city has always been a centre; and it must not act as if it
considered itself a mere feeder. We must provide ourselves with the
complete equipment, not of a village community, not of a thriving town,
but of a true metropolis, large enough for a citizen of the world to
live in without feeling himself provincialized, and not too large for
one honest mayor like our own to handle. The marrow-bones of the past
are pretty well cleared out, or will be before the Centennial year is
over, and we must not be content to live on them for another century.
The Old Elm got enough of it,--grew discontented, and started on its
travels for wider quarters, but, unfortunately, stumbled and fell. Let
us take the hint, and plant a thousand acres with young elms and all
other trees of the forest, where the hillsides are not already clad in
foliage; so that the children of coming generations may bless our
memory, not only for all the happiness they have had in their shadow,
but for saving more lives to the country than were lost in any one of
the battles which scarred and crippled their fathers. [Applause.]


THE PRESIDENT. Gentlemen, you have been addressed by two of the learned
professions. It follows, as a matter of course, that you will now be
addressed by one from the third, the most important and most respected
of all. I am happy to introduce to you the Rev. Dr. NEALE, the oldest
settled pastor of the city of Boston. [Applause.]




SPEECH OF THE REV. ROLLIN H. NEALE, D.D.


I do not intend, my friends, to trespass much upon your time, and
certainly shall not presume to give any new information on the subject
which has been presented. Owing, probably, to my long residence here, it
has been thought, I suppose, that my _testimony_, in these days of
calling for witnesses, may be of some importance. Of the financial
bearings of this proposed enterprise, of course I cannot judge. These
are to be considered and acted upon by men on whom the public
responsibility rests, who will, doubtless, act considerately and wisely;
but the desirableness of the thing itself is unquestionable. I have had
opportunity, with some gentlemen here present, of wandering of a
summer's day through the beautiful and extensive parks of Europe and of
this country, and know how welcome and refreshing they are to the weary
traveller. "Boston Common," of course, we praise everywhere; and when
abroad, and thinking of dear home, say there is nothing like it the
world over.

It is a good feature in the character of Bostonians to love their own
city. There is something delightful in its old buildings, and even its
crooked streets. We forget political and even religious differences in
view of ancient landmarks. We cling to the Old South, and would gladly
have kept Brattle Square with its cannon-ball, whatever might have been
thought of its theology. We cherish the memory of our fathers, and wish
to keep among us, as far as possible, signs of the good old days. This
is right and noble; but equally right, and quite as unselfish, is it to
think of those who shall come after us. HORACE BUSHNELL was a scholar,
and wrote many elaborate works on metaphysics and divinity; but the
Bushnell Park of Hartford will probably be that for which coming
generations will thank him most. Certainly it will keep his memory
fragrant and green forever.

Our good city is justly famous for its hospitals and physicians, as well
as its churches and clergymen. I hope the contemplated parks may not
supersede the sanctuary and the sermon, though, as they say, there are
"sermons in stones, and good in every thing." But certain it is, that a
ramble through green fields at any time, and along sparkling streams, is
better than a sick-bed, or the apothecary's drugs and doses.

We are all of us, I suppose, more or less subject to the blues,
business-men, clergymen, and even politicians. In such cases, it is of
no use to shut one's self up in the house, and brood over trouble. The
best remedy is a walk, a good long stretch into the country, fresh air,
a hearty laugh with some friend; or an exhilarating ride, Brother MURRAY
would say, probably, behind a "perfect horse." And these are some of the
blessings it is proposed to secure for us. The very season now here
speaks impressively for this enterprise. The glories of a June day, how
they make us yearn for rural scenes! Nature everywhere is beckoning.
"The mountains and the hills break forth before us into singing, and all
the trees of the field clap their hands."


THE PRESIDENT. We have listened with much satisfaction and enjoyment to
the address of one of the clergymen of the city of Boston: but all
denominations of the Christian Church are included in this call; and I
am now happy to introduce to you the Rev. Mr. BODFISH, Rector of the
Catholic Cathedral of the Holy Cross of the city of Boston. [Applause.]




SPEECH OF THE REV. J. P. BODFISH.


MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN,--I am happy to stand here, where so many of
my ancestors have stood, and to address my fellow-citizens on such a
measure of public importance. When this matter was first brought to my
attention through the papers, when the plan proposed in all its grandeur
first came before my mind, I was reminded of a saying of a musical
friend of mine. He belonged to a band. He came from the fatherland; and
his great specialty was to play on the trombone. After a while, it
became rather remarkable, these solos on the trombone; and some of the
college boys wanted to put him down a little; so they commenced by
applauding. That seemed to have no effect. So one night they thought
they would try another plan. He was playing his best on the trombone;
and one of the boys cried out, "Louder!" And so he began again on the
trombone; and the boys said, "Louder!" And he tried again on the
trombone; and the boys still cried, "Louder!" And they still kept on,
"Louder!" until he almost burst every blood-vessel. And he put down his
instrument in disgust and said, "It is very well to say, 'Louder!' but
where is you going to get the vind?" [Laughter.]

Now when I thought of this system, and the immense expense it would be,
I said to myself, Now, that is a grand system; it would be beautiful
indeed; but where are you going to get the money? But then I took the
Report of those able Commissioners, this pamphlet that is spoken of; and
I read it myself carefully to see if it was a practicable and feasible
plan, and was surprised to see the ability with which the whole matter
had been treated. So thorough had been their investigations, that they
had demonstrated it was perfectly clear that this grand and beautiful
system of parks could be built at this time, now, with a very slight
taxation upon the whole business community; and, furthermore, that by
the improvement of property in the neighborhood of the parks, and by the
advantage to the city in general, the money expended would soon return
to the taxpayers of the city; and so that objection is disposed of at
once.

There seems to be no difficulty. There are so many solid men here in
Boston, that a work of this kind surely can be carried out with greater
ease than it has been in other cities; and we know in other cities they
have reaped great pecuniary benefit from the establishment and
building-up of their system of parks. But you would hardly expect a
clergyman here to talk on the financial question: that is a little out
of order. But the physicians have considered the medical point of view,
the sanitary point of view, how necessary it is to the health of the
city; and the financiers have demonstrated that it is easy in a
financial point of view; and it would be natural for me to speak here
to-night, perhaps, on the moral necessity of such a system of parks.

Now, when I think of the conditions under which a great many of our
poor people live, I am not very much surprised that they are goaded into
desperation to commit some fearful crime; because we know very well,
where a person lives in the country, and has the blue sky over his head,
and the running brooks gurgling through the meadows, and the green trees
and villages, and every thing cheerful and pleasant about him, why, he
is removed from a great many temptations that are common to a large
city; and we know, that, in a moral point of view, the people of a town
or of a country district are removed from a great many temptations and
incentives to crime: therefore every one who wishes well for the
religious welfare of the people would be glad to have these parks
established as a real moral agent in the community and to the people of
this city. And, as my respected friend has suggested, perhaps the people
would rather go out in the park than to stop and hear our dull sermons.
But I would run even that risk; for the Lord's Day, you know, is a day
of rest; and, after we pay our homage to our Creator, I think it would
be pleasant even to Him to go and take your family, and take a stroll
out into these pleasant parks that are proposed for your health.
[Applause.]

And then there is another feature which pleases me very much. You know,
in the olden time, the lords and nobles, and those who possessed the
landed estates, they felt it their duty to provide for the welfare of
the laboring classes, upon whom they depended really for their riches;
for they tilled their lands, and brought them in their incomes and the
returns from their estates: and so they watched over them with a kind of
a paternal care; and, when they were sick, they provided for them
hospitals, and they watched over them as a father would over his family.
Now, we live in a little somewhat different order of society; but still
there remains the same common duty for the men of wealth, for the men
who possess capital, to look out and provide for the wants and
necessities of the poor, on whom they depend to a great extent; for
capital cannot be independent of labor. [Applause.]

Now I see around me, I may say, the nobility of this city. They may not
have long, sounding titles; but they have the wealth, they have the
philanthropy; and their presence here to-night shows you that they have
those same generous impulses toward the whole of this city's population.
They have come here as a unit: they are willing to pay whatever is
required to build this magnificent system of parks, that all the people
of every class may enjoy its benefits. I say they are acting the part of
the nobles of old; and they are taking care of the people of this city
as though they had a certain paternal influence and responsibility
toward them [applause], and it rejoices my heart. And in another point
of view, we know that the safety of any community and society depends
upon the contentment and happiness of all classes of its people.

If there is one class that is ground down, and unhappy, and living under
unworthy conditions, they are, of course, immediately a dangerous
element. I say that it is a matter of good policy, as a stroke of
political economy, to provide for the wants of all classes of people in
this way, that they may live contented and happy, and have every thing
that is necessary for the health and recreation of their families.
[Applause.]

I cannot, of course, at this late hour, delay you with arguments. You
have had sufficient already. That, as I understand it, is not the chief
object of our meeting here. The arguments are at present before the
authorities in this excellent Report of the Commissioners.

We meet here to encourage them to go forward, to speak out in such a
positive manner, that they can hesitate no longer. It is our duty to
cheer them and encourage them in their work, and we hardly realize what
an influence this meeting will have in encouraging them to the great and
arduous work which they have undertaken to accomplish. Why, it reminds
me of a little incident that happened in New York not long ago, when one
of those great buildings was on fire,--those nine-story tenement-houses.
When the great crowd gathered there in the night, and they were surging
there, the police were trying to keep order, and the firemen were
working, and the hot flames shot up toward the sky, and the black smoke
rolled forth, and all was din and confusion; and, in the noise and
tumult of that dark and threatening night, there was one voice heard. It
was a mother's voice above the noise; and she cried, "Save my child!
Will no one save my child?" And they would hush her; but still she
cried, "Oh, save my child!" And there was one of the brave firemen, when
he learned that a little child was in the fourth story of that building,
who thought of his little ones at home; and he said he would risk his
life, he would dare any thing, rather than that child should be lost.
And they brought the great ladders, and they spliced them together, and
they swung them up against the burning building; and he commenced to
ascend. And, when he was halfway up, he looked at the hot flames and the
dense smoke rolling forth, and his heart trembled with fear: it seemed
to be instant death. But some one in the crowd below, who knew the
springs that govern the human heart, cried, "Cheer him!" "Cheer him!"
And there went up from that great crowd the wild hurrah, and it cheered
his heart like an electric thrill; and he rushed on, and disappeared in
the smoke. All was suspense; they waited with breathless anxiety: and at
last he returned with the child, and placed it in its mother's arms.
[Tremendous applause.] So you see the power of a word of encouragement
and cheer when any one has arduous work before him; and that is our duty
here to-night, my fellow-citizens,--to speak out with one voice, and
determined voice, and to cheer those who have undertaken this work, and
to let them know that we are ready to support them, that now is the
time, and that we are determined that this great work shall be
accomplished. [Applause and cheers.]


THE PRESIDENT. I shall now have the pleasure of introducing to the
audience Col. CHARLES W. WILDER. [Applause.]




SPEECH OF COL. CHARLES W. WILDER.


This large gathering of our citizens in Faneuil Hall is for some
purpose: it is significant that the people want something. I do not
understand that it is in any sense to re-affirm their conviction that
their best interests will be served by adding to our public property a
park or parks. That question has been fully discussed and decided by the
people themselves for themselves: they settled that by their, with
remarkable unanimity, voting to accept the act of the legislature,
giving power to the city government to purchase or take land for that
purpose. All classes seem to agree upon the necessity. The entire
medical faculty with one voice say we want it for sanitary reasons, and
have joined in the general petitions. Our capitalists and merchants have
spoken for themselves unmistakably by their petitions to the city
government, bearing more than seven thousand names, and representing, I
am informed, more than two hundred millions of taxable property. An able
Commission, after a year of careful study, and diligent devotion to
their duty, have made their report. The people have examined, discussed,
criticised, and finally approved and accepted it, and now come here in
Faneuil Hall to speak direct to City Hall for its adoption. Mr.
President, our professional men, our merchants and capitalists, have
spoken for themselves by their petitions and voices here to-night. It
remains only for me to speak for the more numerous class of our
fellow-citizens who pay but two dollars poll-tax. Yet they are as good
citizens, have and feel as deep interest in the growth, prosperity, and
progress of our city, as their more fortunate neighbors; and in the name
and behalf of the mechanics, the laborers, the great mass of men that
build our cities, and whose labor contributes so much to our growth and
prosperity, and whose employment is the one thing more than any other
needed to-day to inaugurate the beginning of our old-time prosperity, I
appeal to our city government to complete the work so opportunely and
well begun. It is immediate action we ask for.

There being no difference of opinion as to the necessity and utility of
parks, and their ultimate payment for their full cost, the only open
question is the time to begin. We say that time is now,--now, while
thousands of unwillingly idle hands are waiting for work, and money is
cheap; cheap, because labor is unemployed. We say to you, gentlemen of
the city government, respectfully but earnestly, Act upon this matter
now.

Don't wait till your summer vacation; don't wait till next month; don't
let any personal matter intervene to prevent the performance of this
public duty the people now ask at your hands. The present truly great
debt of our city, the bulk of which has been created in improvements,
made enormously more costly by the failure of city governments in past
times to comprehend the wants of a growing metropolis, admonishes you to
act now, and secure the advantages the present favorable combination of
circumstances offers. We confer on you the power to spend our money for
the public good; and we ask you to act now, because we clearly see that
delay means largely increased cost for what we must have in the near
future.


THE PRESIDENT. The Act under which this Commission was appointed, and
has discharged its duty, was supported, I think, by nearly every member
of the Boston delegation; and I may be allowed a single moment to add a
tribute of respect to that delegation. Boston has been well represented,
with one exception, perhaps, during the last two years, in the State
legislature; and I am very happy to know that you are now to be
addressed by a member of that delegation, who, as I said, supported this
Act when it was passed; who did not always vote with me on every
occasion, but who never voted against his conscience, never supported
any thing dishonest, or unjust, or unfair; and who will stand up, I have
no doubt, to-night, and speak well his mind, as he did on every fit
occasion in the State House, for what he deems just and right, and for
the good of the people: Mr. JOSEPH F. PAUL, whom I am very happy to
introduce to you. [Applause.]




SPEECH OF MR. JOSEPH F. PAUL.


MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN,--I hardly know what reply to make to the
remarks of the gentleman who has just taken his seat. In fact, I think I
had better let them go, and allow you to judge for yourselves after I
have said what I propose to say. I may say, in the first place, that
this is my first appearance upon this stand as a speaker; and, when
called upon to speak after such gentlemen as you have listened to
to-night, I trust you will make all due allowance for any mistakes that
I may make. But I claim the right as a citizen of Boston, as a
tax-payer of Boston, to express my opinion upon this subject, as upon
all others in which I take an interest. The necessity of parks has been
made apparent to every gentleman here by those who are better qualified
than I am to do so. I believe that there is no man here who does not
believe that we are to have parks. I have not heard from such; and I do
not believe that there is such a man, unless it is one who does not
expect to enjoy them himself, and is unwilling that posterity should.

Taking it for granted that that question is settled, the only question
which seems to be before the people is, whether this is the proper time;
and I propose to address myself to the consideration of that question. I
propose to speak of it as of a private enterprise, and as an individual
business-man. It has been explained to you in regard to the condition of
the labor-market, and I think that I may say fairly and squarely that
labor of the character to be used about parks has not been so cheap for
twenty years. Money is cheap; labor is required; parks are wanted; and
it is better to keep the men at work, and retain them in the city, than
to sustain them and their families at the public cost. It is not like
sending out of the country to import something for which we must pay our
money. All the money is to be paid to our own citizens; and, unless some
show of enterprise is made, we shall lose business-men from this city.
They will not stay here, and do nothing, unless the city government
makes some show of enterprise. I have had some experience myself in the
city government, having been a member of it, whether that is an honor or
not; though I hold that the honor or dishonor of any society depends
upon one's own conduct. There is always some doubt about making a move
in the city government; and, in a matter like the park question, such a
meeting as this will be a great encouragement to action. The public
feeling on this question is so great, that the parks must be
established. The project has been fought no harder than the Water Board
was; and where would the city of Boston be, if the friends of that
enterprise had not succeeded? Act here to-night, and then let the city
government do its part. Objections may be made by some gentlemen, made
conscientiously; but, five years from now, these gentlemen will not
remember that they raised any objection.

This meeting is called for the purpose of giving the city government to
understand that the business-men, the working-men, of the city, mean
what they say, when they say that they want public parks; and there is
no question that an impulse will be given to the action of the city
government by this meeting. We are the city of Boston; and the members
of the city government act for us.

Gentlemen, it is getting late, and there are those to follow who will
entertain you better than I can. But I propose to close with a little
story which I heard; and it was in church that I heard it, in an
excellent sermon. Just after the war of 1812, our laboring men stood, as
they stand to-day, idling about the wharves and public places. That was
the case in a little town to the east of Boston. They had enterprising
men, as we have now; and one day a gentleman stepped into a bank, and
said to the president, "Mr. President, I am going to build a
ship."--"What do you know about shipbuilding?" asked the president.
"Nothing. But I can do the business; and there are men here who can do
the work. We have the money, and there are the men. I will build the
ship, and sell it; you will get your money back; and the profit will be
divided among the men." The idea was a novel one; but the president
wanted to set the wheels of business in motion; and so he said that he
would give an answer the next day. The gentleman called promptly the
next morning; and the president informed him that the directors had
agreed to advance the money. The gentleman then went out among the idle
men, and said, "I am going to build a ship, and I want you to do the
work. I will pay you enough to live on; and, when the ship is built, we
will divide the profit." So they went to work as co-partners, and built
the ship, this gentleman generously attending to the business. The ship
was built and launched and sold, the money was paid to the bank, and the
profits divided. That was the first ship built on the Merrimack in
Newburyport, which has since become one of the largest shipbuilding
places in Massachusetts.

So we want something to set the wheels in motion. The city of Boston
can borrow the money, and buy the land, for these parks, more cheaply
now than ever again; and the men are ready to do the work. I know of
nothing more that I can say. I am glad to see this hall filled to-night.
There are men here to-night who have at heart the interests and
prosperity of the city of Boston. That is what we are acting for; and I
trust that that hundred men will go up to City Hall, and, if the city
government will move in the matter, every true man will deem it his duty
to stand behind and encourage them.


THE PRESIDENT. My friends, the best things and the most enthusiastic
meetings must come to an end; but those who wait till the last generally
get the best. I have now the pleasure of introducing to you the closing
speaker, the Hon. P. A. COLLINS.




SPEECH OF THE HON. P. A. COLLINS.


I know that no word of mine can add to the force of this movement. I am
neither great tax-payer nor eminent sanitarist. I cannot hope to equal
others who have discussed the moral, aesthetic, sanitary, and economic
phases of the question before us. But, happily, there is no need of such
discussion now. The question of public parks has been submitted, in all
its forms and probable effects, to the ablest, keenest, wisest, of our
citizens; and there is but one answer. The answer is, that we need more
out-door life than our sedentary race enjoys, and that public grounds,
accessible to all, are not only desirable, but necessary to the moral
and physical health of our crowded population.

This is the verdict; and, granted this, there remain but two
questions,--"Is this the time?" "Can we afford it?" To some, the present
is never the time for any thing. Their motto seems to be, "Don't do
to-day what you can put off till to-morrow, because you may not live
till to-morrow, and then you won't have to do it at all." This principle
has been acted upon by short-sighted Boston too long; and the result is
a melancholy looking-back to the time when improvements could have been
made for a tenth or a fifteenth of the present cost. We are told of our
beautiful suburbs, as if they can be suburbs forever. Even now, they are
but for the rich. Beware of trespassing in the fields and woods: they
are private property. The roads seem to belong to blood-horses and their
owners. If you wish to know the future, look at the past. Look back, you
aged men, to the fields and gardens of Tremont and Boylston Streets.
Look back, you younger men, to rambles through South Boston farms, and
land at "South End" sold by the acre. Always comes the old conservative
admonition, "Wait!"--yes, wait till the great sea-wall makes City Point
of Castle Island,--wait till the now extended arms of Boston clasp
Brookline to the bosom of the metropolis,--wait till private avarice and
easy legislation, acting intermittently, deface the shore and basin of
Charles River,--wait till the dense and ever growing population,
bursting from its narrow bounds, spreads itself in streets laid out at
random, over what you are pleased to call our suburbs,--wait, in short,
till the inevitable happens, and where are your public parks? You may
have them, even then, I grant you; but you will have them where _the
people_ cannot reach them, and where the cost will be too great.
Remember that our city growth is like the growth of all cities in the
New World and the Old; and, if we want green places in the future
Boston, we must seize them now.

Can we afford the expense? Rather, let us ask, Can Boston afford to be
less comfortable to live in, less attractive, less healthy, than sister
cities? We can afford police, paved streets, light, sewers, scavengers,
a fire department, a board of health, and a score of other agencies, not
because they give salaries and employment to certain men, but because
the public health and safety require it; we can afford schools,
maintained at enormous cost, though it may be conceded that we could
live without education; we can afford pure water in abundance, be the
expense never so great, because we need it; and, if we need pure air, we
can afford to pay for it, to seize the means of having it, and keeping
it forever.

And suffer me, with due modesty, to say, that we in this
meeting--representing as we do the commerce, industries, and professions
of this goodly town--have a right to demand that what we ask shall be
given us, and that Boston shall take and hold for the use of its people
this needed reservation, while yet there is time. I trust our city
fathers will need no further admonition than this meeting gives; but, if
they should, we are enlisted for the war.

As Cromwell, grimly looking down on the fair fields and shining streams
of the land he came to conquer, said, "This is a land worth fighting
for," so let us, as we survey the magnificent area of shore and hill and
glade which fortune now permits us to dedicate to public use, exclaim,
"This, indeed, is worth our effort;" and let us strive for it till the
battle is won.


THE PRESIDENT. I have been requested to state that the well-known
physician, Dr. EDWARD H. CLARKE, who is too ill to be present here
to-night, has written a long and interesting letter on the subject of
this meeting, which will be published in the morning papers; and I
desire that every citizen present will make a point of reading that
letter.




LETTER OF DR. EDWARD H. CLARKE.


HAMILTON A. HILL, ESQ., SECRETARY, &C.

_Dear Sir_,--I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of your note of
the 2d inst., requesting me, in the name of the committee who have
called a public meeting on the park question, to address to them a
letter which shall contain my views upon "the necessity existing at the
present time for action on this subject, and upon the Report of the Park
Commissioners."

If my views are of any value to the community on this question, or if I
could exert any influence, however little, in bringing about a result so
necessary to the comfort, prosperity, and health of all the citizens of
Boston, as the establishment of a public park within the limits of the
city, I should esteem it not less a privilege than a duty to present
those views, and exert that influence.

Among the many and weighty considerations that might be appropriately
urged in favor of the establishment of a park in this city, three stand
out so prominently, that their importance can scarcely be overestimated.
These are, first, the sanitary, second, the educational, and, third, the
economic aspects of the question. Let me call your attention briefly to
these three points.

The first is the sanitary aspect of the park. The discussion of sewerage
and drainage, and of the ventilation of sewers, drains, and houses, with
which our community have latterly been made familiar, has impressed upon
our citizens, to some extent, the importance of introducing pure air
into our houses, and of keeping foul air out of them. The importance of
such ventilation cannot be overstated. But we are in danger of
forgetting that the importance of ventilating a city is as great as that
of ventilating all the houses in it, with this difference, that if a
city is not well ventilated, so as to bring fresh air into it, and to
keep foul air and poisonous gases out of it, the ventilation of
individual dwellings will be of little avail.

The foul air of the streets will not only envelop those who pass through
them, but will penetrate the houses that line them, visiting alike the
sick and the well, increasing the danger of disease to the former, and
diminishing the health and strength of the latter. In proportion as a
city increases in size, large open spaces should be reserved. Parks are
the lungs of the city. They are more than this: they are reservoirs of
oxygen and fresh air. They produce atmospheric currents, which sweep
through and purify the streets. Parks not only offer oxygen to all who
visit them, but distribute a large amount of this prime necessity of
life everywhere in their neighborhood. Without open spaces appropriately
placed, it is impossible, in a large city, to have well ventilated
streets, and to keep the air of the houses sweet and clean. Let us
remember, moreover, that bad ventilation means poisoned air, and that
poisoned air is sure to be followed by a ghastly train of diseases, with
an occasional pestilence to remind the inhabitants what a terrible thing
it is to disregard sanitary laws.

Improved ventilation is by no means the only sanitary good that parks
yield to a city wise enough to possess them. A fraction, and only a
small fraction, of our population, are able to leave the city during the
hot months of the year, for the country. When these favored ones reach
Nahant, Swampscott, or Newport, or some modest farmhouse, or comfortable
dwelling by the side of the many railroads that lead from the foulness
of the city to the purity of the country, or of the mountains, how
gladly and enthusiastically they speak of their escape from heat,
discomfort, and disease, to coolness, comfort, and health! But the mass
of the community,--the artisans and work-people, whose necessities
compel them to remain within the limits of the city,--their families,
children, sick ones and all, have at present no such escape from close
and impure air.

The carrying of little children who are pinched by cholera-infantum, or
spotted by scarlet-fever, or of those who are paralyzed by diphtheria,
or distorted by scrofula, or emaciated by consumption, for a few hours a
day into the pure air and bright sunlight of an open square, has saved
many a life. Many a needless death has occurred, because the city
afforded no such opportunity for escape. A few hours' exposure of a
child on a mother's lap, or in a basket or carriage, to the freshness of
a park, will produce a sleep that never follows opium, chloral, or
ether, and will yield a chance for health that no drug can give. For the
last few years, Philadelphia has shown a diminished death-rate. Dr.
WILLIAM PEPPER, who has lately investigated the sanitary condition of
that city, commenting upon the gratifying fact just stated, says, "While
thus showing an average rate of mortality more favorable than that found
in any other city containing over 500,000 inhabitants, Philadelphia has
recently (1874) attained a degree of healthfulness almost unparalleled;
namely, with a population at that time of 775,000, the number of deaths
was but 14,966, giving a death-rate of only 19.3 per thousand. These
very favorable results are largely due to the abundant and cheap
water-supply, and to the opportunities given, even to the poorest
citizens, for the enjoyment of pure country air in the great Fairmount
Park, which contains 2,991 acres. The extent to which this is valued by
the citizens may be inferred from the fact, that, during the year 1875,
the park was visited by over eleven million persons." There is no
reason why a park in Boston should not yield as good a sanitary result
as one in Philadelphia.

While looking at the sanitary aspects of this subject, let us not forget
that a park laid out in accordance with the plan of the Park
Commissioners will utilize localities that would otherwise become
plague-spots, and nurseries of disease. The low lands along the banks of
Charles River, portions of the Back Bay, and other sections that might
be mentioned, are sure to become unhealthy localities,--stations for
distributing the germs of disease throughout their neighborhood and at a
distance from them,--unless they are reserved, and left unoccupied. The
most extravagant way of disposing of such localities is for the city to
permit them to be built over, "improved" is the phrase, I believe, and
then suffer the consequences, in the way of increase of disease and
taxes, which follow such sort of improvements.

Let us now pass from the sanitary to the educational aspect of our
subject. The educational value of a park to the community of a large
city is second only to its sanitary value. We are too apt to think that
education is the exclusive function of the school, and that books and
school-teachers are the only educators. This is a grievous mistake. The
education of the home and street, of the workshop and store, of the
church and theatre, of the base-ball club and the evening party, of the
rum-shop and dance-hall, and of the numerous other influences of a great
city, is more potent than that of the school. The evil of all evil
agencies is intensified, and the good of the good ones diminished, by
uncleanness and impure air. Clean hands and a pure heart go together.
Foul air prompts to vice, and oxygen to virtue, as surely as sunlight
paints the flowers, and ripens the fruits, of our gardens. The tired
workman, who, after a day's labor, needs the repose and relaxation of
home, is apt to be driven from it by the close atmosphere of the street
and house in which he lives. He would, if he could, get into the fresh
air of the country; but, as he cannot do this, he seeks the relief which
drink or other excitement yields. If there were a park accessible to
him, he with his family would seek it as instinctively as a plant
stretches towards the light. The varied opportunities of a park would
educate him and his family into the enjoyment of innocent amusements and
open-air pleasures. Deprived of these, he and his are educated into the
ways of disease and vice by the character of their surroundings. Who
that has watched the groups of families, neighbors, and friends, that
bivouac by hundreds and thousands on the parks which cluster around,
adorn, and invigorate the great cities of Europe, can have failed to
notice the innocent amusements and enjoyment of these crowds of young
and old, or to be impressed with the fact that the influence of the
natural scenes around them, of the trees and plants and flowers, of the
pure air and bright skies, is a humanizing and elevating one? It is
difficult to compute the value of such an influence in dollars and
cents, or to measure it by any scale that the market acknowledges; but
it is, nevertheless, a real, substantial, and potent one. If our large
cities are the pride and boast of the republic, they also contain the
greatest elements of danger to the state and the nation. Ignorance and
vice, disease and crime, crowd themselves into cities. There they find
their best hiding-places, their surest protection, and their most
defenceless victims. It makes one tremble to think of the thousands of
youth in our cities whom the school and the church do not reach, and who
are moulded by these influences into the worst and lowest forms of
humanity. They can not and will not go out into the country themselves,
except upon some errand of violence and crime. The city should therefore
bring the country to them, and give them a chance, at least, to
experience its humanizing and blessed influence.

A park, or a series of parks, with its trees and running waters, its
grass and plants and flowers, its variegated surface and changing views,
and all the beauty with which such scenes are flooded, supplements the
labor of the church and school in educating, refining, and elevating the
community. There will be less gambling, drinking, and quarrelling in
Boston, when the mass of its inhabitants shall be allowed to partake of
the blessing and beauty of a public park.

These considerations naturally bring us to the third point which has
been mentioned, viz., the economic aspect of the matter. Few will deny
the truth of the above statements; but the admission of their truth is
apt to be coupled with the reply, "The park will cost so much, we cannot
afford it." It is true that it will cost a good deal, but not so much to
each household as the inevitable cost of the sickness, vice, and death,
which the opportunities that a park provides would prevent. Are human
life and health and virtue so cheap, that we can afford to count the
cost of procuring and maintaining them? Are vice, crime, and disease so
unimportant, that we can afford to let them thrive, and propagate
themselves indefinitely? We cannot repeat too often, or ponder too
seriously, the statement made in the first report of the Park
Commissioners: "Nothing is so costly as sickness and disease: nothing so
cheap as health. Whatever promotes the former is the worst sort of
extravagance: whatever fosters the latter is the truest economy." The
truth is, it will cost the city of Boston more to get on without a park
than to incur the expense of buying and taking care of one. We pay at
present an enormous sum yearly for the maintenance of hospitals,
prisons, jails, and workhouses. It is not asserted that the
establishment of a park will depopulate these institutions, or render
them unnecessary; but no sanitarian will deny that one result, and a
most important one, of the establishment of a park, would be to diminish
the number of those who are compelled to resort to these institutions. A
greater economy than all this would be found to accrue to each household
in the increased comfort, diminished sickness, more vigorous health, and
ample enjoyment, that would be added to all its members.

Boston has been long and justly celebrated for its health, beauty, and
wealth. If it loses the two first of these distinctions, how long will
it retain the last? Business and population will turn away from an
unhealthy and unattractive town. Defective sewerage and imperfect
drainage are sapping the health; and the occupation of the suburbs by
houses, manufactories, workshops, and stores, is destroying the beauty
of the city. Will the merchants of Boston, whose reputation for
intelligence, sagacity, and enterprise has gone out to the ends of the
world, permit a false economy to blind them to the importance of this
whole matter?

Of the details of the financial question, I am not qualified to speak;
but I will venture a single remark. It seems only a piece of common
sense to one unfamiliar with the intricate problems of finance to say,
that, if the present time is one of great depression of values, it is
precisely the time when a wealthy corporation like the city of Boston
can purchase the land for a park at the lowest price, and therefore
should do it.

Permit me to add a single word with regard to the plan proposed by the
Commissioners. It offers more advantages, and fewer disadvantages, than
any other that has been proposed. This might be expected, when we
reflect that it was prepared in accordance with the advice of Mr.
OLMSTEAD, than whom no one is better qualified to advise in such
matters. It may be safely asserted, that if Boston should accept this
plan, and authorize it to be carried out, the city would possess a park
unique in its character, of unrivalled beauty, and one which all our
citizens, young and old, rich and poor, would greatly enjoy, and of
which, if they once obtained it, they would never be bribed to
dispossess themselves.

The Rev. Dr. ELLIS, in his recent eloquent address at the centennial
anniversary of the evacuation of Boston, used the following language,
"As I read the history of our fathers in all their generations, their
toil and virtue seem to me to have been the noblest, in their steady
regard for the welfare and happiness of their posterity. And as I firmly
believe that no single individual can follow the highest pattern of an
earthly life, unless his hope and faith link on to a future, so I find
it proved in all biographies and annals, that all unselfish, noble, and
heroic lives are those which parents lead for their children and their
children's children. We have such lives among us in city, state, and
nation, private and public, high and humble." May we be true to the
reputation and tradition of our fathers, and provide as intelligently
for the well-being of ourselves and our posterity as they provided for
themselves and for us!

          I am, with great respect, very truly yours,

                                                      EDW. H. CLARKE.

ARLINGTON STREET, BOSTON, June 6, 1876.


The President, in calling for a vote on the resolutions, said, I merely
wish to say that old Faneuil Hall can stand a great deal of noise; but
still I would recommend, for the benefit of future audiences, that you
should not take off the roof, nor burst the windows, nor put out the
gas. [Laughter.]

The resolutions were unanimously agreed to; and the following committee
of a hundred, to present the result of the meeting to the city
government, was appointed; the assembly dispersing shortly after ten
o'clock.




COMMITTEE OF ONE HUNDRED.


Joseph S. Ropes                       William P. Hunt
Marshall P. Wilder                    Hamilton A. Hill
Oliver W. Holmes, M.D.                Joseph F. Paul
Richard Frothingham                   Charles W. Wilder
Samuel Cabot, M.D.                    M. F. Dickinson, jun.
J. Baxter Upham, M.D.                 P. A. Collins
Thomas J. Gargan                      Albert Bowker
George C. Richardson                  John C. Pratt
John P. Reynolds, M.D.                Jerome Jones
John W. Candler                       H. H. A. Beach, M.D.
George B. Chase                       S. J. Langmaid, M.D.
William E. Coffin                     Joseph H. Chadwick
Francis A. Osborn                     Benjamin Deane
Ralph Crooker                         J. J. McNutt
Robert Seaver                         Nath. Adams
J. Mitchell Galvin                    B. F. Nourse
W. W. Morland, M.D.                   Martin Griffin
Richard Olney                         John J. May
Joseph W. Balch                       M. Doherty
C. Allen Richards                     Thomas B. Curtis, M.D.
Charles L. Thayer                     Thomas Gogin
William E. Perkins                    Royal E. Robbins
James Edwards                         William W. Clapp
J. Tisdale Bradlee                    E. B. Haskell
Jonas Fitch                           C. F. Donnelly
James Sturgis                         T. Quincy Browne
J. N. Borland, M.D.                   F. E. Goodrich
Charles W. Slack                      Charles W. Morris
Clement H. Hill                       D. N. Skillings
William V. Hutchings                  Hales W. Suter
William T. Hart                       Henry Smith
Robert Johnson                        William Atherton
Asa P. Potter                         Charles J. Bishop
William J. R. Evans                   Aaron D. Williams
Charles Nowell                        Henry C. Morse
Jacob Pfaff                           S. Parkman Dexter
Eben D. Jordan                        George P. King
George Woods Rice                     Albert Thompson
Thomas Mack                           Joseph Dix
Lewis Coleman                         H. M. Bearce
Charles F. Choate                     William B. Bacon
Roland Worthington                    George O. Carpenter
M. B. Leonard, M.D.                   Henry J. Nazro
A. H. Lewis                           J. Kent Crowley
George G. Crocker                     James N. Spillane
Charles L. Haley                      W. H. Forbes
Waldo Adams                           J. B. Dacey
John F. Payson                        James F. Gray
Hollis Hunnewell                      John Bigelow
Martin Hayes                          A. Claxton Cary





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Parks for the People, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARKS FOR THE PEOPLE ***

***** This file should be named 26084.txt or 26084.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/0/8/26084/

Produced by Betsie Bush, Martin Pettit and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from scans of public domain works at the
University of Michigan's Making of America collection.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
