The Project Gutenberg EBook of Vixen, Volume I., by M. E. Braddon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Vixen, Volume I.

Author: M. E. Braddon

Release Date: August 9, 2008 [EBook #26236]
[Last updated: June 14, 2013]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VIXEN, VOLUME I. ***




Produced by Daniel Fromont.  HTML version by Al Haines.








  COLLECTION
  OF
  BRITISH AUTHORS

  TAUCHNITZ EDITION.

  VOL. 1809.

  VIXEN BY M. E. BRADDON
  IN THREE VOLUMES.
  VOL. I.

  TAUCHNITZ EDITION.



VIXEN


A NOVEL


BY

M.  E. BRADDON,

AUTHOR OF "LADY AUDLEY'S SECRET," ETC. ETC.


_COPYRIGHT EDITION_.


IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. I.




By the same Author,

  LADY AUDLEY'S SECRET   2 vols.
  AURORA FLOYD   2 vols.
  ELEANOR'S VICTORY   2 vols.
  JOHN MARCHMONT'S LEGACY   2 vols.
  HENRY DUNBAR   2 vols.
  THE DOCTOR'S WIFE   2 vols.
  ONLY A CLOD   2 vols.
  SIR JASPER'S TENANT   2 vols.
  THE LADY'S MILE   2 vols.
  RUPERT GODWIN   2 vols.
  DEAD-SEA FRUIT   2 vols.
  RUN TO EARTH   2 vols.
  FENTON'S QUEST   2 vols.
  THE LOVELS OF ARDEN   2 vols.
  STRANGERS AND PILGRIMS   2 vols.
  LUCIUS DAVOREN   3 vols.
  TAKEN AT THE FLOOD   3 vols.
  LOST FOR LOVE   2 vols.
  A STRANGE WORLD   2 vols.
  HOSTAGES TO FORTUNE   2 vols.
  DEAD MEN'S SHOES   2 vols.
  JOSHUA HAGGARD'S DAUGHTER   2 vols.
  WEAVERS AND WEFT   1 vol.
  IN GREAT WATERS & OTHER TALES   1 vol.
  AN OPEN VERDICT   3 vols.




LEIPZIG

BERNHARD TAUCHNITZ

1879.


_The Right of Translation is reserved_.


CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.


CHAPTER I. A Pretty Horsebreaker

CHAPTER II. Lady Jane Vawdrey

CHAPTER III. "I Want a Little Serious Talk with You"

CHAPTER IV. Rorie comes of Age

CHAPTER V. Rorie makes a Speech

CHAPTER VI. How She took the News

CHAPTER VII. Rorie has Plans of his own

CHAPTER VIII. Glas ist der Erde Stolz und Glueck

CHAPTER IX. A House of Mourning

CHAPTER X. Captain Winstanley

CHAPTER XI. "It shall be Measure for Measure"

CHAPTER XII. "I have no Wrong, where I can claim no Right"

CHAPTER XIII. "He belongs to the Tame-Cat Species"

CHAPTER XIV. "He was worthy to be loved a Lifetime"

CHAPTER XV. Lady Southminster's Ball

CHAPTER XVI. Rorie asks a Question

CHAPTER XVII. Where the Red King was slain



VIXEN.



CHAPTER I.

A Pretty Horsebreaker.

The moon had newly risen, a late October moon, a pale almost
imperceptible crescent, above the dark pine spires in the thicket
through which Roderick Vawdrey came, gun in hand, after a long day's
rabbit-shooting. It was not his nearest way home, but he liked the
broad clearing in the pine wood, which had a ghostly look at  dusk, and
was so still and lonely that the dart of a squirrel  through the fallen
leaves was a startling event. Here and there  a sturdy young oak that
had been newly stripped of its bark lay among the fern, like the naked
corpse of a giant. Here and there a tree had been cut down and slung
across the track, ready for  barking. The ground was soft and spongy,
slippery with damp dead leaves, and inclined in a general way to
bogginess; but it was ground that Roderick Vawdrey had known all his
life, and it seemed more natural to him than any other spot upon mother
earth.

On the edge of this thicket there was a broad ditch, with more mud and
dead fern in it than water, a ditch strongly suspected of snakes, and
beyond the ditch the fence that enclosed Squire Tempest's domain--an
old manor house in the heart of the New Forest. It had been an abbey
before the Reformation, and was still best known as the Abbey House.

"I wonder whether I'm too late to catch her," speculated Roderick,
shifting his bag from one shoulder to the other; "she's no end of fun."

In front of the clearing there was a broad five-barred gate,  and
beside the gate a keeper's cottage. The flame of a newly-lighted candle
flashed out suddenly upon the autumn dusk, while  Roderick stood
looking at the gate.

"I'll ask at the lodge," he said; "I should like to say good-bye to the
little thing before I go back to Oxford."

He walked quickly on to the gate. The keeper's children were playing at
nothing particular just inside it.

"Has Miss Tempest gone for her ride this afternoon?" he asked.

"Ya-ase," drawled the eldest shock-headed youngster.

"And not come back yet?"

"Noa. If she doant take care her'll be bogged."

Roderick hitched his bag on to the top of the gate, and stood at ease
waiting. It was late for the little lady of Tempest Manor to be out on
her pony; but then it was an understood thing within a radius of ten
miles or so that she was a self-willed young person, and even at
fifteen years of age she had a knack of following her own inclination
with that noble disregard of consequences which characterises the
heaven-born ruler.

Mr. Vawdrey had not waited more than ten minutes when there came the
thud of hoofs upon the soft track, a flash of gray in the distance,
something flying over those forky branches sprawling across the way,
then a half-sweet, half-shrill call, like a bird's, at which the
keeper's children scattered themselves like a brood of scared chickens,
and now a rush, and a gray pony shooting suddenly into the air and
coming down on the other  side of the gate, as if he were a new kind of
skyrocket.

"What do you think of that, Rorie?" cried the shrill sweet voice of the
gray pony's rider!

"I'm ashamed of you, Vixen," said Roderick, "you'll come to a bad end
some of these days."

"I don't care if I do, as long as I get my fling first," replied Vixen,
tossing her tawny mane.

She was a slim young thing, in a short Lincoln-green habit. She had a
small pale face, brown eyes that sparkled with life and mischief, and a
rippling mass of reddish-auburn hair falling down her back under a
coquettish little felt hat.

"Hasn't your mamma forbidden jumping, Vixen?" remonstrated Roderick,
opening the gate and coming in.

"Yes, that she has, sir," said the old groom, riding up at a jog-trot
on his thickset brown cob. "It's quite against Mrs. Tempest's orders,
and it's a great responsibility to go out with Miss Violet. She will do
it."

"You mean the pony will do it, Bates," cried Vixen. "I don't jump. How
can I help it if papa has given me a jumping pony? If I didn't let
Titmouse take a gate when he was in the humour, he'd kick like old
boots, and pitch me a cropper. It's an  instinct of self-preservation
that makes me let him jump. And as for poor dear, pretty little mamma,"
continued Vixen, addressing herself to Roderick, and changing her tone
to one of  patronising tenderness, "if she had her way, I should be
brought up in a little box wrapped in jeweller's wool, to keep me safe.
But you see I take after papa, Rorie; and it comes as natural to me to
fly over gates as it does to you to get ploughed for smalls. There,
Bates," jumping off the pony, "you may take Titmouse home, and I'll
come presently and give him some apples, for he has been a dear,
darling, precious treasure of a ponykins."

She emphasised this commendation with a kiss on Titmouse's gray nose,
and handed the bridle to Bates.

"I'm going to walk home with Mr. Vawdrey," she said.

"But, Vixen, I can't, really," said Roderick; "I'm due at home at this
moment, only I couldn't leave without saying good-bye to little Vix."

"And you're over due at Oxford, too, aren't you?" cried Vixen,
laughing; "you're always due somewhere--never in the right place. But
whether you are due or not, you're coming up to the stables with me to
give Titmouse his apples, and then you're coming to dine with us on
your last night at home. I insist upon it; papa insists; mamma
insists--we all insist."

"My mother will be as angry as----"

"Old boots!" interjected Vixen. "That's the best comparison I know."

"Awfully vulgar for a young lady."

"You taught it me. How can I help being vulgar when I associate with
you? You should hear Miss McCroke preach at me sermons so long"--here
Vixen extended her arms to the utmost--"and I'm afraid they'd make as
much impression on Titmouse as they do upon me. But she's a dear old
thing, and I love her immensely."

This was Vixen's usual way, making up for all shortcomings with the
abundance of her love. The heart was always atoning for the errors of
the head.

"I wouldn't be Miss McCroke for anything. She must have a bad time of
it with you."

"She has," assented Vixen, with a remorseful sigh; "I fear I'm bringing
her sandy hairs with sorrow to the grave. That hair of hers never could
be gray, you know, it's too self-opinionated in its sandiness. Now come
along, Rorie, do. Titmouse will be stamping about his box like a maniac
if he doesn't get those apples."

She gave a little tug with both her small doeskin-covered hands at
Roderick's arm. He was still standing by the gate irresolute,
inclination drawing him to the Abbey House, duty calling him home to
Briarwood, five miles off, where his widowed mother was expecting his
return.

"My last night at home, Vix," he said remonstrantly; "I really ought to
dine with my mother."

"Of course you ought, and that's the very reason why you'll dine with
us. So 'kim over, now,' as Bates says to the horses; I don't know what
there is for dinner," she added confidentially, "but I feel sure it's
something nice. Dinner is papa's particular vanity, you know. He's very
weak about dinner."

"Not so weak as he is about you, Vixen."

"Do you really think papa is as fond of me as he is of his dinner?"

"I'm sure of it!"

"Then he must be very fond of me," exclaimed Vixen, with conviction.
"Now, are you coming?"

Who could resist those little soft hands in doeskin? Certainly not
Rorie. He resigned himself to the endurance of his mother's anger in
the future as a price to be paid for the indulgence of his inclination
in the present, gave Vixen his arm, and turned his face towards the
Abbey House.

They walked through shrubberies that would have seemed a pathless
wilderness to a stranger, but every turn in which was familiar to these
two. The ground was undulating, and vast thickets of rhododendron and
azalea rose high above them, or sank in green valleys below their path.
Here and there a group of tall firs towered skyward above the dark
entanglement of shrubs, or a great beech spread its wide limbs over the
hollows; here and there a pool of water reflected the pale moonshine.

The house lay low, sheltered and shut in by those rhododendron
thickets, a long, rambling pile of building, which had been added to,
and altered, and taken away from, and added to again, like that
well-known puzzle in mental arithmetic which used to amuse us in our
childhood. It was all gables, and chimney-stacks, and odd angles, and
ivy-mantled wall, and richly-mullioned windows, or quaint little
diamond-paned lattices, peeping like a watchful eye from under the
shadow of a jutting cornice. The stables had been added in Queen
Elizabeth's time, after the monks had been routed from their snug
quarters, and the Abbey had been bestowed upon one of the Tudor
favourites. These Elizabethan stables formed the four sides of a
quadrangle, stone-paved, with an old marble basin in the centre--a
basin which the Vicar pronounced to be an early Saxon font, but which
Squire Tempest refused to have removed from the place it had occupied
ever since the stables were built. There were curious carvings upon the
six sides, but so covered with mosses and lichens that nobody could
tell what they meant; and the Squire forbade any scraping process by
officious antiquarians, which might lead to somebody's forcible
appropriation of the ancient basin.

The Squire was not so modern in his ideas as to set up his own
gasometer, so the stables were lighted by lanterns, with an oil-lamp
fixed here and there against the wall. Into this dim uncertain light
came Roderick and Vixen, through the deep stone archway which opened
from the shrubbery into the stable-yard, and which was solid enough for
the gate of a fortified town.

Titmouse's stable was lighted better then the rest. The door stood
open, and there was Titmouse, with the neat little quilted doeskin
saddle still on his back, waiting to be fed and petted by his young
mistress. It was a pretty picture, the old low-ceiled stable, with its
wide stalls and roomy loose-boxes and carpet of plaited straw, golden
against the deep brown of the woodwork.

Vixen ran into the box, and took off Titmouse's bridle, he holding down
his head, like a child submitting to be undressed. Then, with many
vigorous tugs at straps and buckles, and a good deal of screwing up of
her rosy lips in the course of the effort, Vixen took off her pony's
saddle.

"I like to do everything I can for him," she explained, as Rorie
watched her with an amused smile; "I'd wisp him down if they'd let me."

She left the leather panel on Titmouse's back, hung up saddle and
bridle, and skipped off to a corn-chest to hunt for apples. Of these
she brought half-a-dozen or so in the skirt of her habit, and then,
swinging herself lightly into a comfortable corner of the manger, began
to carry out her system of reward for good conduct, with much coquetry
on her part and Titmouse's, Rorie watching it all from the empty stall
adjoining, his folded arms resting on the top of the partition. He said
not another word about his mother, or the duty that called him home to
Briarwood, but stood and watched this pretty horsebreaker in a dreamy
contentment.

What was Violet Tempest, otherwise Vixen, like, this October evening,
just three months before her fifteenth birthday? She made a lovely
picture in this dim light, as she sat in the corner of the old manger,
holding a rosy-cheeked apple at a tantalising distance from Titmouse's
nose: yet she was perhaps not altogether lovely. She was brilliant
rather than absolutely beautiful. The white skin was powdered with
freckles. The rippling hair was too warm an auburn to escape an
occasional unfriendly remark from captious critics; but it was not red
hair for all that. The eyes were brownest of the brown, large, bright,
and full of expression. The mouth was a thought too wide, but it was a
lovely mouth notwithstanding. The lips were full and firmly
moulded--lips that could mean anything, from melting tenderness to
sternest resolve. Such lips, a little parted to show the whitest,
evenest teeth in Hampshire, seemed to Rorie lovely enough to please the
most critical connoisseur of feminine beauty. The nose was short and
straight, but had a trick of tilting itself upward with a little
impatient jerk that made it seem _retrousse;_ the chin was round and
full and dimpled; the throat was full and round also, a white column
supporting the tawny head, and indicated that Vixen was meant to be a
powerful woman, and not one of those ethereal nymphs who lend
themselves most readily to the decorative art of a court milliner.

"I'm afraid Violet will be a dreadfully large creature," Mrs. Tempest
murmured plaintively, as the girl grew and flourished; that lady
herself being ethereal, and considering her own appearance a strictly
correct standard of beauty. How could it be otherwise, when she had
been known before her marriage as "the pretty Miss Calthorpe?"

"This is very nice, you know, Vixen," said Roderick critically, as
Titmouse made a greedy snap at an apple, and was repulsed with a gentle
pat on his nose, "but it can't go on for ever. What'll you do when you
are grown up?"

"Have a horse instead of a pony," answered Vixen unhesitatingly.

"And will that be all the difference?"

"I don't see what other difference there can be. I shall always love
papa, I shall always love hunting, I shall always love mamma--as much
as she'll let me. I shall always have a corner in my heart for deal old
Crokey; and, perhaps," looking at him mischievously, "even an odd
corner for you. What difference can a few more birthdays make in me? I
shall be too big for Titmouse, that's the only misfortune; but I shall
always keep him for my pet, and I'll have a basket-carriage and drive
him when I go to see my poor people. Sitting behind a pony is an awful
bore when one's natural place is on his back, but I'd sooner endure it
than let Titmouse fancy himself superannuated."

"But when you're grown up you'll have to come out, Vixen. You'll be
obliged to go to London for a season, and be presented, and go to no
end of balls, and ride in the Row, and make a grand marriage, and have
a page all to yourself in the _Court Journal_."

"Catch me--going to London!" exclaimed Vixen, ignoring the latter part
of the sentence. "Papa hates London, and so do I. And as to riding in
Rotten Row, _je voudrais bien me voir faisant cela_," added Vixen,
whose study of the French language chiefly resulted in the endeavour to
translate English slang into that tongue. "No, when I grow up I shall
take papa the tour of Europe. We'll see all those places I'm worried
about at lessons--Marathon, Egypt, Naples, the Peloponnesus, _tout le
tremblement_--and I shall say to each of them, 'Oh, this is you, is it?
What a nuisance you've been to me on the map.' We shall go up Mount
Vesuvius, and the Pyramids, and do all sorts of wild things; and by the
time I come home I shall have forgotten the whole of my education."

"If Miss McCroke could hear you!"

"She does, often. You can't imagine the wild things I say to her. But I
love her--fondly."

A great bell clanged out with a vigorous peal, that seemed to shake the
old stable.

"There's the first bell. I must run and dress. Come to the drawing-room
and see mamma."

"But, Vixen, how can I sit down to dinner in such a costume,"
remonstrated Rorie, looking down at his brown shooting-suit, leather
gaiters, and tremendous boots--boots which, instead of being beautified
with blacking, were suppled with tallow; "I can't do it, really."

"Nonsense," cried Vixen, "what does it matter? Papa seldom dresses for
dinner. I believe he considers it a sacrifice to mamma's sense of
propriety when he washes his hands after coming in from the home farm.
And you are only a boy--I beg pardon--an undergraduate. So come along."

"But upon my word, Vixen, I feel too much ashamed of myself."

"I've asked you to dinner, and you've accepted," cried Vixen, pulling
him out of the stable by the lapel of his shooting-jacket.

He seemed to relish that mode of locomotion, for he allowed himself to
be pulled all the way to the hall-door, and into the glow of the great
beech-wood fire; a ruddy light which shone upon many a sporting trophy,
and reflected itself on many a gleaming pike and cuirass, belonging to
days of old, when gentlemanly sport for the most part meant man-hunting.

It was a fine old vaulted hall, a place to love and remember lovingly
when far away. The walls were all of darkly bright oak panelling, save
where here and there a square of tapestry hung before a door, or a
painted window let in the moonlight. At one end there was a great
arched fireplace, the arch surmounted with Squire Tempest's armorial
bearings, roughly cut in freestone. A mailed figure of the usual stumpy
build, in helm and hauberk, stood on each side of the hearth; a large
three-cornered chair covered with stamped and gilded leather was drawn
up to the fireside, the Squire's favourite seat on an autumn or winter
afternoon. The chair was empty now, but, stretched at full length
before the blazing logs, lay the Squire's chosen companion, Nip, a
powerful liver-coloured pointer; and beside him in equally luxurious
rest, reclined Argus, Vixen's mastiff. There was a story about Vixen
and the mastiff, involving the only incident in that young lady's life
the recollection whereof could make her blush.

The dog, apparently coiled in deepest slumber, heard the light
footsteps on the hall floor, pricked up his tawny ears, sprang to his
feet, and bounded over to his young mistress, whom he nearly knocked
down in the warmth of his welcome. Nip, the pointer, blinked at the
intruders, yawned desperately, stretched himself a trifle longer, and
relapsed into slumber.

"How fond that brute is of you," said Rorie; "but it's no wonder, when
one considers what you did for him."

"If you say another word I shall hate you," cried Vixen savagely.

"Well, but you know when a fellow fights another fellow's battles, the
other fellow's bound to be fond of him; and when a young lady pitches
into a bird-boy with her riding-whip to save a mastiff pup from
ill-usage, that mastiff pup is bound----"

"Mamma," cried Vixen, flinging aside a tapestry _portiere_, and
bouncing into the drawing-room, "here's Roderick, and he's come to
dinner, and you must excuse his shooting-dress, please. I'm sure pa
will."

"Certainly, my dear Violet," replied a gentle, _trainante_ voice from
the fire-lit dimness near the velvet-curtained hearth. "Of course I am
always glad to see Mr. Vawdrey when your papa asks him. Where did you
meet the Squire, Roderick?"

"Upon my word, Mrs. Tempest," faltered Rorie, coming slowly forward
into the ruddy glow, "I feel quite awfully ashamed of myself; I've been
rabbit-shooting, and I'm a most horrid object. It wasn't the Squire
asked me to stay. It was Vixen."

Vixen made a ferocious grimace at him--he could just see her distorted
countenance in the fire-light--and further expressed her aggravation by
a smart crack of her whip.

"Violet, my love, you have such startling ways," exclaimed Mrs.
Tempest, with a long-suffering air. "Really, Miss McCroke, you ought to
try and correct her of those startling ways."

On this Roderick became aware of a stout figure in a tartan dress,
knitting industriously on the side of the hearth opposite Mrs.
Tempest's sofa. He could just see the flash of those active needles,
and could just hear Miss McCroke murmur placidly that she had corrected
Violet, and that it was no use.

Rorie remembered that plaid poplin dress when he was at Eton. It was a
royal Stuart, too brilliant to be forgotten. He used to wonder whether
it would ever wear out, or whether it was not made of some
indestructible tissue, like asbestos--a fabric that neither time nor
fire could destroy.

"It was Rorie's last night, you see, mamma," apologised Vixen, "and I
knew you and papa would like him to come, and that you wouldn't mind
his shooting-clothes a bit, though they do make him look like the
under-keeper, except that the under-keeper's better looking than Rorie,
and has finished growing his whiskers, instead of living in the
expectation of them."

And with this Parthian shot, Vixen made a pirouette on her neat little
morocco-shod toes, and whisked herself out of the room; leaving
Roderick Vawdrey to make the best of his existence for the next twenty
minutes with the two women he always found it most difficult to get on
with, Mrs. Tempest and Miss McCroke.

The logs broke into a crackling blaze just at this moment, and lighted
up that luxurious hearth and the two figures beside it.

It was the prettiest thing imaginable in the way of a drawing-room,
that spacious low-ceiled chamber in the Abbey House.

The oak panelling was painted white, a barbarity on the part of those
modern Goths the West End decorators, but a charming background for
quaint Venetian mirrors, hanging shelves of curious old china, dainty
little groups of richly-bound duodecimos, brackets, bronzes, freshest
flowers in majolica jars; water-colour sketches by Hunt, Prout,
Cattermole, and Edward Duncan; sage-green silk curtains; black and gold
furniture, and all the latest prettinesses of the new Jacobean school.
The mixture of real medievalism and modern quaintness was delightful.
One hardly knew where the rococo began or the mediaeval left off. The
good old square fireplace, with its projecting canopy, and columns in
white and coloured marbles, was as old as the days of Inigo Jones; but
the painted tiles, with their designs from the Iliad and Odyssey after
Dante Rossetti, were the newest thing from Minton's factory.

Even Rorie felt that the room was pretty, though he did above all
things abhor to be trapped in it, as he found himself this October
evening.

"There's a great lot of rubbish in it," he used to say of Mrs.
Tempest's drawing-room, "but it's rather nice altogether."

Mrs. Tempest, at five-and-thirty, still retained the good looks which
had distinguished Miss Calthorpe at nineteen. She was small and slim,
with a delicate complexion. She had large soft eyes of a limpid
innocent azure, regular features, rosebud lips, hands after Velasquez,
and an unexceptionable taste in dress, the selection of which formed
one of the most onerous occupations of her life. To attire herself
becomingly, and to give the Squire the dinners he best liked, in an
order of succession so dexterously arranged as never to provoke
satiety, were Mrs. Tempest's cardinal duties. In the intervals of her
life she read modern poetry, unobjectionable French novels, and
reviews. She did a little high-art needle-work, played Mendelssohn's
Lieder, sang three French _chansons_ which her husband liked, slept,
and drank orange pekoe. In the consumption of this last article Mrs.
Tempest was as bad as a dram-drinker. She declared her inability to
support life without that gentle stimulant, and required to be wound up
at various hours of her languid day with a dose of her favourite
beverage.

"I think I'll take a cup of tea," was Mrs. Tempest's inevitable remark
at every crisis of her existence.

"And so you are going back to Oxford, Roderick?" the lady began with a
languid kindness.

Mrs. Tempest had never been known to be unkind to anyone. She regarded
all her fellow-creatures with a gentle tolerance. They were there, a
necessary element of the universe, and she bore with them. But she had
never attached herself particularly to anybody except the Squire. Him
she adored. He took all the trouble of life off her hands, and gave her
all good things. She had been poor, and he had made her rich; nobody,
and he had elevated her into somebody. She loved him with a canine
fidelity, and felt towards him as a dog feels towards his master--that
in him this round world begins and ends.

"Yes," assented Rorie, with a sigh, "I'm going up to-morrow."

"Why up?" inquired Miss McCroke, without lifting her eyes from her
needles. "It isn't up on the map."

"I hope you are going to get a grand degree," continued Mrs. Tempest,
in that soft conciliatory voice of hers; "Senior Wrangler, or
something."

"That's the other shop," exclaimed Rorie; "they grow that sort of
timber at Cambridge. However, I hope to pull myself through somehow or
other this time, for my mother's sake. She attaches a good deal of
importance to it, though for my own part I can't see what good it can
do me. It won't make me farm my own land better, or ride straighter to
hounds, or do my duty better to my tenants."

"Education," said Miss McCroke sententiously, "is always a good, and we
cannot too highly estimate its influence upon----"

"Oh yes, I know," answered Rorie quickly, for he knew that when the
floodgates of Miss McCroke's eloquence were once loosened the tide ran
strong, "when house and lands are gone and spent a man may turn usher
in an academy, and earn fifty pounds a year and his laundress's bill by
grinding Caesar's Commentaries into small boys. But I shouldn't lay in
a stock of learning with that view. When my house and lands are gone
I'll go after them--emigrate, and go into the lumber trade in Canada."

"What a dreadful idea," said Mrs. Tempest; "but you are not going to
lose house and lands, Roderick--such a nice place as Briarwood."

"To my mind it's rather a commonplace hole," answered the young man
carelessly, "but the land is some of the best in the county."

It must be nearly seven by this time, he thought. He was getting
through this period of probation better than he had expected. Mrs.
Tempest gave a little stifled yawn behind her huge black fan, upon
which Cupids and Graces, lightly sketched in French gray, were depicted
dancing in the airiest attitudes, after Boucher. Roderick would have
liked to yawn in concert, but at this juncture a sudden ray of light
flashed upon him and showed him a way of escape.

"I think I'll go to the gentleman's room, and make myself decent before
the second bell rings," he said.

"Do," assented Mrs. Tempest, with another yawn; and the young man fled.

He had only time to scramble through a hurried toilet, and was still
feeling very doubtful as to the parting of his short crisp hair, when
the gong boomed out its friendly summons. The gentleman's room opened
from the hall, and Rorie heard the Squire's loud and jovial voice
uplifted as he raised the tapestry curtain.

Mr. Tempest was standing in front of the log fire, pulling Vixen's
auburn hair. The girl had put on a picturesque brown velvet frock. A
scarlet sash was tied loosely round her willowy waist, and a scarlet
ribbon held back the rippling masses of her bright hair.

"A study in red and brown," thought Rorie, as the fire-glow lit up the
picture of the Squire in his hunting-dress, and the girl in her warm
velvet gown.

"Such a run, Rorie," cried the Squire; "we dawdled about among the
furze from twelve till four doing nothing, and just as it was getting
dark started a stag up on the high ground this side of Pickett's Post,
and ran him nearly into Ringwood. Go in and fetch my wife, Rorie. Oh,
here she is"--as the _portiere_ was lifted by a white hand, all
a-glitter with diamonds--"you must excuse me sitting down in pink
to-day, Pamela; I only got in as the gong began to sound, and I'm as
hungry as the proverbial hunter."

"You know I always think you handsomest in your scarlet coat, Edward,"
replied the submissive wife, "but I hope you're not very muddy."

"I won't answer for myself; but I haven't been actually up to my neck
in a bog."

Rorie offered his arm to Mrs. Tempest, and they all went in to dinner,
the squire still playing with his daughter's hair, and Miss McCroke
solemnly bringing up the rear.

The dining-room at the Abbey House was the ancient refectory, large
enough for a mess-room; so, when there were no visitors, the Tempests
dined in the library--a handsome square room, in which old family
portraits looked down from the oak panelling above the bookcases, and
where the literary element was not obtrusively conspicuous. You felt
that it was a room quite as well adapted for conviviality as for study.
There was a cottage piano in a snug corner by the fireplace. The
Squire's capacious arm-chair stood on the other side of the hearth,
Mrs. Tempest's low chair and gipsy table facing it. The old oak buffet
opposite the chimney-piece was a splendid specimen of Elizabethan
carving, and made a rich background for the Squire's racing-cups, and a
pair of Oliver Cromwell tankards, plain and unornamental as that
illustrious Roundhead himself.

It was a delightful room on a chill October evening like this: the logs
roaring up the wide chimney, a pair of bronze candelabra lighting
buffet and table, Mrs. Tempest smiling pleasantly at her unbidden
guest, and the squire stooping, red-faced and plethoric, over his
mulligatawny; while Vixen, who was at an age when dinner is a secondary
consideration, was amusing herself with the dogs, gentlemanly animals,
too wellbred to be importunate in their demands for an occasional
tid-bit, and content to lie in superb attitudes, looking up at the
eaters patiently, with supplication in their great pathetic brown eyes.

"Rorie is going up to-morrow--not in a balloon, but to Magdalen
College, Oxford--so, as this was his last night, I made him come to
dinner," explained Vixen presently. "I hope I didn't do wrong."

"Rorie knows he's always welcome. Have some more of that mulligatawny,
my lad, it's uncommonly good."

Rorie declined the mulligatawny, being at this moment deeply engaged in
watching Vixen and the dogs. Nip, the liver-coloured pointer, was
performing his celebrated statue feat. With his forelegs stiffly
extended, and his head proudly poised, he simulated a dog of marble;
and if it had not been for the occasional bumping of his tail upon the
Persian carpet, in an irresistible wag of self-approbation, the
simulation would have been perfect.

"Look, papa! isn't it beautiful? I went out of the room the other day,
while Nip was doing the statue, after I'd told him not to move a paw,
and I stayed away quite five minutes, and then stole quietly back; and
there he was, lying as still as if he'd been carved out of stone.
Wasn't that fidelity?"

"Nonsense!" cried the Squire. "How do you know that Nip didn't wind you
as you opened the door, and get himself into position? What are these?"
as the old silver _entree_ dishes came round. "Stewed eels? You never
forget my tastes, Pamela."

"Stewed eels, sir; _sole maitre d'hotel_," said the butler, in the
usual suppressed and deferential tone.

Rorie helped himself automatically, and went on looking at Vixen.

Her praises of Nip had kindled jealous fires in the breast of Argus,
her own particular favourite; and the blunt black muzzle had been
thrust vehemently under her velvet sleeve.

"Argus is angry." said Rorie.

"He's a dear old foolish thing to be jealous," answered Vixen, "when he
knows I'd go through fire and water for him."

"Or even fight a big boy," cried the Squire, throwing himself back in
his chair with the unctuous laughter of a man who is dining well, and
knows it.

Vixen blushed rosiest red at the allusion.

"Papa, you oughtn't to say such things," she cried; "I was a little bit
of a child then."

"Yes, and flew at a great boy of fourteen and licked him," exclaimed
the Squire, rapturously. "You know the story, don't you, Rorie?"

Rorie had heard it twenty times, but looked the picture of ignorant
expectancy.

"You know how Vixen came by Argus? What, you don't?  Well, I'll tell
you. This little yellow-haired lass of mine was barely nine years old,
and she was riding through the village on her pony, with young Stubbs
behind her on the sorrel mare--and, you know, to her dying day, that
sorrel would never let anyone dismount her quietly. Now what does Vixen
spy but a lubberly lad and a lot of small children ill-using a mastiff
pup. They'd tied a tin-kettle to the brute's tail, and were doing their
best to drown him. There's a pond just beyond Mrs. Farley's cottage,
you know, and into that pond they'd pelted the puppy, and wouldn't let
him get out of it. As fast as the poor little brute scrambled up the
muddy bank they drove him back into the water."

"Papa darling," pleaded Vixen despairingly, "Rorie has heard it all a
thousand times before. Haven't you now, Rorie?"

"It's as new to me as to-morrow's _Times_," said Roderick with
effrontery.

"Vixen was off the pony before you could say 'Jack Robinson.' She flew
into the midst of the dirty little ragamuffins, seized the biggest
ruffian by the collar, and trundled him backwards into the pond. Then
she laid about her right and left with her whip till the wretches
scampered off, leaving Vixen and the puppy masters of the situation;
and by this time the sorrel mare had allowed Stubbs to get off her, and
Stubbs rushed to the rescue. The young ringleader had been too much
surprised by his ducking to pull himself together again before this,
but he came up to time now, and had it out with Stubbs, while the
sorrel was doing as much damage as she conveniently could to Mrs.
Farley's palings. 'Don't quite kill him, please, Stubbs,' cried Vixen,
'although he richly deserves it;' and then she took the muddy little
beast up in her arms and ran home, leaving her pony to fate and Stubbs.
Stubbs told me the whole story, with tears in his eyes. 'Who'd ha'
thought, Squire, the little lady would ha' been such a game 'un?' said
Stubbs."

"It's very horrid of you, papa, to tell such silly old stories,"
remonstrated Vixen. "That was nearly seven years ago, and Dr. Dewsnap
told us the other day that everybody undergoes a complete change
of--what is it?--all the tissues--in seven years. I'm not the same
Vixen that pushed the boy into the pond. There's not a bit of her left
in me."

And so the dinner went on and ended, with a good deal of distraction,
caused by the dogs, and a mild little remark now and then from Mrs.
Tempest, or an occasional wise interjection from Miss McCroke, who in a
manner represented the Goddess of Wisdom in this somewhat frivolous
family, and came in with a corrective and severely rational observation
when the talk was drifting towards idiocy.

The filberts, bloomy purple grapes, and ruddy pippins, and yellow
William pears had gone their rounds--all home produce--and had been
admired and praised, and the Squire's full voice was mellowing after
his second glass of port, when the butler came in with a letter on a
salver, and carried it, with muffled footfall and solemn visage, as of
one who entrusted with the delivery of a death-warrant, straight to
Roderick Vawdrey.

The young man looked at it as if he had encountered an unexpected
visitor of the adder tribe.

"My mother," he faltered.

It was a large and handsome letter with a big red seal.

"May I?" asked Rorie, with a troubled visage, and having received his
host and hostess's assent, broke the seal.


"Dear Roderick,--Is it quite kind of you to absent yourself on this
your last night at home? I feel very sure that this will find you at
the Abbey House, and I send the brougham at a venture. Be good enough
to come home at once. The Dovedales arrived at Ashbourne quite
unexpectedly this afternoon, and are dining with me on purpose to see
you before you go back to Oxford. If your own good feeling did not urge
you to spend this last evening with me, I wonder that Mr. and Mrs.
Tempest were not kind enough to suggest to you which way your duty
lay.--Yours anxiously,

"JANE VAWDREY."


Roderick crumpled the letter with an angry look. That fling at the
Tempests hit him hard. Why was it that his mother was always so ready
to find fault with these chosen friends of his?

"Anything wrong, Rorie?" asked the Squire.

"Nothing; except that the Dovedales are dining with my mother; and I'm
to go home directly."

"If you please, ma'am, Master Vawdrey's servant has come for him," said
Vixen, mimicking the style of announcement at a juvenile party. "It's
quite too bad, Rorie," she went on, "I had made up my mind to beat you
at pyramids. However I daresay you're very glad to have the chance of
seeing your pretty cousin before you leave Hampshire."

But Rorie shook his head dolefully, made his adieux, and departed.



CHAPTER II.

Lady Jane Vawdrey.

"It is not dogs only that are jealous!" thought Roderick, as he went
home in the brougham, with all the windows down, and the cool night
breeze blowing his cigar smoke away into the forest, to mix with the
mist wreaths that were curling up from the soft ground. It was an
offence of the highest grade to smoke in his mother's carriage; but
Rorie was in an evil temper just now, and found a kind of bitter
pleasure in disobedience.

The carriage bowled swiftly along the straight, well-made road, but
Rorie hated riding in a brougham. The soft padded confinement galled
him.

"Why couldn't she send me my dog-cart?" he asked himself indignantly.

Briarwood was a large white house in a small park. It stood on much
higher ground than the Abbey House, and was altogether different from
that good old relic of a bygone civilisation. Briarwood was distinctly
modern. Its decorations savoured of the Regency: its furniture was
old-fashioned, without being antique. The classic stiffness and
straightness of the First French Empire distinguished the gilded chairs
and tables in the drawing-room. There were statues by Chantrey and
Canova in the spacious lofty hall; portraits by Lawrence and Romney in
the dining-room; a historical picture by Copley over the elephantine
mahogany sideboard; a Greek sarcophagus for wines under it.

At its best, the Briarwood house was commonplace; but to the mind of
Lady Jane Vawdrey, the gardens and hot-houses made amends. She was a
profound horticulturist, and spent half her income on orchids and rare
newly-imported flowers, and by this means she had made Briarwood one of
the show places of the neighbourhood.

"A woman must be distinguished for something, or she is no better than
her scullery-maid," said Lady Jane to her son, excusing herself for
these extravagances. "I have no talent for music, painting, or poetry,
so I devote myself to orchids; and perhaps my orchids turn out better
than many people's music and poetry."

Lady Jane was not a pleasant-tempered woman, and enjoyed the privilege
of being more feared than liked; a privilege of which she made the
most, and which secured her immunity from many annoyances to which
good-natured people are subject. She did good to her poor neighbours,
in her own cold set way, but the poor people about Briarwood did not
send to her for wine and brandy as if she kept a public-house, and was
benefited by their liberal patronage; the curate at the little Gothic
church, down in the tiny village in a hollow of the wooded hills, did
not appeal to Lady Jane in his necessities for church or parish. She
subscribed handsomely to all orthodox well-established charities, but
was not prone to accidental benevolence. Nobody ever disappointed her
when she gave a dinner, or omitted the duty-call afterwards; but she
had no unceremonious gatherings, no gossipy kettle-drums, no
hastily-arranged picnics or garden parties. When people in the
neighbourhood wanted to take their friends to see the orchids, they
wrote to Lady Jane first, and made it quite a state affair; and on an
appointed afternoon, the lady of Briarwood received them, richly clad
in a dark velvet gown and a point-lace cap, as if she had just walked
out of an old picture, and there were three or four gardeners in
attendance to open doors, and cut specimen blossoms for the guests.

"She's a splendid woman, admirable in every way," said Roderick to an
Oxford chum, with whom he had been discussing Lady Jane's virtues; "but
if a fellow could have a voice in the matter, she's not the mother I
should have chosen for myself."

Ambition was the leading characteristic of Lady Jane's mind. As a girl,
she had been ambitious for herself, and that ambition had been
disappointed; as a woman, her ambition transferred itself to her son.
She was the eldest daughter of the Earl of Lodway, a nobleman who had
been considerably overweighted in the handicap of life, having nine
children, seats in three counties, a huge old house in St. James's
Square, and a small income--his three estates consisting of some of the
barrenest and most unprofitable land in Great Britain. Of Lord Lodway's
nine children, five were daughters, and of these Lady Jane was the
eldest and the handsomest. Even in her nursery she had a very distinct
notion that, for her, marriage meant promotion. She used to play at
being married at St. George's, Hanover Square, and would never consent
to have the ceremony performed by less than two bishops; even though
the part of one hierarch had to be represented by the nursery
hearth-broom. In due course Lady Jane Umleigh made her debut in
society, in all the bloom and freshness of her stately Saxon beauty.
She was admired and talked about, and acknowledged as one of the belles
of that season; her portrait was engraved in the Book of Beauty, and
her ball programmes were always filled with the very best names; but at
the end of the season, Lady Lodway went back to the Yorkshire Wolds
with a biting sense of failure and mortification. Her handsome daughter
had not sent her arrow home to the gold. She had not received a single
offer worth talking about.

"Don't you think you could consent to be married by one bishop and a
dean, Jenny, if the Marquis comes to the scratch soon after the
twelfth?" asked Lady Jane's youngest brother derisively.

He had been made to do bishop in those play-weddings of Lady Jane's,
very often when the function went against the grain.

The Marquis thus familiarly spoken about was Lord Strishfogel, the
richest nobleman in Ireland, and a great sea-rover, famous for his
steam yachts, and his importance generally. He had admired Lady Jane's
statuesque beauty, and had been more particular in his attentions than
the rest of her satellites, who for the most part merely worshipped her
because it was the right thing to do. Lord Strishfogel had promised to
come to Heron's Nest, Lord Lodway's place in the Wolds, for the
grouse-shooting; but instead of keeping his promise, this erratic young
peer went off to the Golden Horn, to race his yacht against the vessel
of a great Turkish official. This was Lady Jane Umleigh's first
disappointment. She had liked Lord Strishfogel just well enough to
fancy herself deeply in love with him, and she was unconscious of the
influence his rank and wealth had exercised upon her feelings. She had
thought of herself so often as the Marchioness of Strishfogel, had so
completely projected her mind into that brilliant future, that to
descend from this giddy height to the insignificance of unwedded
girlhood was as sharp a fall as if she had worn a crown and lost it.

Her second season began, and Lord Strishfogel was still a rover; He was
in the South Seas by this time, writing a book, and enjoying halcyon
days among the friendly natives, swimming like a dolphin in those
summery seas, and indulging in harmless flirtations with dusky
princesses, whose chief attire was made of shells and flowers, and
whose untutored dancing was more vigorous than refined. At the end of
that second season, Jane Umleigh had serious thoughts of turning
philanthropist, and taking a shipload of destitute young women to
Australia. Anything would be better than this sense of a wasted life
and ignominious failure.

She was in this frame of mind when Mr. Vawdrey came to Heron's Nest for
the shooting. He was a commoner, but his family was one of the oldest
in Hampshire, and he had lately distinguished himself by some rather
clever speeches in the House of Commons. His estate was worth fifteen
thousand a year, and he was altogether a man of some mark. Above all,
he was handsome, manly, and a gentleman to the marrow of his bones, and
he was the first man who ever fell over head and ears in love with Jane
Umleigh.

The charms that had repelled more frivolous admirers attracted John
Vawdrey. That proud calm beauty of Lady Jane's seemed to his mind the
perfection of womanly grace. Here was a wife for a man to adore upon
his knees, a wife to be proud of, a wife to rule her vassals like a
queen, and to lead him, John Vawdrey, on to greatness.

He was romantic, chivalrous, aspiring, and Lady Jane Umleigh was the
first woman he had met who embodied the heroine of his youthful dreams.
He proposed and was refused, and went away despairing. It would have
been a good match, undoubtedly--a truth which Lord and Lady Lodway
urged with some iteration upon their daughter--but it would have been a
terrible descent from the ideal marriage which Lady Jane had set up in
her own mind, as the proper prize for so fair a runner in life's race.
She had imagined herself a marchioness, with a vast territory of
mountain, vale, and lake, and an influence in the sister island second
only to that of royalty. She could not descend all at once to behold
herself the wife of a plain country gentleman, whose proudest privilege
it was to write M.P. after his name.

The Earl and Countess were urgent, for they had another daughter ready
for the matrimonial market, and were inclined to regard Lady Jane as an
"old shopkeeper," but they knew their eldest daughter's temper, and did
not press the matter too warmly.

Another season, Lady Jane's fourth, and Lady Sophia's first, began and
ended. Lady Sophia was piquant and witty, with a snub nose and a
playful disposition. She was a first-rate horsewoman, an exquisite
waltzer, good at croquet, archery, billiards, and all games requiring
accuracy of eye and aim, and Lady Sophia brought down her bird in a
single season. She went home to Heron's Nest a duchess in embryo. The
Duke of Dovedale, a bulky, middle-aged nobleman, with a passion for
fieldsports and high farming, had seen Lady Sophia riding a dangerous
horse in Rotten Row, and had been so charmed by her management of the
brute, as to become from that hour her slave. A pretty girl, with such
a seat in her saddle, and such a light hand for a horse's mouth, was
the next best thing to a goddess. Before the season was over the Duke
had proposed, and had been graciously accepted by the young lady, who
felt an inward glow of pride at having done so much better than the
family beauty.

"Can I ever forget how that girl Jane has snubbed me?" said Lady Sophia
to her favourite brother. "And to think that I shall be sitting in
ermine robes in the House of Lords, while she is peeping through the
nasty iron fretwork in the Ladies' Gallery to catch a glimpse of the
top of her husband's head in the House of Commons."

This splendid engagement of Lady Sophia's turned the tide for the
faithful John Vawdrey. Lady Jane met her rejected lover at Trouville,
and was so gracious to him that he ventured to renew his suit, and, to
his delighted surprise, was accepted. Anything was better than standing
out in the cold while the ducal engagement was absorbing everybody's
thoughts and conversation. Lady Sophia had boasted, in that playful way
of hers, of having her beauty-sister for chief bridesmaid; and the
beauty-sister had made up her mind that this thing should not be.
Perhaps she would have married a worse man than John Vawdrey to escape
such infamy.

And John Vawdrey was by no means disagreeable to her; nay, it had been
pride, and not any disinclination for the man himself that had bidden
her reject him. He was clever, distinguished, and he loved her with a
romantic devotion which flattered and pleased her. Yes, she would marry
John Vawdrey.

Everybody was delighted at this concession, the lady's parents and
belongings most especially so. Here were two daughters disposed of; and
if the beauty had made the inferior match, it was only one of those
capricious turns of fortune that are more to be expected than the
common order of things.

So there was a double marriage the following spring at St. George's,
and Lady Jane's childish desire was gratified. There were two bishops
at the ceremony. True that one was only colonial, and hardly ranked
higher than the nursery hearth brush.

Fate was not altogether unkind to Lady Jane. Her humble marriage was
much happier than her sister's loftier union. The Duke, who had been so
good-natured as a lover, proved stupid and somewhat tiresome as a
husband. He gave his mind to hunting and farming, and cared for nothing
else. His chief conversation was about cattle and manure, guano and
composts, the famous white Chillingham oxen, or the last thing in
strawberry roans. He spent a small fortune that would have been large
for a small man--in the attempt to acclimatise strange animals in his
park in the Midlands. Sophia, Duchess of Dovedale, had seven country
seats, and no home. Her children were puny and feeble. They sickened in
the feudal Scotch castle, they languished in the Buckinghamshire
Eden--a freestone palace set among the woods that overhang the valley
of the Thames. No breezes that blow could waft strength or vitality to
those feeble lungs. At thirty the Duchess of Dovedale had lost all her
babies, save one frail sapling, a girl of two years old, who promised
to have a somewhat better constitution than her perished brothers and
sisters. On this small paragon the Duchess concentrated her cares and
hopes. She gave up hunting--much to the disgust of that Nimrod, her
husband--in order to superintend her nursery. From the most
pleasure-loving of matrons, she became the most domestic. Lady Mabel
Ashbourne was to grow up the perfection of health, wisdom, and beauty,
under the mother's loving care. She would have a great fortune, for
there was a considerable portion of the Duke's property which he was
free to bequeath to his daughter. He had coal-pits in the North, and a
tin-mine in the West. He had a house at Kensington which he had built
for himself, a model Queen Anne mansion, with every article of
furniture made on the strictest aesthetic principles, and not an
anachronism from the garrets to the cellars. You might have expected to
meet Marlborough on the stairs, and to find Addison reading in the
library. The Scottish castle and the Buckinghamshire Paradise would go
with the title; but the Duke, delighted with the easy-going sport of
the New Forest, had bought six hundred acres between Stony Cross and
Romsey--a wide stretch of those low level pastures across which you see
the distant roofs and spires of the good old market town--and had made
for himself an archetypal home-farm, and had built himself a
hunting-box, with stables and kennels of the most perfect kind; and
this estate, with the Queen Anne house, and the pits, and the mine, was
his very own to dispose of as he pleased.

Lady Jane's marriage had proved happy. Her husband, always egged on by
her ambitious promptings, had made himself an important figure in the
senate, and had been on the eve of entering the cabinet as Colonial
Secretary, when death cut short his career. A hard winter and a sharp
attack of bronchitis nipped the aspiring senator in the bud.

Lady Jane was as nearly broken-hearted as so cold a woman could be. She
had loved her husband better than anything in this life, except
herself. He left her with one son and a handsome jointure, with the
full possession of Briarwood until her son's majority. Upon that only
child Lady Jane lavished all her care, but did not squander the wealth
of her affection. Perhaps her capacity for loving had died with her
husband. She had been proud and fond of him, but she was not proud of
the little boy in velvet knickerbockers, whose good looks were his only
merit, and who was continually being guilty of some new piece of
mischief; laming ponies, smashing orchids, glass, china, and generally
disturbing the perfect order which was Briarwood's first law.

When the boy was old enough to go to Eton, he seemed still more remote
from his mother's love and sympathy. He was passionately fond of field
sports, and those Lady Jane Vawdrey detested. He was backwards in all
his studies, despite the careful coaching he had received from the mild
Anglican curate of Briarwood village. He was intensely pugilistic, and
rarely came home for the holidays without bringing a black eye or a
swollen nose as the result of his latest fight. He spent a good deal of
money, and in a manner that to his mother's calm sense appeared simply
idiotic. His hands were always grubby, his nails wore almost perpetual
mourning, his boots were an outrage upon good taste, and he generally
left a track of muddy foot-marks behind him along the crimson-carpeted
corridors. What could any mother do for such a boy, except tolerate
him? Love was out of the question. How could a delicate, high-bred
woman, soft-handed, velvet robed, care to have such a lad about her? a
boy who smelt of stables and wore hob-nailed boots, whose pockets were
always sticky with toffee, and his handkerchiefs a disgrace to
humanity, who gave his profoundest thoughts to pigeon-fancying, and his
warmest affections to ratting terriers, nay, who was capable of having
a live rat in his pocket at any moment of his life.

But while all these habits made the lad abominable in the eyes of his
mother, the Duke and Duchess of Dovedale admired the young Hercules
with a fond and envious admiration. The Duke would have given coal-pits
and tin-mine, all the disposable property he held, and deemed it but a
small price for such a son. The Duchess thought of her feeble
boy-babies who had been whooping-coughed or scarlet-fevered out of the
world, and sighed, and loved her nephew better than ever his mother had
loved him since his babyhood. When the Dovedales were at their place in
the Forest, Roderick almost lived with them; or, at any rate, divided
his time between Ashbourne Park and the Abbey House, and spent as
little of his life at home as he could. He patronised Lady Mabel, who
was his junior by five years, rode her thorough-bred pony for her under
the pretence of improving its manners, until he took a header with it
into a bog, out of which pony and boy rolled and struggled
indiscriminately, boy none the worse, pony lamed for life. He played
billiards with the Duke, and told the Duchess all his school
adventures, practical jokes, fights, apple-pie beds, booby-traps,
surreptitious fried sausages, and other misdemeanours.

Out of this friendship arose a brilliant vision which reconciled Lady
Jane Vawdrey to her son's preference for his aunt's house and his
aunt's society. Why should he not marry Mabel by-and-by, and unite the
two estates of Ashbourne and Briarwood, and become owner of the pits
and the mine, and distinguish himself in the senate, and be created a
peer? As the husband of Lady Mabel Ashbourne, he would be rich enough
to command a peerage, almost as a right; but his mother would have had
him deserve it. With this idea Lady Jane urged on her son's education.
All his Hampshire friends called him clever, but he won no laurels at
school. Lady Jane sent for grinders and had the boy ground; but all the
grinding could not grind a love of classics or metaphysics into this
free son of the forest. He went to Oxford, and got himself ploughed for
his Little Go, with a wonderful facility. For politics he cared not a
jot, but he could drive tandem better than any other undergraduate of
his year. He never spoke at the Union, but he pulled stroke in the
'Varsity boat. He was famous for his biceps, his good-nature, and his
good looks; but so far he had distinguished himself for nothing else,
and to this stage of nonperformance had he come when the reader first
beheld him.



CHAPTER III.

"I Want a Little Serious Talk with You."

It was only half-past nine when the brougham drove up to the pillared
porch at Briarwood. The lighted drawing-room windows shone out upon the
vaporous autumn darkness--a row of five tall French casements--and the
sound of a piano caught Roderick's ear as he tossed the end of his
cigar in the shrubbery, and mounted the wide stone door-steps.

"At it again," muttered Rorie with a shrug of disgust, as he entered
the hall, and heard, through the half-open drawing-room door, an
interlacement of pearly runs. At this stage of his existence, Rorie had
no appreciation of brilliant pianoforte playing. The music he liked
best was of the simplest, most inartificial order.

"Are the Duke and Duchess here?" he asked the butler.

"Her Grace and Lady Mabel is here, sir; not the Dook."

"I suppose I must dress before I face the quality," muttered Rorie
sulkily, and he went leaping upstairs--three steps at a time--to
exchange his brown shooting-clothes and leather gaiters for that
dress-suit of his which was continually getting too small for him.
Rorie detested himself in a dress-suit and a white tie.

"You beast," he cried, addressing his reflection in the tall glass door
of his armoire, "you are the image of a waiter at The Clarendon."

The Briarwood drawing-room looked a great deal too vast and too lofty
for the three women who were occupying it this evening. It was a
finely-proportioned room, and its amber satin hangings made a pleasing
background for the white and gold furniture. White, gold, and amber
made up the prevailing tone of colour. Clusters of wax lights against
the walls and a crystal chandelier with many candles, filled the room
with a soft radiance. It was a room without shadow. There were no
recesses, no deep-set windows or doors. All was coldly bright,
faultlessly elegant. Rorie detested his mother's drawing-room almost as
much as he detested himself in a dress-coat that was too short in the
sleeves.

The matrons were seated on each side of the shining gold and steel
fireplace, before which there stretched an island of silky white fur.
Lady Jane Vawdrey's younger sister was a stout, comfortable-looking
woman in gray silk, who hardly realised one's preconceived notion of a
duchess. Lady Jane herself had dignity enough for the highest rank in
the "Almanach de Gotha." She wore dark green velvet and old rose-point,
and looked like a portrait of an Austrian princess by Velasquez. Years
had not impaired the purity of her blonde complexion. Her aquiline
nose, thin lips, small firm chin, were the features of one born to
rule. Her light brown hair showed no streak of gray. An admirable
woman, no doubt, for anybody else's mother, as Rorie so often said to
himself.

The young lady was still sitting at the piano, remote from the two
elders, her slim white fingers running in and out and to and fro in
those wondrous intricacies and involutions which distinguish modern
classical music. Rorie hated all that running about the piano to no
purpose, and could not perceive his cousin's merit in having devoted
three or four hours of her daily life for the last seven years to the
accomplishment of this melodious meandering. She left off playing, and
held out her small white hand to him as he came to the piano, after
shaking hands with his aunt.

What was she like, this paragon formed by a mother's worshipping love
and ceaseless care, this one last pearl in the crown of domestic life,
this child of so many prayers and hopes, and fears, and deep pathetic
rejoicings?

She was very fair to look upon--complete and beautiful as a pearl--with
that outward purity, that perfect delicacy of tint and harmony of
detail which is in itself a charm. Study her as captiously as you
would, you could find no flaw in this jewel. The small regular features
were so delicately chiselled, the fair fine skin was so transparent,
the fragile figure so exquisitely moulded, the ivory hand and arm so
perfect--no, you could discover no bad drawing or crude colouring in
this human picture. She lifted her clear blue eyes to Rorie's face, and
smiled at him in gentle welcome; and though he felt intensely cross at
having been summoned home like a school-boy, he could not refuse her a
responsive smile, or a gentle pressure of the taper fingers.

"And so you have been dining with those horrid people!" she exclaimed
with an air of playful reproach, "and on your last night in
Hampshire--quite too unkind to Aunt Jane."

"I don't know whom you mean by horrid people, Mabel," answered Rorie,
chilled back into sulkiness all at once; "the people I was with are all
that is good and pleasant."

"Then you've not been at the Tempests' after all?"

"I have been at the Tempests'. What have you to say against the
Tempests?"

"Oh, I have nothing to say against them," said Lady Mabel, shrugging
her pretty shoulders in her fawn-coloured silk gown. "There are some
things that do not require to be said."

"Mr. Tempest is the best and kindest of men; his wife is--well, a
nonentity, perhaps, but not a disagreeable one; and his daughter----"

Here Rorie came to a sudden stop, which Lady Mabel accentuated with a
silvery little laugh.

"His daughter is charming," she cried, when she had done laughing; "red
hair, and a green habit with brass buttons, a yellow waistcoat like her
papa's, and a rose in her button-hole. How I should like to see her in
Rotten Row!"

"I'll warrant there wouldn't be a better horse-woman or a prettier girl
there," cried Rorie, scarlet with indignation.

His mother looked daggers. His cousin gave another silvery laugh, clear
as those pearly treble runs upon the Erard; but that pretty artificial
laugh had a ring which betrayed her mortification.

"Rorie is thorough," she said; "when he likes people he thinks them
perfection. You do think that little red-haired girl quite perfection,
now don't you, Rorie?" pursued Lady Mabel, sitting down before the
piano again, and touching the notes silently as she seemed to admire
the slender diamond hoops upon her white fingers--old-fashioned rings
that had belonged to a patrician great-grandmother. "You think her
quite a model young lady, though they say she can hardly read, and
makes her mark--like William the Conqueror--instead of signing her
name, and spends her life in the stables, and occasionally, when the
fox gets back to earth--swears."

"I don't know who they may be," cried Roderick, savagely, "but they say
a pack of lies. Violet Tempest is as well educated as--any girl need
be. All girls can't be paragons; or, if they could, this earth would be
intolerable for the rest of humanity. Lord deliver us from a world
overrun with paragons. Violet Tempest is little more than a child, a
spoiled child, if you like, but she has a heart of gold, and a firmer
seat in her saddle than any other woman in Hampshire."

Roderick had turned from scarlet to pale by the time he finished this
speech. His mother had paled at the first mention of poor Vixen. That
young lady's name acted upon Lady Jane's feelings very much as a red
rag acts on a bull.

"I think, after keeping you away from your mother on the last night of
your vacation, Mr. Tempest might at least have had the good taste to
let you come home sober," said Lady Jane, with suppressed rage.

"I drank a couple of glasses of still hock at dinner, and not a drop of
anything else from the time I entered the Abbey till I left it; and I
don't think, considering how I've seasoned myself with Bass at Oxford,
that two glasses of Rudesheimer would floor me," explained Rorie, with
recovered calmness.

"Oh, but you were drinking deep of a more intoxicating nectar," cried
Lady Mabel, with that provokingly distinct utterance of hers. She had
been taught to speak as carefully as girls of inferior rank are taught
to play Beethoven--every syllable studied, every tone trained and
ripened to the right quality. "You were with Violet Tempest."

"How you children quarrel!" exclaimed the Duchess; "you could hardly be
worse if you were lovers. Come here, Rorie, and tell me all that has
happened to you since we saw you at Lord's in July. Never mind these
Tempest people. They are of the smallest possible importance. Of
course, Rorie must have somebody to amuse himself with while we are
away."

"And now we are come back, he is off to Oxford," said Mabel with an
aggrieved air.

"You shouldn't have stayed so long in Switzerland then," retorted Rorie.

"Oh, but it was my first visit, and everything is so lovely. After all
the Swiss landscapes I have done in chalk, and pencil, and
water-colours, I was astonished to find what a stranger I was to the
scenery. I blushed when I remembered those dreadful landscapes of mine.
I was ashamed to look at Mont Blanc. I felt as if the Matterhorn would
fall and crush me."

"I think I shall do Switzerland next long," said Rorie patronisingly,
as if it would be a good thing for Switzerland.

"You might have come this year while we were there," said Lady Mabel.

"No, I mightn't. I've been grinding. If you knew what a dose of
Aristotle I've had, you'd pity me. That's where you girls have the best
of it. You learn to read a story-book in two or three modern languages,
to meander up and down the piano, and spoil Bristol board, or Whatman's
hot-pressed imperial, and then you call yourselves educated; while we
have to go back to the beginning of civilisation, and find out what a
lot of old Greek duffers were driving at when they sat in the sunshine
and prosed like old boots."

Lady Mabel looked at him with a serene smile.

"Would you be surprised to hear that I know a little Greek," she said,
"just enough to struggle through the Socratic dialogues with the aid of
my master?"

Roderick started as if he had been stung.

"What a shame!" he cried. "Aunt Sophia, what do you mean by making a
Lady Jane Grey or an Elizabeth Barrett Browning of her?"

"A woman who has to occupy a leading position can hardly know too
much," answered the Duchess sententiously.

"Ah, to be sure, Mabel will marry some diplomatic swell, and be
entertaining ambassadors by-and-by. And when some modern Greek envoy
comes simpering up to her with a remark about the weather, it will be
an advantage for her to know Plato. I understand. Wheels within wheels."

"The Duchess of Dovedale's carriage," announced the butler, rolling out
the syllables as if it were a personal gratification to announce them.

Mabel rose at once from the piano, and came to say good-night to her
aunt.

"My dear child, it's quite early," said Lady Jane; "Roderick's last
night, too. And your mamma is in no hurry."

Mabel looked at Roderick, but that young gentleman was airing himself
on the hearth-rug, and gazing absently up at the ceiling. It evidently
signified very little to him whether his aunt and cousin went or stayed.

"You know you told papa you would be home soon after ten," said Lady
Mabel, and the Duchess rose immediately.

She had a way of yielding to her only daughter which her
stronger-minded sister highly disapproved. The first duty of a mother,
in Lady Jane's opinion, was to rule her child, the second, to love it.
The idea was no doubt correct in the abstract; but the practice was not
succeeding too well with Roderick.

"Good-night and good-bye," said Lady Mabel, when the maid had brought
her wraps, and Rorie had put them on.

"Not good-bye," said the good-natured Duchess; "Rorie must come to
breakfast to-morrow, and see the Duke. He has just bought some
wonderful short-horns, and I am sure he would like to show them to you,
Rorie, because you can appreciate them. He was too tired to come out
to-night, but I know he wants to see you."

"Thanks, I'll be there," answered Rorie, and he escorted the ladies to
their carriage; but not another word did Mabel speak till the brougham
had driven away from Briarwood.

"What a horrid young man Roderick has grown, mamma!" she remarked
decisively, when they were outside the park-gates.

"My love, I never saw him look handsomer."

"I don't mean his looks. Good looks in a man are a superfluity. But his
manners--I never saw anything so underbred. Those Tempest people are
spoiling him."


"Roderick," said Lady Jane, just as Rorie was contemplating an escape
to the billiard-room and his cigar, "I want a little serious talk with
you."

Rorie shivered in his shoes. He knew too well what his mother's serious
talk meant. He shrugged his shoulders with a movement that indicated a
dormant resistance, and went quietly into the drawing-room.



CHAPTER IV.

Rorie comes of Age.

"Bless my soul!" cried the Squire; "it's a vixen, after all."

This is how Squire Tempest greeted the family doctor's announcement of
the his baby's sex. He had been particularly anxious for a son to
inherit the Abbey House estate, succeed to his father's dignities as
master of the fox-hounds, and in a general way sustain the pride and
glory of the family name; and, behold! Providence had given him a
daughter.

"The deuce is in it," ejaculated the Squire; "to think that it should
be a vixen!"

This is how Violet Tempest came by her curious pet name. Before she was
short-coated, she had contrived to exhibit a very spirited, and even
vixenish temper, and the family doctor, who loved a small joke, used to
ask after Miss Vixen when he paid his professional visits. As she grew
older, her tawny hair was not unlike a red fox's brush in its bright
golden-brown hue, and her temper proved decidedly vixenish.

"I wish you wouldn't call Violet by that dreadful nickname, dear," Mrs.
Tempest remonstrated mildly.

"My darling, it suits her to a nicety," replied the Squire, and he took
his own way in this as in most things.

The earth rolled round, and the revolving years brought no second baby
to the Abbey House. Every year made the Squire fonder of his little
golden-haired girl. He put her on a soft white ball of a pony as soon
as she could sit up straight, and took her about the Forest with a
leading-rein. No one else was allowed to teach Vixen to ride. Young as
she was, she soon learnt to do without the leading-rein, and the gentle
white pony was discarded as too quiet for little Miss Tempest. Before
her eleventh birthday she rode to hounds, rose before the sun to hunt
the young fox-cubs in early autumn, and saw the stag at bay on the wild
heathery downs above the wooded valleys that sink and fall below
Boldrewood with almost Alpine grandeur. She was a creature full of
life, and courage, and generous impulses, and spontaneous leanings to
all good thoughts; but she was a spoiled child, liked her own way, and
had no idea of being guided by anybody else's will--unless it had been
her father's, and he never thwarted her.

Him she adored with the fondest love that child ever gave to parent: a
blind worshipping love, that saw in him the perfection of manhood, the
beginning and end of earthly good. If anyone had dared to say in
Vixen's hearing that her father could, by any possible combination of
circumstances, do wrong, act unjustly, or ungenerously, it would have
been better for that man to have come to handy grips with a tiger-cat
than with Violet Tempest. Her reverence for her father, and her belief
in him, were boundless.

There never, perhaps, was a happier childhood than Violet's. She was
daughter and heiress to one of the most popular men in that part of the
country, and everybody loved her. She was not much given to visiting in
a methodical way among the poor, and it had never entered into her
young mind that it was her mission to teach older people the way to
heaven; but if there was trouble in the village--a sick child, a
husband in prison for rabbit snaring, a dead baby, a little boy's
pinafore set fire--Vixen and her pony were always to the fore; and it
was an axiom in the village that, where Miss Tempest did "take," it was
very good for those she took to. Violet never withdrew her hand when
she had put it to the plough. If she made a promise, she always kept
it. However long the sickness, however dire the poverty, Vixen's
patience and benevolence lasted to the end.

The famous princess in the story, whose sleep was broken because there
was a pea under her seven feather-beds, had scarcely a more untroubled
life than Vixen. She had her own way in everything. She did exactly
what she liked with her comfortable, middle-aged governess, Miss
McCroke, learnt what she pleased, and left what she disliked unlearned.
She had the prettiest ponies in Hampshire to ride, the prettiest
dresses to wear. Her mother was not a woman to bestow mental culture
upon her only child, but she racked her small brain to devise becoming
costumes for Violet: the coloured stockings which harmonised best with
each particular gown, the neat little buckled shoes, the fascinating
Hessian boots. Nothing was too beautiful or too costly for Violet. She
was the one thing her parents possessed in the world, and they lavished
much love upon her; but it never occurred to Mr. and Mrs. Tempest, as
it had occurred to the Duchess of Dovedale--to make their daughter a
paragon.

In this perpetual sunshine Violet grew up, fair as most things are that
grow in the sunshine. She loved her father with all her heart, and
mind, and soul; she loved her mother with a lesser love; she had a
tolerant affection for Miss McCroke; she loved her ponies, and the dog
Argus; she loved the hounds in the kennels; she loved every honest
familiar face of nurse, servant, and stable-man, gardener, keeper, and
huntsman, that had looked upon her with friendly, admiring eyes, ever
since she could remember.

Not to be loved and admired would have been the strangest thing to
Violet. She would hardly have recognised herself in an unappreciative
circle. If she could have heard Lady Mabel talking about her, it would
have been like the sudden revelation of an unknown world--a world in
which it was possible for people to dislike and misjudge her.

This is one of the disadvantages of being reared in a little heaven of
domestic love. The outside world seems so hard, and black, and dreary
afterwards, and the inhabitants thereof passing cruel.

Miss Tempest looked upon Roderick Vawdrey as her own particular
property--a person whom she had the right to order about as she
pleased. Rorie had been her playfellow and companion in his
holiday-time for the last five years. All their tastes were in common.
They had the same love for the brute creation, the same wild delight in
rushing madly through the air on the backs of unreasoning animals;
widely different in their tastes from Lady Mabel, who had once been run
away with in a pony-carriage, and looked upon all horses as incipient
murderers. They had the same love of nature, and the same indifference
to books, and the same careless scorn of all the state and ceremony of
life.

Vixen was "rising fifteen," as her father called it, and Rorie was just
five years her senior. The Squire saw them gay and happy together,
without one serious thought of what might come of their childish
friendship in the growth of years. That his Vixen could ever care for
anyone but her "old dad," was a notion that had not yet found its way
into the Squire's brain. She seemed to him quite as much his own
property, his own to do what he liked with, singly and simply attached
to him, as his favourite horse or his favourite dog. So there were no
shadowings forth in the paternal mind as to any growth and development
which the mutual affection of these two young people might take in the
future.

It was very different with Lady Jane Vawdrey, who never saw her son and
his cousin Mabel together without telling herself how exactly they were
suited to each other, and what a nice thing it would be for the
Briarwood and Ashbourne estates to be united by their marriage.

Rorie went back to college, and contrived to struggle through his next
examinations with an avoidance of actual discredit; but when Christmas
came he did not return to the Forest, though Violet had counted on his
coming, and had thought that it would be good fun to have his help in
the decorations for the little Gothic church in the valley--a pretty
little new church, like a toy, which the Squire had built and paid for,
and endowed with a perpetual seventy pounds a year out of his own
pocket. It would have been fun to see poor Rorie prick his clumsy
fingers with the holly. Vixen laughed at his awkwardness in advance,
when she talked to Miss McCroke about him, and drew upon herself that
lady's mild reproval.

But Christmas came and brought no Rorie. He had gone off to spend his
Christmas at the Duke of Dovedale's Scotch castle. Easter came, and
still no Rorie. He was at Putney, with the 'Varsity crew, or in London
with the Dovedales, riding in the Row, and forgetting dear old
Hampshire and the last of the hunting, for which he would have been
just in time.

Even the long vacation came without Rorie. He had gone for that
promised tour in Switzerland, at his mother's instigation, and was only
to come back late in the year to keep his twenty-first birthday, which
was to be honoured in a very subdued and unhilarious fashion at
Briarwood.

"Mamma," said Violet, at breakfast-time one August morning, with her
nose scornfully tilted, "what is Mr. Vawdrey like--dark or fair?"

"Why Violet, you can't have forgotten him," protested her mother, with
languid astonishment.

"I think he has been away long enough for me to forget even the colour
of his hair, mamma; and as he hasn't written to anybody, we may fairly
suppose he has forgotten us."

"Vixen misses her old playfellow," said the Squire, busy with the
demolition of a grouse. "But Rorie is a young man now, you know, dear,
and has work to do in the world--duties, my pet--duties."

"And is a young man's first duty to forget his old friends?" inquired
Vixen naively.

"My pet, you can't expect a lad of that kind to write letters. I am a
deuced bad hand at letter-writing myself, and always was. I don't think
a man's hand was ever made to pinch a pen. Nature has given us a broad
strong grasp, to grip a sword or a gun. Your mother writes most of my
letters, Vixen, you know, and I shall expect you to help her in a year
or two. Let me see; Rorie will be one-and-twenty in October, and there
are to be high jinks at Briarwood, I believe, so there's something for
you to look forward to, my dear."

"Edward!" exclaimed Mrs. Tempest reproachfully; "you forget that Violet
is not out. She will not be sixteen till next February."

"Bless her!" cried the Squire, with a tender look at his only child,
"she has grown up like a green bay-tree. But if this were to be quite a
friendly affair at Briarwood, she might go, surely."

"It will not be a friendly affair," said Mrs. Tempest; "Lady Jane never
gives friendly parties. There is nothing friendly in her nature, and I
don't think she likes us--much. But I daresay we shall be asked, and if
we go I must have a new dress," added the gentle lady with a sigh of
resignation. "It will be a dinner, no doubt; and the Duke and Duchess
will be there, of course."

The card of invitation came in due course, three weeks before the
birthday. It was to be a dinner, as Mrs. Tempest had opined. She wrote
off to her milliner at once, and there was a passage of letters and
fashion-plates and patterns of silk to and fro, and some of Mrs.
Tempest's finest lace came out of the perfumed chest in which she kept
her treasures, and was sent off to Madame Theodore.

Poor Vixen beheld these preparations with an aching heart. She did not
care about dinner-parties in the least, but she would have liked to be
with Roderick on his birthday. She would have liked it to have been a
hunting-day, and to have ridden for a wild scamper across the hills
with him--to have seen the rolling downs of the Wight blue in the
distance--to have felt the soft south wind blowing in her face, and to
have ridden by his side, neck and neck, all day long; and then to have
gone home to the Abbey House to dinner, to the snug round table in the
library, and the dogs, and papa in his happiest mood, expanding over
his port and walnuts. That would have been a happy birthday for all of
them, in Violet's opinion.

The Squire and his daughter had plenty of hunting in this merry month
of October, but there had been no sign of Rorie and his big raking
chestnut in the field, nor had anyone in the Forest heard of or seen
the young Oxonian.

"I daresay he is only coming home in time for the birthday," Mrs.
Tempest remarked placidly, and went on with her preparations for that
event.

She wanted to make a strong impression on the Duchess, who had not
behaved too well to her, only sending her invitations for
indiscriminate afternoon assemblies, which Mrs. Tempest had graciously
declined, pleading her feeble health as a reason for not going to
garden-parties.

Vixen was in a peculiar temper during those three weeks, and poor Miss
McCroke had hard work with her.

"_Der_, _die_, _das_," cried Vixen, throwing down her German grammar in
a rage one morning, when she had been making a muddle of the definite
article in her exercise, and the patient governess had declared that
they really must go back to the very beginning of things. "What stupid
people the Germans are! Why can't they have one little word for
everything, as we have? T, h, e, the. Any child can learn that. What do
they mean by chopping up their language into little bits, like the
pieces in a puzzle? Why, even the French are more reasonable--though
they're bad enough, goodness knows, with their hes and shes--feminine
tables, and masculine beds. Why should I be bothered to learn all this
rubbish? I'm not going to be a governess, and it will never be any use
to me. Papa doesn't know a single sentence in French or German, and
he's quite happy."

"But if your papa were travelling on the Continent, Violet, he would
find his ignorance of the language a great deprivation."

"No, he wouldn't. He'd have a courier."

"Are you aware, my dear, that we have wasted five minutes already in
this discursive conversation?" remarked Miss McCroke, looking at a fat
useful watch, which she wore at her side in the good old fashion. "We
will leave the grammar for the present, and you can repeat Schiller's
Song of the Bell."

"I'd rather say the Fight with the Dragon," said Vixen; "there's more
fire and life in it. I do like Schiller, Crokey dear. But isn't it a
pity he didn't write it in English?"

And Vixen put her hands behind her, and began to recite the wonderful
story of the knight who slew the dragon, and very soon her eyes kindled
and her cheeks were aflame, and the grand verses were rolled out
rapidly, with a more or less faulty pronunciation, but plenty of life
and vehemence. This exercise of mind and memory suited Vixen a great
deal better than dull plodding at the first principles of grammar, and
the perpetual _der_, _die_, _das_.

This day was the last of October, and Roderick Vawdrey's birthday. He
had not been seen at the Abbey House yet. He had returned to Briarwood
before this, no doubt, but had not taken the trouble to come and see
his old friends.

"He's a man now, and has duties, and has done with us," thought Vixen
savagely.

She was very glad that it was such a wretched day--a hideous day for
anyone's twenty-first birthday, ominous of all bad things, she thought.
There was not a rift in the dull gray sky; the straight fine rain came
down persistently, soaking into the sodden earth, and sending up an
odour of dead leaves. The smooth shining laurels in the shrubbery were
the only things in nature that seemed no worse for the perpetual
downpour. The gravel drives were spongy and sloppy. There was no
hunting, or Vixen would have been riding her pony through rain and foul
weather, and would have been comparatively independent of the elements.
But to be at home all day, watching the rain, and thinking what a
horrid, ungrateful young man Rorie was! That was dreary.

Mrs. Tempest went to her room to lie down directly after luncheon. She
wanted to keep herself fresh for the evening. She made quite a solemn
business of this particular dinner-party. At five precisely, Pauline
was to bring her a cup of tea. At half-past five she was to begin to
dress. This would give her an hour and a half for her toilet, as
Briarwood was only half-an-hour's drive from the Abbey House. So for
the rest of that day--until she burst upon their astonished view in her
new gown--Mrs. Tempest would be invisible to her family.

"What a disgusting birthday!" cried Vixen, sitting in the deep
embrasure of the hall window, with Argus at her side, dog and girl
looking out at the glistening shrubbery.

Miss McCroke had gone to her room to write letters, or Vixen would have
hardly been allowed to remain peacefully in such an inelegant position,
her knees drawn up to her chin, her arms embracing her legs, her back
against the stout oak shutter. Yet the girl and dog made rather a
pretty picture, despite the inelegance of Vixen's attitude. The tawny
hair, black velvet frock, and careless amber sash, amber stockings, and
broad-toed Cromwell shoes; the tawny mastiff curled in the opposite
corner of the deep recess; the old armorial bearings, sending pale
shafts of parti-coloured light across Vixen's young head;--these things
made a picture full framed of light and colour, in the dark brown oak.

"What an abominable birthday!" ejaculated Vixen; "if it were such
weather as this on my twenty-first birthday, I should think Nature had
taken a dislike to me. But I don't suppose Rorie cares. He is playing
billiards with a lot of his friends, and smoking, and making a horror
of himself, I daresay, and hardly knows whether it rains or shines."

Drip, drip, drip, came the rain on the glistening leaves, berberis and
laurel, bay and holly, American oaks of richest red and bronze, copper
beeches, tall rhododendrons, cypress of every kind, and behind them a
dense black screen of yew. The late roses looked miserable. Vixen would
have liked to have brought them in and put them by the hall fire--the
good old hearth with its pile of blazing logs, before which Nip the
pointer was stretched at ease, his muscular toes stiffening themselves
occasionally, as if he was standing at a bird in his dreams.

Vixen went on watching the rain. It was rather a lazy way of spending
the afternoon certainly, but Miss Tempest was out of humour with her
little world, and did not feel equal to groping out the difficulties,
the inexorable double sharps and odious double flats, in a waltz of
Chopin's. She watched the straight thin rain, and thought about
Rorie--chiefly to the effect that she hated him, and never could, by
any possibility, like him again.

Gradually the trickle of the rain from an overflowing waterpipe took
the sound of a tune. No _berceuse_ by Gounod was ever more
rest-compelling. The full white lids drooped over the big brown eyes,
the little locked hands loosened, the soft round chin fell forward on
the knees; Argus gave a snort of satisfaction, and laid his heavy head
on the velvet gown. Girl and dog were asleep. There was no sound in the
wide old hall except the soft falling of wood ashes, the gentle
breathing of girl and dogs.

Too pretty a picture assuredly to be lost to the eye of mankind.

Whose footstep was this sounding on the wet gravel half-an-hour later?
Too quick and light for the Squire's. Who was this coming in softly out
of the rain, all dripping like a water god? Who was this whose falcon
eye took in the picture at a glance, and who stole cat-like to the
window, and bending down his dark wet head, gave Violet's sleeping lips
the first lover's kiss that had ever saluted them?

Violet awoke with a faint shiver of surprise and joy. Instinct told her
from whom that kiss came, though it was the first time Roderick had
kissed her since he went to Eton. The lovely brown eyes opened and
looked into the dark gray ones. The ruddy brown head rested on Rorie's
shoulder. The girl--half child, half woman, and all loving
trustfulness, looked up at him with a glad smile. His heart was stirred
with a new feeling as those softly bright eyes looked into his. It was
the early dawn of a passionate love. The head lying on his breast
seemed to him the fairest thing on earth.

"Rorie, how disgracefully you have behaved, and how utterly I detest
you!" exclaimed Vixen, giving him a vigorous push, and scrambling down
from the window-seat. "To be all this time in Hampshire and never come
near us."

A moment ago, in that first instant of a newly awakened delight, she
was almost betrayed into telling him that she loved him dearly, and had
found life empty without him. But having had just time enough to
recover herself, she drew herself up as straight as a dart, and looked
at him as Kate may have looked at Petruchio during their first
unpleasant interview in which they made each other's acquaintance.

"All this time!" cried Rorie. "Do you know how long I have been in
Hampshire?"

"Haven't the least idea," retorted Vixen haughtily.

"Just half-an-hour--or, at least it is exactly half-an-hour since I was
deposited with all my goods and chattels at the Lyndhurst Road Station."

"You are only just home from Switzerland?"

"Within this hour!"

"And you have not even been to Briarwood?"

"My honoured mother still awaits my duteous greetings."

"And this is your twenty-first birthday, and you came here first of
all."

And, almost uninvited, the tawny head dropped on to his shoulder again,
and the sweet childish lips allowed themselves to be kissed.

"Rorie, how brown you have grown.'"

"Have I!"

The gray eyes were looking into the brown ones admiringly, and the
conversation was getting a trifle desultory.

Swift as a flash Violet recollected herself. It dawned upon her that it
was not quite the right thing for a young lady "rising sixteen" to let
herself be kissed so tamely. Besides, Rorie never used to do it. The
thing was a new development, a curious outcome of his Swiss tour.
Perhaps people did it in Switzerland, and Rorie had acquired the habit.

"How dare you do such a thing?" exclaimed Vixen, shaking herself free
from the traveller's encircling arm.

"I didn't think you minded," said Rorie innocently; "and when a fellow
comes home from a long journey he expects a warm welcome!"

"And I am glad to see you," cried Vixen, giving him both her hands with
a glorious frankness; "but you don't know how I have been hating you
lately."

"Why, Vixen?"

"For being always away. I thought you had forgotten us all--that you
did not care a jot for any of us."

"I had not forgotten any of you, and I did care--very much--for some of
you."

This, though vague, was consoling.

The brown became Roderick. Dark of visage always, he was now tanned to
a bronze as of one born under southern skies. Those deep gray eyes of
his looked black under their black lashes. His black hair was cut close
to his well-shaped head. An incipient moustache shaded his upper lip,
and gave manhood to the strong, firm mouth. A manly face altogether,
Roderick's, and handsome withal. Vixen's short life had shown her none
handsomer.

He was tall and strongly built, with a frame that had been developed by
many an athletic exercise--from throwing the hammer to pugilism. Vixen
thought him the image of Richard Coeur de Lion. She had been reading
"The Talisman" lately, and the Plantagenet was her ideal of manly
excellence.

"Many happy returns of the day, Rorie," she said softly. "To think that
you are of age to-day. Your own master."

"Yes, my infancy ceased and determined at the last stroke of midnight
yesterday. I wonder whether my anxious mother will recognise that fact?"

"Of course you know what is going to happen at Briarwood. There is to
be a grand dinner-party."

"And you are coming? How jolly!"

"Oh, no, Rorie. I am not out yet, you know. I shan't be for two years.
Papa means to give me a season in town. He calls it having me broken to
harness. He'll take a furnished house, and we shall have the horses up,
and I shall ride in the Row, You'll be with us part of the time, won't
you, Rorie?"

"_Ca se peut_. If papa will invite me."

"Oh, he will, if I wish it. It's to be my first season, you know, and
I'm to have everything my own way."

"Will that be a novelty?" demanded Roderick, with intention.

"I don't know. I haven't had my own way in anything lately."

"How is that?"

"You have been away."

At this naive flattery, Roderick almost blushed.

"How you've grown. Vixen," he remarked presently.

"Have I really? Yes, I suppose I do grow. My frocks are always getting
too short."

"Like the sleeves of my dress-coats a year or two ago."

"But now you are of age, and can't grow any more. What are you going to
be, Rorie? What are you going to do with your liberty? Are you going
into Parliament?"

Mr. Vawdrey indulged in a suppressed yawn.

"My mother would like it," he said, "but upon my word I don't care
about it. I don't take enough interest in my fellow-creatures."

"If they were foxes, you'd be anxious to legislate for them," suggested
Vixen.

"I would certainly try to protect them from indiscriminate slaughter.
And in fact, when one considers the looseness of existing game-laws, I
think every country gentleman ought to be in Parliament."

"And there is the Forest for you to take care of."

"Yes, forestry is a subject on which I should like to have my say. I
suppose I shall be obliged to turn senator. But I mean to take life
easily--you may be sure of that, Vixen; and I intend to have the best
stud of hunters in Hampshire. And now I think I must be off."

"No, you mustn't," cried Violet. "The dinner is not till eight. If you
leave here at six you will have no end of time for getting home to
dress. How did you come?"

"On these two legs."

"You shall have four to take you to Briarwood. West shall drive you
home in papa's dog-cart, with the new mare. You don't know her, do you?
Papa only bought her last spring. She is such a beauty, and
goes--goes--oh, like a skyrocket. She bolts occasionally; but you don't
mind that, do you?"

"Not in the least. It would be rather romantic to be smashed on one's
twenty-first birthday. Will you tell them to order West to get ready at
once."

"Oh, but you are to stop to tea with Miss McCroke and me--that's part
of our bargain. No kettledrum, no Starlight Bess! And you'd scarcely
care about walking to Briarwood under such rain as that!"

"So be it, then; kettledrum and Starlight Bess, at any hazard of
maternal wrath. But really now I'm doing a most ungentlemanly thing,
Vixen, to oblige you!"

"Always be ungentlemanly then for my sake--if it's ungentlemanly to
come and see me," said Vixen coaxingly.

They were standing side by side in the big window looking out at the
straight thin rain. The two pairs of lips were not very far away from
each other, and Rorie might have been tempted to commit a third offence
against the proprieties, if Miss McCroke had not fortunately entered at
this very moment. She was wonderfully surprised at seeing Mr. Vawdrey,
congratulated him ceremoniously upon his majority, and infused an
element of stiffness into the small assembly.

"Rorie is going to stay to tea," said Vixen. "We'll have it here by the
fire, please, Crokey dear. One can't have too much of a good fire this
weather. Or shall we go to my den? Which would you like best, Rorie?"

"I think we had better have tea here, Violet," interjected Miss
McCroke, ringing the bell.

Her pupil's _sanctum sanctorum_--that pretty up-stairs room, half
schoolroom, half boudoir, and wholly untidy--was not, in Miss McCroke's
opinion, an apartment to be violated by the presence of a young man.

"And as Rory hasn't had any luncheon, and has come ever so far out of
his way to see me, please order something substantial for him," said
Vixen.

Her governess obeyed. The gipsy table was wheeled up to the broad
hearth, and presently the old silver tea-pot and kettle, and the yellow
cups and saucers, were shining in the cheery firelight. The old butler
put a sirloin and a game-pie on the sideboard, and then left the little
party to shift for themselves, in pleasant picnic fashion.

Vixen sat down before the hissing tea-kettle with a pretty important
air, like a child making tea out of toy tea-things. Rorie brought a low
square stool to a corner close to her, and seated himself with his chin
a little above the tea-table.

"You can't eat roast beef in that position," said Vixen.

"Oh yes I can--I can do anything that's mad or merry this evening. But
I'm not at all sure that I want beef, though it is nearly three months
since I've seen an honest bit of ox beef. I think thin bread and
butter--or roses and dew even--quite substantial enough for me this
evening."

"You're afraid of spoiling your appetite for the grand dinner," said
Vixen.

"No, I'm not. I hate grand dinners. Fancy making a fine art of eating,
and studying one's _menu_ beforehand to see what combination of dishes
will harmonise best with one's internal economy. And then the names of
the things are always better than the things themselves. It's like a
show at a fair, all the best outside. Give me a slice of English beef
or mutton, and a bird that my gun has shot, and let all the fine-art
dinners go hang."

"Cut him a slice of beef, dear Miss McCroke," said Vixen.

"Not now, thanks; I can't eat now. I'm going to drink orange pekoe."

Argus had taken up his position between Violet and her visitor. He sat
bolt upright, like a sentinel keeping guard over his mistress; save
that a human sentinel, unless idiotic or intoxicated, would hardly sit
with jaws wide apart, and his tongue hanging out of one side of his
mouth, as Argus did. But this lolloping attitude of the canine tongue
was supposed to indicate a mind at peace with creation.

"Are you very glad to come of age, Rorie?" asked Vixen, turning her
bright brown eyes upon him, full of curiosity.

"Well, it will be rather nice to have as much money as I want without
asking my mother for it. She was my only guardian, you know. My father
had such confidence in her rectitude and capacity that he left
everything in her hands."

"Do you find Briarwood much improved?" inquired Miss McCroke.

Lady Jane had been doing a good deal to her orchid-houses lately.

"I haven't found Briarwood at all yet," answered Rorie, "and Vixen
seems determined I shan't find it."

"What, have you only just returned?"

"Only just,"

"And you have not seen Lady Jane yet?" exclaimed Miss McCroke with a
horrified look.

"It sounds rather undutiful, doesn't it? I was awfully tired, after
travelling all night; and I made this a kind of halfway house."

"Two sides of a triangle are invariably longer than any one side,"
remarked Vixen, gravely. "At least that's what Miss McCroke has taught
me."

"It was rather out of my way, of course. But I wanted to see whether
Vixen had grown. And I wanted to see the Squire."

"Papa has gone to Ringwood to look at a horse; but you'll see him at
the grand dinner. He'll be coming home to dress presently."

"I hope you had an agreeable tour, Mr. Vawdrey?" said Miss McCroke.

"Oh, uncommonly jolly."

"And you like Switzerland?"

"Yes; it's nice and hilly."

And then Roderick favoured them with a sketch of his travels, while
they sipped their tea, and while Vixen made the dogs balance pieces of
cake on their big blunt noses.

It was all very nice--the Tete Noire, and Mont Blanc, and the
Matterhorn. Rorie jumbled them all together, without the least regard
to geography. He had done a good deal of climbing, had worn out and
lost dozens of alpenstocks, and had brought home a case of Swiss carved
work for his friends.

"There's a clock for your den, Vixen--I shall bring it to-morrow--with
a little cock-robin that comes out of his nest and sings--no end of
jolly."

"How lovely!" cried Violet.

The tall eight-day clock in a corner of the hall chimed the half-hour.

"Half-past five, and Starlight Bess not ordered," exclaimed Roderick.

"Let's go out to the stables and see about her," suggested Vixen. "And
then I can show you my pony. You remember Titmouse, the one that
_would_ jump?"

"Violet!" ejaculated the aggrieved governess. "Do you suppose I would
permit you to go out of doors in such weather?"

"Do you think it's still raining?" asked Vixen innocently. "It may have
cleared up. Well, we'd better order the cart," she added meekly, as she
rang the bell. "I'm not of age yet, you see, Rorie. Please, Peters,
tell West to get papa's dog-cart ready for Mr. Vawdrey, and to drive
Starlight Bess."

Rorie looked at the bright face admiringly. The shadows had deepened;
there was no light in the great oak-panelled room except the ruddy
fire-glow, and in this light Violet Tempest looked her loveliest. The
figures in the tapestry seemed to move in the flickering
light--appeared and vanished, vanished and appeared, like the phantoms
of a dream. The carved bosses of the ceiling were reflected grotesquely
on the oaken wall above the tapestry. The stags' heads had a goblin
look. It was like a scene of enchantment, and Violet, in her black
frock and amber sash, looked like the enchantress--Circe, Vivien,
Melusine, or somebody of equally dubious antecedents.

It was Miss McCroke's sleepiest hour. Orange pekoe, which has an
awakening influence upon most people, acted as an opiate upon her. She
sat blinking owlishly at the two young figures.

Rorie roused himself with a great effort.

"Unless Starlight Bess spins me along the road pretty quickly, I shall
hardly get to Briarwood by dinner-time," he said; "and upon my honour,
I don't feel the least inclination to go."

"Oh, what fun if you were absent at your coming-of-age dinner!" cried
Vixen, with her brown eyes dancing mischievously. "They would have to
put an empty chair for you, like Banquo's."

"It would be a lark," acquiesced Rorie, "but it wouldn't do; I should
hear too much about it afterwards. A fellow's mother has some kind of
claim upon him, you know. Now for Starlight Bess."

They went into the vestibule, and Rorie opened the door, letting in a
gust of wind and rain, and the scent of autumn's last ill-used flowers.

"Oh, I so nearly forgot," said Violet, as they stood on the threshold,
side by side, waiting for the dog-cart to appear. "I've got a little
present for you--quite a humble one for a grand young land-owner like
you--but I never could save much of my pocket-money; there are so many
poor children always having scarlet-fever, or tumbling into the fire,
or drinking out of boiling tea-kettles. But here it is, Rorie. I hope
you won't hate it very much."

She put a little square packet into his hand, which he proceeded
instantly to open.

"I shall love it, whatever it is."

"It's a portrait."

"You darling! The very thing I should have asked for."

"The portrait of someone you're fond of."

"Someone I adore," said Rorie.

He had extracted the locket from its box by this time. It was a thick
oblong locket of dead gold, plain and massive; the handsomest of its
kind that a Southampton jeweller could supply.

Rorie opened it eagerly, to look at the portrait.

There was just light enough from the newly-kindled vestibule lamp to
show it to him.

"Why it's a dog," cried Rorie, with deep-toned disgust. "It's old
Argus."

"Who did you think it was?"

"You, of course."

"What an idea! As if I should give anyone my portrait. I knew you were
fond of Argus. Doesn't his head come out beautifully? The photographer
said he was the best sitter he had had for ever so long. I hope you
don't quite detest the locket, Rorie."

"I admire it intensely, and I'm deeply grateful. But I feel
inexpressibly sold, all the same. And I am to go about the world with
Argus dangling at my breast. Well, for your sake, Vixen, I'll submit
even to that degradation."

Here came the cart, with two flaming lamps, like angry eyes flashing
through the shrubberies. It pulled up at the steps. Rorie and Vixen
clasped hands and bade good-night, and then the young man swung himself
lightly into the seat beside the driver, and away went Starlight Bess
making just that sort of dashing and spirited start which inspires the
timorous beholder with the idea that the next proceeding will be the
bringing home of the driver and his companion upon a brace of shutters.



CHAPTER V.

Rorie makes a Speech.

Somewhat to his surprise, and much to his delight, Roderick Vawdrey
escaped that maternal lecture which he was wont undutifully to describe
as a "wigging." When he entered the drawing-room in full dress just
about ten minutes before the first of the guests was announced, Lady
Jane received him with a calm affectionateness, and asked him no
questions about his disposal of the afternoon. Perhaps this unusual
clemency was in honour of his twenty-first birthday, Rorie thought. A
man could not come of age more than once in his life. He was entitled
to some favour.

The dinner-party was as other dinners at Briarwood; all the
arrangements perfect; the _menu_ commendable, if not new; the general
result a little dull.

The Ashbourne party were among the first to arrive; the Duke portly and
affable; the Duchess delighted to welcome her favourite nephew; Lady
Mabel looking very fragile, flower-like, and graceful, in her pale blue
gauze dinner-dress. Lady Mabel affected the palest tints, half-colours,
which were more like the shadows in a sunset sky than any earthly hues.

She took possession of Rorie at once, treating him with a calm
superiority, as if he had been a younger brother.

"Tell me all about Switzerland," she said, as they sat side by side on
one of the amber ottomans. "What was it that you liked best?"

"The climbing, of course," he answered.

"But which of all the landscapes? What struck you most? What impressed
you most vividly? Your first view of Mont Blanc, or that marvellous
gorge below the Tete Noire,--or----?"

"It was all uncommonly jolly. But there's a family resemblance in Swiss
mountains, don't you know? They're all white--and they're all peaky.
There's a likeness in Swiss lakes, too, if you come to think of it.
They're all blue, and they're all wet. And Swiss villages, now--don't
you think they are rather disappointing?--such a cruel plagiarism of
those plaster chalets the image-men carry about the London streets, and
no candle-ends burning inside to make 'em look pretty. But I liked
Lucerne uncommonly, there was such a capital billiard-table at the
hotel."

"Roderick!" cried Lady Mabel, with a disgusted look. "I don't think you
have a vestige of poetry in your nature."

"I hope I haven't," replied Rorie devoutly.

"You could see those sublime scenes, and never once feel your heart
thrilled or your mind exalted--you can come home from your first Swiss
tour and talk about billiard-tables!"

"The scenery was very nice," said Rorie thoughtfully. "Yes; there were
times, perhaps, when I was a trifle stunned by all that grand calm
beauty, the silence, the solitude, the awfulness of it all; but I had
hardly time to feel the thrill when I came bump up against a party of
tourists, English or American, all talking the same twaddle, and all
patronising the scenery. That took the charm out of the landscape
somehow, and I coiled up, as the Yankees say. And now you want me to go
into second-hand raptures, and repeat my emotions, as if I were writing
a tourist's article for a magazine. I can't do it, Mabel."

"Well, I won't bore you any more about it," said Lady Mabel, "but I
confess my disappointment. I thought we should have such nice long
talks about Switzerland."

"What's the use of talking of a place? If it's so lovely that one can't
live without it, one had better go back there."

This was a practical way of putting things which was too much for Lady
Mabel. She fanned herself gently with a great fan of cloudy looking
feathers, such as Titania might have used that midsummer night near
Athens. She relapsed into a placid silence, looking at Rorie
thoughtfully with her calm blue eyes.

His travels had improved him. That bronze hue suited him wonderfully
well. He looked more manly. He was no longer a beardless boy, to be
patronised with that gracious elder-sister air of Lady Mabel's. She
felt that he was further off from her than he had been last season in
London.

"How late you arrived this evening," she said, after a pause. "I came
to five-o'clock with my aunt, and found her quite anxious about you. If
it hadn't been for your telegram from Southampton, she would have
fancied there was something wrong."

"She needn't have fidgeted herself after three o'clock," answered Rorie
coolly; "my luggage must have come home by that time."

"I see. You sent the luggage on before, and came by a later train?"

"No, I didn't. I stopped halfway between here and Lyndhurst to see some
old friends."

"Flattering for my aunt," said Mabel. "I should have thought she was
your oldest friend."

"Of course she has the prior claim. But as I was going to hand myself
over to her bodily at seven o'clock, to be speechified about and
rendered generally ridiculous, after the manner of young men who come
of age, I felt I was entitled to do what I liked in the interval."

"And therefore you went to the Tempests'," said Mabel, with her blue
eyes sparkling. "I see. That is what you do when you do what you like."

"Precisely. I am very fond of Squire Tempest. When I first rode to
hounds it was under his wing. There's my mother beckoning me; I am to
go and do the civil to people."

And Roderick walked away from the ottoman to the spot where his mother
stood, with the Duke of Dovedale at her side, receiving her guests.

"It was a very grand party, in the way of blue blood, landed estate,
diamonds, lace, satin and velvet, and self-importance. All the magnates
of the soil, within accessible distance of Briarwood, had assembled to
do honour to Rorie's coming of age. The dining-tables had been arranged
in a horse-shoe, so as to accommodate fifty people in a room which, in
its every-day condition, would not have been too large for thirty. The
orchids and ferns upon this horse-shoe table made the finest
floricultural show that had been seen for a long time. There were rare
specimens from New Granada and the Philippine Islands; wondrous flowers
lately discovered in the Sierra Madre; blossoms of every shape and
colour from the Cordilleras; richest varieties of hue--golden yellow,
glowing crimson, creamy white; rare eccentricities of form and colour
beside which any other flower would have looked vulgar; butterfly
flowers and pitcher-shaped flowers, that had cost as much money as
prize pigeons, and seemed as worthless, save to the connoisseur in the
article. The Vawdrey racing-plate, won by Roderick's grandfather, was
nowhere by comparison with those marvellous tropical blossoms, that
fairy forest of fern. Everybody talked about the orchids, confessed his
or her comparative ignorance of the subject, and complimented Lady Jane.

"The orchids made the hit of the evening," Rorie said afterwards. "It
was their coming of age, not mine."

There was a moderate and endurable amount of speechifying by-and-by,
when the monster double-crowned pines had been cut, and the purple
grapes, almost as big as pigeons' eggs, had gone round.

The Duke of Dovedale assured his friends that this was one of the
proudest moments of his life, and that if Providence had permitted a
son of his own to attain his majority, he, the Duke, could have hardly
felt a deeper interest in the occasion than he felt to-day. He
had--arra--arra--known this young man from childhood, and
had--er--um--never found him guilty of a mean
action--or--arra--discovered in him a thought unworthy of an English
gentleman.

This last was felt to be a strong point, as it implied that an English
gentleman must needs be much better than any other gentleman.

A continental gentleman might, of course, be guilty of an unworthy
thought and yet pass current, according to the loose morality of his
nation. But the English article must be flawless.

And thus the Duke meandered on for five minutes or so, and there was a
subdued gush of approval, and then an uncomfortable little pause, and
then Rorie rose in his place, next to the Duchess, and returned thanks.

He told them all how fond he was of them and the soil that bred them.
How he meant to be a Hampshire squire, pure and simple, if he could.
How he had no higher ambition than to be useful and to do good in this
little spot of England which Providence had given him for his
inheritance. How, if he should go into Parliament by-and-by, as he had
some thoughts of attempting to do, it would be in their interests that
he would join that noble body of legislators; that it would be they and
their benefit he would have always nearest his heart.

"There is not a tree in the Forest that I do not love," cried Rorie,
fired with his theme, and forgetting to stammer; "and I believe there
is not a tree, from the Twelve Apostles to the Knightwood Oak, or a
patch of gorse from Picket Post to Stony Cross, that I do not know as
well as I know the friends round me to-night. I was born in the Forest,
and may I live and die and be buried here. I have just come back from
seeing some of the finest scenery in Europe; yet, without blushing for
my want of poetry, I will confess that the awful grandeur of those
snow-clad mountains did not touch my heart so deeply as our beechen
glades and primrose-carpeted bottoms close at home." There was a burst
of applause after Rorie's speech that made all the orchids shiver, and
nearly annihilated a thirty-guinea _Odontoglossum Vexillarium_. His
talk about the Forest, irrelevant as it might be, went home to the
hearts of the neighbouring landowners. But, by-and-by, in the
drawing-room, when he rejoined his cousin, he found that fastidious
young lady by no means complimentary.

"Your speech would have been capital half a century ago, Rorie," she
said, "and you don't arra--arra--as poor papa does, which is something
to be thankful for; but all that talk about the Forest seemed to be an
anachronism. People are not rooted in their native soil nowadays, as
they used to be in the old stage-coach times, when it was a long day's
journey to London. One might as well be a vegetable at once if one is
to be pinned down to one particular spot of earth. Why, the Twelve
Apostles," exclaimed Mabel, innocent of irreverence, for she meant
certain ancient and fast-decaying oaks so named, "see as much of life
as your fine old English gentleman. Men have wider ideas nowadays. The
world is hardly big enough for their ambition."

"I would rather live in a field, and strike my roots deep down like one
of those trees, than be a homeless nomad with a world-wide ambition,"
answered Rorie. "I have a passion for home."

"Then I wonder you spend so little time in it."

"Oh, I don't mean a home inside four walls. The Forest is my home, and
Briarwood is no dearer to me than any other spot in it."

"Not so dear as the Abbey House, perhaps?"

"Well, no. I confess that fine old Tudor mansion pleases me better than
this abode of straight lines and French windows, plate glass and gilt
mouldings."

They sat side by side upon the amber ottoman, Rorie with Mabel's blue
feather fan in his hand, twirling and twisting it as he talked, and
doing more damage to that elegant article in a quarter of an hour than
a twelvemonth's legitimate usage would have done. People, looking at
the pretty pair, smiled significantly, and concluded that it would be a
match, and went home and told less privileged people about the evident
attachment between the Duke's daughter and the young commoner. But
Rorie was not strongly drawn towards his cousin this evening. It seemed
to him that she was growing more and more of a paragon; and he hated
paragons.

She played presently, and afterwards sang some French _chansons_. Both
playing and singing were perfect of their kind. Rorie did not
understand Chopin, and thought there was a good deal of unnecessary
hopping about the piano in that sort of thing--nothing concrete, or
that came to a focus; a succession of airy meanderings, a fairy dance
in the treble, a goblin hunt in the bass. But the French _chansons_,
the dainty little melodies with words of infantile innocence, all about
leaves and buds, and birds'-nests and butterflies, pleased him
infinitely. He hung over the piano with an enraptured air; and again
his friends made note of his subjugation, and registered the fact for
future discussion.



CHAPTER VI.

How she took the News.

It was past midnight when the Tempest carriage drove through the dark
rhododendron shrubberies up to the old Tudor porch. There was a great
pile of logs burning in the hall, giving the home-comers cheery
welcome. There was an antique silver spirit stand with its
accompaniments on one little table for the Squire, and there was
another little table on the opposite side of the hearth for Mrs.
Tempest, with a dainty tea-service sparkling and shining in the red
glow.

A glance at these arrangements would have told you that there were old
servants at the Abbey House, servants who knew their master's and
mistress's ways, and for whom service was more or less a labour of love.

"How nice," said the lady, with a contented sigh. "Pauline has thought
of my cup of tea."

"And Forbes has not forgotten my soda-water," remarked the Squire.

He said nothing about the brandy, which he was pouring into the tall
glass with a liberal hand.

Pauline came to take off her mistress's cloak, and was praised for her
thoughtfulness about the tea, and then dismissed for the night.

The Squire liked to stretch his legs before his own fireside after
dining out; and with the Squire, as with Mr. Squeers, the
leg-stretching process involved the leisurely consumption of a good
deal of brandy and water.

Mr. and Mrs. Tempest talked over the Briarwood dinner-party, and
arrived--with perfect good nature--at the conclusion that it had been a
failure.

"The dinner was excellent," said the Squire, "but the wine went round
too slow; my glasses were empty half the time. That's always the way
when you've a woman at the helm. She never fills her cellars properly,
or trusts her butler thoroughly."

"The dresses were lovely," said Mrs. Tempest, "but everyone looked
bored. How did you like my dress, Edward? I think it's rather good
style. Theodore will charge me horribly for it, I daresay."

"I don't know much about your dress, Pam, but you were the prettiest
woman in the room."

"Oh Edward, at my age!" exclaimed Mrs. Tempest, with a pleased look,
"when there was that lovely Lady Mabel Ashbourne."

"Do you call her lovely?--I don't. Lips too thin; waist too slim; too
much blood, and too little flesh."

"Oh, but surely, Edward, she is grace itself; quite an ethereal
creature. If Violet had more of that refined air----"

"Heaven forbid. Vixen is worth twenty such fine-drawn misses. Lady
Mabel has been spoiled by over-training."

"Roderick is evidently in love with her," suggested Mrs. Tempest,
pouring out another cup of tea.

The clocks had just struck two, the household was at rest, the logs
blazed and cracked merrily, the red light shining on those mail-clad
effigies in the corners, lighting up helm and hauberk, glancing on
greaves and gauntlets. It was an hour of repose and gossip which the
Squire dearly loved.

Hush! what is this creeping softly down the old oak staircase? A
slender white figure with cloudy hair; a small pale face, and two dark
eyes shining with excitement; little feet in black velvet slippers
tripping lightly upon the polished oak.

Is it a ghost? No; ghosts are noiseless, and those little slippers
descend from stair to stair with a gentle pit-a-pit.

"Bless my soul and body!" cried the Squire; "what's this?"

A gush of girlish laughter was his only answer.

"Vixen!"

"Did you take me for a ghost, papa?" cried Violet, descending the last
five stairs with a flying leap, and then, bounding across the hall to
perch, light as a bird, upon her father's knee. "Did I really frighten
you? Did you think the good old Abbey House was going to set up a
family ghost; a white lady, with a dismal history of a broken heart?
You darling papa! I hope you took me for a ghost!"

"Well, upon my word, you know, Vixen, I was just the least bit
staggered. Your little white figure looked like something uncanny
against the black oak balustrades, half in light, half in shadow."

"How nice!" exclaimed Violet.

"But, my dear Violet, what can have induced you to come downstairs at
such an hour?" ejaculated Mrs. Tempest in an aggrieved voice.

"I want to hear all about the party, mamma," answered Vixen coaxingly.
"Do you think I could sleep a wink on the night of Rorie's coming of
age? I heard the joy-bells ringing in my ears all night."

"That was very ridiculous." said Mrs. Tempest, "for there were no
joy-bells after eleven o'clock yesterday."

"But they rang all the same, mamma. It was no use burying my head in
the pillows; those bells only rang the louder. Ding-dong, ding-dong,
dell, Rorie's come of age; ding-dong, dell, Rorie's twenty-one. Then I
thought of the speeches that would be made, and I fancied I could hear
Rorie speaking. Did he make a good speech, papa?"

"Capital, Vix; the only one that was worth hearing!"

"I am so glad! And did he look handsome while he was speaking? I think
the Swiss sunshine has rather over-cooked him, you know; but he is not
unbecomingly brown."

"He looked as handsome a young fellow as you need wish to set eyes on."

"My dear Edward," remonstrated Mrs. Tempest, languidly, too thoroughly
contented with herself to be seriously vexed about anything, "do you
think it is quite wise of you to encourage Violet in that kind of talk?"

"Why should she not talk of him? She never had a brother, and he stands
in the place of one to her. Isn't Rorie the same to you as an elder
brother, Vix?"

The girl's head was on her father's shoulder, one slim arm round his
neck, her face hidden against the Squire's coat-collar. He could not
see the deep warm blush that dyed his daughter's cheek at this home
question.

"I don't quite know what an elder brother would be like, papa. But I'm
very fond of Rorie--when he's nice, and comes to see us before anyone
else, as he did to-day."

"And when he stays away?"

"Oh, then I hate him awfully," exclaimed Vixen, with such energy that
the slender figure trembled faintly as she spoke. "But tell me all
about the party, mamma. Your dress was quite the prettiest, I am sure?"

"I'm not certain of that, Violet," answered Mrs. Tempest with grave
deliberation, as if the question were far too serious to be answered
lightly. "There was a cream-coloured silk, with silver bullion fringe,
that was very striking. As a rule, I detest gold or silver trimmings;
but this was really elegant. It had an effect like moonlight."

"Was that Lady Mabel Ashbourne's dress?" asked Vixen eagerly.

"No; Lady Mabel wore blue gauze--the very palest blue, all puffings and
ruchings--like a cloud."

"Oh mamma! the clouds have no puffings and ruchings."

"My dear, I mean the general effect--a sort of shadowiness which suits
Lady Mabel's ethereal style."

"Ethereal!" repeated Violet thoughtfully; "you seem to admire her very
much, mamma."

"Everybody admires her, my dear."

"Because she is a duke's only daughter."

"No; because she is very lovely, and extremely elegant, and most
accomplished. She played and sang beautifully to-night."

"What did she play, mamma?"

"Chopin!"

"Did she!" cried Vixen. "Then I pity her. Yes, even if she were my
worst enemy I should still pity her."

"People who are fond of music don't mind difficulties," said Mrs.
Tempest.

"Don't they? Then I suppose I'm not fond of it, because I shirk my
practice. But I should be very fond of music if I could grind it on a
barrel organ."

"Oh, Violet, when will you be like Lady Mabel Ashbourne?"

"Never, I devoutly hope," said the Squire.

Here the Squire gave his daughter a hug which might mean anything.

"Never, mamma," answered Violet with conviction. "First and foremost, I
never can be lovely, because I have red hair and a wide mouth.
Secondly, I can never be elegant--much less ethereal--because it isn't
in me. Thirdly, I shall never be accomplished, for poor Miss McCroke is
always giving me up as the baddest lot in the shape of pupils that ever
came in her way."

"If you persist in talking in that horrible way, Violet----"

"Let her talk as she likes, Pam," said the fond father. "I won't have
her bitted too heavily."

Mrs. Tempest breathed a gentle sigh of resignation. The Squire was all
that is dear and good as husband and father, but refinement was out of
his line.

"Do go on about the party, mamma. Did Rorie seem to enjoy himself very
much----"

"I think so. He was very devoted to his cousin all the evening. I
believe they are engaged to be married."

"Mamma!" exclaimed Vixen, starting up from her reclining attitude upon
her father's shoulder, and looking intently at the speaker; "Rorie
engaged to Lady Mabel Ashbourne!"

"So I am told," replied Mrs. Tempest. "It will be a splendid match for
him."

The pretty chestnut head dropped back into its old place upon the
Squire's shoulder, and Violet answered never a word.

"Past two o'clock," cried her mother. "This is really too dreadful.
Come, Violet, you and I must go upstairs at any rate."

"We'll all go," said the Squire, finishing his second brandy and soda.

So they all three went upstairs together. Vixen had grown suddenly
silent and sleepy. She yawned dolefully, and kissed her mother and
father at the end of the gallery, without a word; and then scudded off,
swift as a scared rabbit, to her own room.

"God bless her!" exclaimed the Squire; "she grows prettier and more
winning every day."

"If her mouth were only a little smaller," sighed Mrs. Tempest.

"It's the prettiest mouth I ever saw upon woman--bar one," said the
Squire.

What was Vixen doing while the fond father was praising her?

She had locked her door, and thrown herself face downwards on the
carpet, and was sobbing as if her heart would break.

Rorie was going to be married. Her little kingdom had been overturned
by a revolution: her little world had crumbled all to pieces. Till
to-night she had been a queen in her own mind; and her kingdom had been
Rorie, her subjects had begun and ended in Rorie. All was over. He
belonged to some one else. She could never tyrannise over him
again--never scold him and abuse him and patronise him and ridicule him
any more. He was her Rorie no longer.

Had she ever thought that a time might come when he would be something
more to her than playfellow and friend? No, never. The young bright
mind was too childishly simple for any such foresight or calculation.
She had only thought that he was in somewise her property, and would be
so till the end of both their lives. He was hers, and he was very fond
of her, and she thought him a rather absurd young fellow, and looked
down upon him with airs of ineffable superiority from the altitude of
her childish womanliness.

And now he was gone. The earth had opened all at once and swallowed
him, like that prophetic gentleman in the Greek play, whose name Vixen
could never remember--chariot and horses and all. He belonged
henceforth to Lady Mabel Ashbourne. She could never be rude to him any
more. She could not take such a liberty with another young lady's lover.

"And to think that he should never have told me he was going to be
engaged to her," she said. "He must have been fond of her from the very
beginning; and he never said a word; and he let me think he rather
liked me--or at least tolerated me. And how could he like two people
who are the very antipodes of each other? If he is fond of her, he must
detest me. If he respects her, he must despise me."

The thought of such treachery rankled deep in the young warm heart.
Vixen started up to her feet, and stood in the midst of the firelit
room, with clinched fists, like a young fury. The light chestnut
tresses should have been Medusa's snakes to have harmonised with that
set white face. God had given Violet Tempest a heart to feel deeply,
too deeply for perfect peace, or that angelic softness which seems to
us most worthy in woman--the power to suffer and be patient.



CHAPTER VII.

Rorie has Plans of his own.

Roderick Vawdrey's ideas of what was due to a young man who attains his
majority were in no wise satisfied by his birthday dinner-party. It had
been pleasant enough in its way, but far too much after the pattern of
all other dinner-parties to please a young man who hated all common and
hackneyed things, and all the beaten tracks of life--or who, at any
rate, fancied he did, which comes to nearly the same thing.

"Mother," he began at breakfast next morning, in his loud cheery voice,
"we must have something for the small tenants, and shopkeepers, and
cottagers."

"What do you mean, Roderick?"

"Some kind of entertainment to celebrate my majority. The people will
expect it. Last night polished off the swells very nicely. The whole
thing did you credit, mother."

"Thank you," said Lady Jane, with a slight contraction of her thin lips.

This October morning, so pleasant for Rorie, was rather a bitter day
for his mother. She had been reigning sovereign at Briarwood hitherto;
henceforth she could only live there on sufferance. The house was
Rorie's. Even the orchid-houses were his. He might take her to task if
he pleased for having spent so much money on glass.

"But I must have my humble friends round me," continued Rorie. "The
young people, too--the boys and girls. I'll tell you what, mother. We
must have a lawn meet. The hounds have never met here since my
grandfather's time--fifty years ago. The Duke's stud-groom was telling
me about it last year. He's a Hampshire man, you know, born and bred in
the Forest. We'll have a lawn meet and a hunting breakfast; and it
shall be open house for everyone--high and low, rich and poor, gentle
and simple. Don't be frightened, mother," interjected Rorie, seeing
Lady Jane's look of horror; "we won't do any mischief. Your gardens
shall be respected."

"They are your gardens now, Roderick. You are sole master here, and can
do what you please."

"My dear mother, how can you talk like that? Do you suppose I shall
ever forget who made the place what it is? The gardens have been your
particular hobby, and they shall be your gardens to the end of time."

"That is very generous of you, my dear Roderick; but you are promising
too much. When you marry, your wife will be mistress of Briarwood, and
it will be necessary for me to find a new home."

"I am in no hurry to get married. It will be half-a-dozen years before
I shall even think of anything so desperate."

"I hope not, Roderick. With your position and your responsibilities you
ought to marry young. Marriage--a suitable marriage, that is to
say--would give you an incentive to earnestness and ambition. I want to
see you follow your father's footsteps; I want you to make a name
by-and-by."

"I'm afraid it will be a distant by-and-by," said Rorie, with a yawn.
"I don't feel at all drawn towards the senate. I love the country, my
dogs, my horses, the free fresh air, the stir and movement of life too
well to pen myself up in a study and pore over blue-books, or to waste
the summer evenings listening to the member for Little Peddlington
laying down the law about combination drainage, or the proposed
loop-line that is intended to connect his borough with the world in
general. I'm afraid it isn't in me, mother, and that you'll be sorely
disappointed if you set your heart upon my making a figure as a
senator."

"I should like to see you worthy of your father's name," Lady Jane
said, with a regretful sigh.

"Providence hasn't made me in the same pattern," answered Rorie. "Look
at my grandfather's portrait over the mantelpiece, in pink and mahogany
tops. What a glorious fellow he must have been. You should hear how the
old people talk of him. I think I inherit his tastes, instead of my
father's. Hereditary genius crops up in curious ways, you know.
Perhaps, if I have a son, he will be a heaven-born statesman, and you
may have your ambition gratified by a grandson. And now about the
hunting breakfast. Would this day week suit you?"

"This is your house, Roderick. It is for you to give your orders."

"Bosh!" exclaimed the son impatiently. "Don't I tell you that you are
mistress here, and will be mistress----"

"My dear Roderick, let us look things straight in the face," said Lady
Jane. "If I were sole mistress here there would be no hunting
breakfast. It is just the very last kind of entertainment I should ever
dream of giving. I am not complaining, mind. It is natural enough for
you to like that kind of thing; and, as master of this house, it is
your right to invite whomsoever you please. I am quite happy that it
should be so, but let there be no more talk about my being mistress of
this house. That is too absurd."

Rorie felt all his most generous impulses turned to a sense of
constraint and bitterness. He could say no more.

"Will you give me a list of the people you would like to be asked?"
said his mother, after rather an uncomfortable silence.

"I'll go and talk it over with the Duke," answered Rorie. "He'll enter
into the spirit of the thing."

Rorie found the Duke going the round of the loose-boxes, and uncle and
nephew spent an hour together pleasantly, overhauling the fine stud of
hunters which the Duke kept at Ashbourne, and going round the paddocks
to look at the brood-mares and their foals; these latter being
eccentric little animals, all head and legs, which nestled close to the
mother's side for a minute, and then took fright at their own tails,
and shot off across the field, like a skyrocket travelling
horizontally, or suddenly stood up on end, and executed a wild waltz in
mid air.

The Duke and Roderick decided which among these leggy little beasts
possessed the elements of future excellence; and after an hour's
perambulation of the paddocks they went to the house, where they found
the Duchess and Lady Mabel in the morning-room; the Duchess busy making
scarlet cloth cloaks for her school-children, Lady Mabel reading a
German critic on Shakespeare.

Here the hunt breakfast was fully discussed. Everybody was to be asked.
The Duchess put in a plea for her school-children. It would be such a
treat for the little things to see the hounds, and their red cloaks and
hoods would look so pretty on the lawn.

"Let them come, by all means," said Roderick; "your
school--half-a-dozen schools. I'll have three or four tents rigged up
for refreshments. There shall be plenty to eat and drink for everybody.
And now I'm off to the Tempests' to arrange about the hounds. The
Squire will be pleased, I know."

"Of course," said Lady Mabel, "and the Squire's daughter."

"Dear little thing!" exclaimed Rorie, with an elder brother's
tenderness; "she'll be as pleased as Punch. You'll hunt, of course,
Mabel?"

"I don't know. I don't shine in the field, as Miss Tempest does."

"Oh, but you must come, Mab. The Duke will find you a safe mount."

"She has a hunter I bred on purpose for her," said the Duke; "but
she'll never be such a horsewoman as her mother."

"She looks lovely on Mazeppa," said Rorie; "and she must come to my
hunting breakfast."

"Of course, Rorie, if you wish I shall come."

Rorie stayed to luncheon, and then went back to Briarwood to mount his
horse to ride to the Abbey House.

The afternoon was drawing in when Rorie rode up to the old Tudor
porch--a soft, sunless, gray afternoon. The door stood open, and he saw
the glow of the logs on the wide hearth, and the Squire's stalwart
figure sitting in the great arm-chair, leaning forward with a newspaper
across his knee, and Vixen on a stool at his feet, the dogs grouped
about them.

"Shall I send my horse round to the stables, Squire?" asked Rorie.

"Do, my lad," answered Mr. Tempest, ringing the bell, at which summons
a man appeared and took charge of Roderick's big chestnut.

"Been hunting to-day, Squire?" asked Rorie, when he had shaken hands
with Mr. Tempest and his daughter, and seated himself on the opposite
side of the hearth.

"No," answered the Squire, in a voice that had a duller sound than
usual. "We had the hounds out this morning at Hilberry Green, and there
was a good muster, Jack Purdy says; but I felt out of sorts, and
neither Vixen nor I went. It was a loss for Vixen, poor little girl."

"It was a grief to see you ill, papa," said Violet, nestling closer to
him.

 She had hardly taken any notice of Roderick to-day, shaking
hands with him in an absent-minded way, evidently full of anxiety about
her father. She was very pale, and looked older and more womanly than
when he saw her yesterday, Roderick thought.

"I'm not ill, my dear," said the Squire, "only a little muddled and
queer in my head; been riding too hard lately, perhaps. I don't get
lighter, you know, Rorie, and a quick run shakes me more than it used.
Old Martin, our family doctor, has been against my hunting for a long
time; but I should like to know what kind of life men of my age would
lead if they listened to the doctors. They wouldn't let us have a
decent dinner."

"I'm so sorry!" said Rorie. "I came to ask you a favour, and now I feel
as it I hardly ought to say anything about it."

And then Roderick proceeded to tell the Squire his views about a lawn
meet at Briarwood, and a hunting breakfast for rich and poor.

"It shall be done, my boy," answered the Squire heartily. "It's just
the sort of thing you ought to do to make yourself popular. Lady Jane
is a charming woman, you know, thoroughbred to the finger-nails; but
she has kept herself a little too much to herself. There are people old
enough to remember what Briarwood was in your grandfather's time. This
day week you say. I'll arrange everything. We'll have such a gathering
as hasn't been seen for the last twenty years."

"Vixen must come with you," said Rorie.

"Of course."

"If papa is well and strong enough to hunt."

"My love, there is nothing amiss with me--nothing that need trouble me
this day week. A man may have a headache, mayn't he, child, without
people making any fuss about it?"

"I should like you to see Dr. Martin, papa. Don't you think he ought to
see the doctor, Rorie? It's not natural for him to be ill."

"I'm not going to be put upon half-rations, Vixen. Martin would starve
me. That's his only idea of medical treatment. Yes, Vixen shall come,
Rorie."



CHAPTER VIII.

Glas ist der Erde Stolz und Glueck.

The morning of the Briarwood Meet dawned fairly. Roderick watched the
first lifting of the darkness from his bed-room window, and rejoiced in
the promise of a fine weather. The heavens, which had been so
unpropitious upon his birthday, seemed to promise better things to-day.
He did not desire the traditional hunting morning--a southerly wind and
a cloudy sky. He cared very little about the scent lying well, or the
actual result of the day's sport. He wanted rather to see the kind
familiar faces round him, the autumn sunshine lighting up all the glow
and colour of the picture, the scarlet coats, the rich bay and brown of
the horses, the verdant background of lawn and shrubberies. Two huge
marquees had been erected for the commonalty--one for the
school-children, the other for the villagers. There were long tables in
the billiard-room for the farming class; and for the quality there was
the horse-shoe table in the dining-room, as at Roderick's birthday
dinner. But on this occasion the table was decorated only with hardy
ferns and flowers. The orchids were not allowed to appear.

Roderick noticed the omission.

"Why, where are the thing-um-tites, mother?" he asked, with some
surprise; "the pitcher-plants and tropical what's-its-names?"

"I did not think there was any occasion to have them brought out of the
houses, Roderick," Lady Jane answered quietly; "there is always a risk
of their being killed, or some of your sporting friends might be
picking my prize blossoms to put in their button-holes. Men who give
their minds to horses would hardly appreciate orchids."

"All right, mother. As long as there is plenty to eat, I don't suppose
it much matters," answered Rorie.

He had certainly no cause for complaint upon this score. Briarwood had
been amply provisioned for an unlimited hospitality. The red coats and
green coats, and blue coats and brown coats, came in and out, slashed
away at boar's head and truffled turkey, sent champagne corks flying,
and added more dead men to the formidable corps of tall hock bottles,
dressed in uniform brown, which the astonished butler ranged rank and
file in a lobby outside the dining-room. He had never seen this kind of
thing at Briarwood since he had kept the keys of the cellars; and he
looked upon this promiscuous hospitality with a disapproving eye.

The Duke supported his nephew admirably, and was hail-fellow-well-met
with everybody. He had always been popular at Ashbourne. It was his own
place, his particular selection, bought with his own money, improved
under his own eye, and he liked it better than any of his hereditary
seats.

"If I had only had a son like you, Rorie," he said, as he stood beside
the young man, on the gravel sweep before the hall-door, welcoming the
new-comers, "I should have been a happy man. Well, I suppose I must be
satisfied with a grandson; but it's a hard thing that the title and
estates are to go to that scamp of a cousin of mine."

Roderick, on this particular morning, was a nephew whom any uncle might
be proud to own. His red coat and buckskins became him; so did his
position as host and master at Briarwood. His tall erect figure showed
to advantage amidst the crowd. His smile lit up the dark sunburnt face
like sunshine. He had a kind word, a friendly hand-clasp for
everybody--even for gaffers and goodies who had hobbled from their
village shanties to see the sport, and to get their share of cold
sirloin and old October. He took the feeble old creatures into the
tent, and saw that they found a place at the board.

Squire Tempest and his daughter were among the later arrivals. The meet
was to be at one, and they only rode into the grounds at half-past
twelve, when everyone else had breakfasted. Mrs. Tempest had not come.
The entertainment was much too early for a lady who never left her
rooms till after noon.

Vixen looked lovely in her smart little habit. It was not the Lincoln
green with the brass buttons, which Lady Mabel had laughed at a year
ago. To-day Miss Tempest wore a dark brown habit, moulded to the full
erect figure, with a narrow rim of white at the throat, a little felt
hat of the same dark brown with a brown feather, long white gauntlets,
and a whip with a massive ivory handle.

The golden bay's shining coat matched Violet's shining hair. It was the
prettiest picture in the world, the little rider in dark brown on the
bright bay horse, the daintily quilted saddle, the gauntleted hands
playing so lightly with the horse's velvet mouth--horse and rider
devotedly attached to each other.

"How do you like him?" asked Vixen, directly she and Rorie had shaken
hands. "Isn't he absolutely lovely?'

"Absolutely lovely," said Rorie, patting the horse's shoulder and
looking at the rider.

"Papa gave him to me on my last birthday. I was to have ridden Titmouse
another year; but I got the brush one day after a hard run when almost
everybody else was left behind, and papa said I should have a horse.
Poor Titmouse is put into a basket-chaise. Isn't it sad for him?'

"Awfully humiliating."

Lady Mabel was close by on her chestnut thoroughbred, severely costumed
in darkest blue and chimney-pot hat.

"I don't think you've ever met my cousin?" said Rorie. "Mabel, this is
Miss Tempest, whom you've heard me talk about. Miss Tempest, Lady Mabel
Ashbourne."

Violet Tempest gave a startled look, and blushed crimson. Then the two
girls bowed and smiled: a constrained smile on Vixen's part, a prim and
chilly smile from Lady Mabel.

"I want you two to be awful good friends," said Rorie; "and when you
come out, Vixen, Lady Mabel will take you under her wing. She knows
everybody, and the right thing to be done on every occasion."

Vixen turned from red to pale, and said nothing. Lady Mabel looked at
the distant blue line of the Wight, and murmured that she would be
happy to be of use to Miss Tempest if ever they met in London. Rorie
felt, somehow, that it was not encouraging. Vixen stole a glance at her
rival. Yes, she was very pretty--a delicate patrician beauty which
Vixen had never seen before. No wonder Rorie was in love with her.
Where else could he have seen anything so exquisite? It was the most
natural thing in the world that these cousins should be fond of each
other, and engaged to be married. Vixen wondered that the thing had
never occurred to her as inevitable--that it should have come upon her
as a blow at the last.

"I think Rorie ought to have told me," she said to herself. "He is like
my brother; and a brother would not hide his love affairs from his
sister. It was rather mean of Rorie."

The business of the day began presently. Neither Vixen nor the Squire
dismounted. They had breakfasted at home; and Vixen, who did not care
much for Lady Jane Vawdrey, was glad to escape with no further
communication than a smile and a bow. At a quarter-past one they were
all riding away towards the Forest, and presently the serious business
began.

Vixen and her father were riding side by side.

"You are so pale, papa. Is your head bad again to-day?"

"Yes, my dear. I'm afraid I've started a chronic headache. But the
fresh air will blow it away presently, I daresay. You're not looking
over-well yourself, Vixen. What have you done with your roses?"

"I--I--don't care much about hunting to-day, papa," said Violet, sudden
tears rushing into her eyes. "Shall we go home together? You're not
well, and I'm not enjoying myself. Nobody wants us, either; so why
should we stay?"

Rorie was a little way behind them, taking care of Lady Mabel, whose
slim-legged chestnut went through as many manoeuvres as if he had been
doing the manege business in a circus, and got over the ground very
slowly.

"Nonsense, child! Go back! I should think not! Jack Purdy may do all
the work, but people like to see me to the fore. We shall find down in
Dingley Bottom, I daresay, and get a capital run across the hills to
Beaulieu."

They found just as the Squire had anticipated, and after that there was
a hard run for the next hour and a quarter. Roderick was at the heel of
the hunt all the time, opening gates, and keeping his cousin out of
bogs and dangers of all kinds. They killed at last on a wild bit of
common near Beaulieu, and there were only a few in at the death,
amongst them Vixen on her fast young bay, flushed with excitement and
triumph by this time, and forgetting all her troubles in the delight of
winning one of the pads. Mrs Millington, the famous huntress from the
shires, was there to claim the brush.


"How tired you look, papa," said Vixen, as they rode quietly homewards.

"A little done up, my dear, but a good dinner will set me all right
again. It was a capital run, and your horse behaved beautifully. I
don't think I made a bad choice for you. Rorie and his cousin were
miles behind, I daresay. Pretty girl, and sits her horse like a
picture--but she can't ride. We shall meet them going home, perhaps."

A mile or two farther on they met Roderick alone. His cousin had gone
home with her father.

"It was rather a bore losing the run," he said, as he turned his
horse's head and rode by Vixen, "but I was obliged to take care of my
cousin."

One of the Squire's tenants, a seventeen-stone farmer, on a stout gray
cob, overtook them presently, and Mr. Tempest rode on by his side,
talking agricultural talk about over-fed beasts and cattle shows, the
last popular form of cruelty to animals.

Roderick and Violet were alone, riding slowly side by side in the
darkening gray, between woods where solitary robins carolled sweetly,
or the rare gurgle of the thrush sounded now and then from thickets of
beech and holly.

A faint colour came back to Vixen's cheek. She was very angry with her
playfellow for his want of confidence, for his unfriendly reserve. Yet
this was the one happy hour of her day. There had been a flavour of
desolateness and abandonment in all the rest.

"I hope you enjoyed the run," said Rorie.

"I don't think you can care much whether we did or didn't," retorted
Vixen, shrouding her personality in a vague plural. "If you had cared
you would have been with us. Sultan," meaning the chestnut "must have
felt cruelly humiliated by being kept so far behind."

"If a man could be in two places at once, half of me, the better half
of me, would have been with you, Vixen; but I was bound to take care of
my cousin. I had insisted upon her coming."

"Of course," answered Vixen, with a little toss of her head; "it would
have been quite wrong if she had been absent."

They rode on in silence for a little while after this. Vixen was
longing to say: "Rorie, you have treated me very badly. You ought to
have told me you were going to be married." But something restrained
her. She patted her horse's neck, listened to the lonely robins, and
said not a word. The Squire and his tenant were a hundred yards ahead,
talking loudly.

Presently they came to a point at which their roads parted, but Rorie
still rode on by Vixen.

"Isn't that your nearest way?" asked Vixen, pointing down the
cross-road with the ivory handle of her whip.

"I am not going the nearest way. I am going to the Abbey House with
you."

"I wouldn't be so rude as to say Don't, but I think poor Sultan must be
tired."

"Sultan shall have a by-day to-morrow."

They went into an oak plantation, where a broad open alley led from one
side of the enclosure to the other. The wood had a mysterious look in
the late afternoon, when the shadows were thickening under the tall
thin trees. There was an all-pervading ghostly grayness as in a shadowy
under-world. They rode silently over the thick wet carpet of fallen
leaves, the horses starting a little now and then at the aspect of a
newly-barked trunk lying white across the track. They were silent,
having, in sooth, very little to say to each other just at this time.
Vixen was nursing her wrathful feelings; Rorie felt that his future was
confused and obscure. He ought to do something with his life, perhaps,
as his mother had so warmly urged. But his soul was stirred by no
ambitious promptings.

They were within two hundred yards of the gate at the end of the
enclosure, when Vixen gave a sudden cry:

"Did papa's horse stumble?" she asked; "look how he sways in his
saddle."

Another instant, and the Squire reeled forward, and fell headforemost
across his horse's shoulder. The fall was so sudden and so heavy, that
the horse fell with him, and then scrambled up on to his feet again
affrighted, swung himself round, and rushed past Roderick and Vixen
along the plashy track.

Vixen was off her horse in a moment, and had flown to her father's
side. He lay like a log, face downwards upon the sodden leaves just
inside the gate. The farmer had dismounted and was stooping over him,
bridle in hand, with a frightened face.

"Oh, what is it?" cried Violet frantically. "Did the horse throw
him?--Bullfinch, his favourite horse. Is he much hurt? Oh, help me to
lift him up--help me--help me!"

Rorie was by her side by this time, kneeling down with her beside the
prostrate Squire, trying to raise the heavy figure which lay like lead
across his arm.

"It wasn't the horse, miss," said the farmer. "I'm afraid it's a
seizure."

"A fit!" cried Vixen. "Oh, papa, papa----darling--darling----"

She was sobbing, clinging to him, trembling like a leaf, and turning a
white, stricken face up towards Roderick.

"Do something to help him--for God's sake--do something," she cried;
"you won't let him lie there and die for want of help. Some
brandy--something," she gasped, stretching out her trembling hand.

The farmer had anticipated her thought. He had taken his flask from the
saddle pocket, and was kneeling down by the Squire. Roderick had lifted
the heavy head, and turned the ghastly face to the waning light. He
tried to force a little brandy between the livid lips--but vainly.

"For God's sake get her away," he whispered to John Wimble, the farmer.
"It's all over with him."

"Come away with me, my dear Miss Tempest," said Wimble, trying to raise
Violet from her knees beside the Squire. She was gazing into that awful
face distractedly--half divining its solemn meaning--yet watching for
the kind eyes to open and look at her again. "Come away with me, and
we'll get a doctor. Mr. Vawdrey will take care of your father."

"You go for the doctor," she answered firmly. "I'll stay with papa.
Take my horse, he's faster than yours. Oh, he'll carry you well enough.
You don't know how strong he is--go, quick--quick--Dr. Martin, at
Lyndhurst--it's a long way, but you must get him. Papa will recover,
and be able to ride home, perhaps, before you can get back to us, but
go, go."

"You go for the doctor, miss; your horse will carry you fast enough.
He'd never carry such a heavy weight as me, and my cob is dead beat.
You go, and Mr. Vawdrey will go with you. I'll take care of the Squire."

Violet looked from one to the other helplessly.

"I'd rather stay with papa," she said. "You go--yes--go, go. I'll stay
with papa."

She crouched down beside the prostrate figure on the damp marshy
ground, took the heavy head on her lap, and looked up at the two men
with a pale set face which indicated a resolve that neither of them was
strong enough to overrule. They tried their utmost to persuade her, but
in vain. She was fixed as a new Niobe--a stony image of young despair.
So Roderick mounted his horse and rode off towards Lyndhurst, and
honest Jack Wimble tied the other two horses to the gate, and took his
stand beside them, a few paces from those two motionless figures on the
ground, patiently waiting for the issue of this bitter hour.

It was one of the longest, weariest, saddest hours that ever youth and
hope lived through. There was an awful heart-sickening fear in Violet's
mind, but she gave it no definite shape. She would not say to herself,
"My father is dead." The position in which he was lying hampered her
arms so that she could not reach out her hand to lay it upon his heart.
She bent her face down to his lips.

Oh God! not a flutter stirred upon her soft cheek as she laid it
against those pallid lips. The lower jaw had fallen in an awful-looking
way; but Violet had seen her father look like that sometimes as he
slept, with open mouth, before the hall fire. It might be only a long
swoon, a suspension of consciousness. Dr. Martin would come
presently--oh, how long, how long the time seemed--and make all things
right.

The crescent moon shone silver pale above that dim gray wood. The
barked trunks gleamed white and spectral in the gathering dark. Owls
began to hoot in the distance, frogs were awaking near at hand, belated
rabbits flitted ghost-like across the track. All nature seemed of one
gray or shadowy hue--silvery where the moonbeams fell.

The October air was chill and penetrating. There was a dull aching in
Violet's limbs from the weight of her burden, but she was hardly
conscious of physical pain. It seemed to her that she had been sitting
there for hours waiting for the doctor's help. She thought the night
must have nearly worn itself out.

"Dr. Martin could not have been at home," she said, speaking for the
first time since Roderick rode away. "Mr. Vawdrey would fetch someone
else, surely."

"My dear young lady, he hasn't had time to ride to Lyndhurst yet."

"Not yet," cried Vixen despairingly, "not yet! And it has been so long.
Papa is getting so cold. The chill will be so bad for him."

"Worse for you, miss. I do wish you'd let me take you home."

"And leave papa here--alone--unconscious! How can you be so cruel as to
think of such a thing?"

"Dear Miss Tempest, we're not doing him any good, and you may be
getting a chill that will be nigh your death. If you would only go home
to your mamma, now--it's hard upon her not to know--she'll be fretting
about you, I daresay."

"Don't waste your breath talking to me," cried Vixen indignantly; "I
shall not leave this spot till papa goes with me."

They waited for another quarter of an hour in dismal silence. The
horses gnawed the lower branches of the trees, and gave occasional
evidence of their impatience. Bullfinch had gone home to his stable no
doubt. They were only about a mile-and-a-half from the Abbey House.

Hark! what was that? The splish-splash of horses' hoofs on the soft
turf. Another minute and Rorie rode up to the gate with a stranger.

"I was lucky enough to meet this gentleman," he said, "a doctor from
Southampton, who was at the hunt to-day. Violet dear, will you let me
take you home now, and leave the doctor and Mr. Wimble with your
father?"

"No," answered Vixen decisively.

The strange doctor knelt down and looked at his patient. He was a
middle-aged man, grave-looking, with iron-gray hair--a man who
impressed Vixen with a sense of power and authority. She looked at him
silently, with a despairing appealing look that thrilled him, familiar
as he was with such looks. He made his examination quietly, saying not
a word, and keeping his face hidden. Then he turned to the two men who
were standing close by, watching him anxiously.

"You must get some kind of litter to carry him home," he whispered.

And then with gentle firmness, with strong irresistible hands, he
separated the living from the dead, lifted Violet from the ground and
led her towards her horse.

"You must let Mr. Vawdrey take you home, my dear young lady," he said.
"You can do nothing here."

"But you--you can do something," sobbed Violet, "you will bring him
back to life--you----"

"I will do all that can be done," answered the doctor gently.

His tone told her more than his words. She gave one wild shriek, and
threw herself down beside her dead father. A cloud came over the
distracted brain, and she lay there senseless. The doctor and Rorie
lifted her up and carried her to the gate where her horse was waiting.
The doctor forced a little brandy through the locked lips, and between
them Rorie and he placed her in the saddle. She had just consciousness
enough by this time to hold the bridle mechanically, and to sit upright
on her horse; and thus led by Roderick, she rode slowly back to the
home that was never any more to be the same home that she had known and
lived in through the joyous sixteen years of her life. All things were
to be different to her henceforward. The joy of life was broken short
off, like a flower snapped from its stem.



CHAPTER IX.

A House of Mourning.

There was sorrow at the Abbey House deeper and wilder than had entered
within those doors for many a year. To Mrs. Tempest the shock of her
husband's death was overwhelming. Her easy, luxurious, monotonous life
had been very sweet to her, but her husband had been the dearest part
of her life. She had taken little trouble to express her love for him,
quite willing that he should take it for granted. She had been
self-indulgent and vain; seeking her own ease, spending money and care
on her own adornment; but she had not forgotten to make the Squire's
life pleasant to him also. Newly-wedded lovers in the fair
honeymoon-stage of existence could not have been fonder of each other
than the middle-aged Squire and his somewhat faded wife. His loving
eyes had never seen Time's changes in Pamela Tempest's pretty face, the
lessening brightness of the eyes, the duller tints of the complexion,
the loss of youth's glow and glory. To him she had always appeared the
most beautiful woman in the world.

And now the fondly-indulged wife could do nothing but lie on her sofa
and shed a rain of incessant tears, and drink strong tea, which had
lost its power to comfort or exhilarate. She would see no one. She
could not even be roused to interest herself in the mourning, though,
with a handsome widow, Pauline thought that ought to be all important.

"There are so many styles of widows' caps now, ma'am. You really ought
to see them, and choose for yourself," urged Pauline, an honest young
Englishwoman, who had begun life as Polly, but whom Mrs. Tempest had
elevated into Pauline.

"What does it matter, Pauline? Take anything you like. _He_ will not be
there to see."

Here the ready tears flowed afresh. That was the bitterest of all. That
she should look nice in her mourning, and Edward not be there to praise
her. In her feebleness she could not imagine life without him. She
would hear his step at her door surely, his manly voice in the
corridor. She would awake from this awful dream, in which he was not,
and find him, and fall into his arms, and sob out her grief upon his
breast, and tell him all she had suffered.

That was the dominant feeling in this weak soul. He could not be gone
for ever.

Yet the truth came back upon her in hideous distinctness every now and
then--came back suddenly and awfully, like the swift revelation of a
desolate plague-stricken scene under a lightning flash. He was gone. He
was lying in his coffin, in the dear old Tudor hall where they had sat
so cosily. Those dismal reiterated strokes of the funeral-bell meant
that his burial was at hand. They were moving the coffin already,
perhaps. His place knew him no more.

She tottered to the darkened window, lifted the edge of the blind, and
looked out. The funeral train was moving slowly along the carriage
sweep, through the winding shrubberied road. How long, and black, and
solemnly splendid the procession looked. Everybody had loved and
respected him. It was a grand funeral. The thought of this general
homage gave a faint thrill of comfort to the widow's heart.

"My noble husband," she ejaculated. "Who could help loving you?"

It seemed to her only a little while ago that she had driven up to the
Tudor porch for the first time after her happy honeymoon, when she was
in the bloom of youth and beauty, and life was like a schoolgirl's
happy dream.

"How short life is," she sobbed; "how cruelly short for those who are
happy!"

With Violet grief was no less passionate; but it did not find its sole
vent in tears. The stronger soul was in rebellion against Providence.
She kept aloof from her mother in the time of sorrow. What could they
say to each other? They could only cry together. Violet shut herself in
her room, and refused to see anyone, except patient Miss McCroke, who
was always bringing her cups of tea, or basins of arrowroot, trying to
coax her to take some kind of nourishment, dabbing her hot forehead
with eau-de-Cologne--doing all those fussy little kindnesses which are
so acutely aggravating in a great sorrow.

"Let me lie on the ground alone, and think of him, and wail for him."

That is what Violet Tempest would have said, if she could have
expressed her desire clearly.

Roderick Vawdrey went back to the Abbey House after the funeral, and
contrived to see Miss McCroke, who was full of sympathy for everybody.

"Do let me see Violet, that's a dear creature," he said. "I can't tell
you how unhappy I am about her. I can't get her face out of my
thoughts, as I saw it that dreadful night when I led her horse
home--the wild sad eyes, the white lips."

"She is not fit to see anyone," said Miss McCroke; "but perhaps it
might rouse her a little to see you."

Miss McCroke had an idea that all mourners ought to be roused; that
much indulgence in grief for the dead was reprehensible.

"Yes," answered Rorie eagerly, "she would see me, I know. We are like
brother and sister."

"Come into the schoolroom," said the governess, "and I'll see what I
can do."

The schoolroom was Vixen's own particular den, and was not a bit like
the popular idea of a schoolroom.

It was a pretty little room, with a high wooden dado, painted olive
green, and a high-art paper of amazing ugliness, whereon brown and red
storks disported themselves on a dull green ground. The high-art paper
was enlivened with horsey caricatures by Leech, and a menagerie of
pottery animals on various brackets.

A pot or a pan had been stuck into every corner that would hold one.
There were desks, and boxes, and wickerwork baskets of every shape and
kind, a dwarf oak bookcase on either side of the fireplace, with the
books all at sixes and sevens, leaning against each other as if they
were intoxicated. The broad mantelpiece presented a confusion of
photographs, cups and saucers, violet jars, and Dresden shepherdesses.
Over the quaint old Venetian glass dangled Vixen's first trophy, the
fox's brush, tied with a scarlet ribbon. There were no birds, or
squirrels, or dormice, for Vixen was too fond of the animal creation to
shut her favourites up in cages; but there was a black bearskin spread
in a corner for Argus to lie upon. In the wide low windows there were
two banks of bright autumn flowers, pompons and dwarf roses, mignonette
and veronica.

Miss McCroke drew up the blind, and stirred the fire.

"I'll go and ask her to come," she said.

"Do, like a dear," said Rorie.

He paced the room while she was gone, full of sadness. He had been very
fond of the Squire, and that awfully sudden death, an apopleptic
seizure, instantaneous as a thunderbolt, had impressed him very
painfully. It was his first experience of the kind, and it was
infinitely terrible to him. It seemed to him a long time before Vixen
appeared, and then the door opened, and a slim black figure came in, a
white fixed face looked at him piteously, with tearless eyes made big
by a great grief. She came leaning on Miss McCroke, as if she could
hardly walk unaided. The face was stranger to him than an altogether
unknown face. It was Violet Tempest with all the vivid joyous life gone
out of her, like a lamp that is extinguished.

He took her cold trembling hands and drew her gently to a chair, and
sat down beside her.

"I wanted so much to see you, dear," he said, "to tell you how sorry we
all are for you--my mother, my aunt, and cousin"--Violet gave a faint
shiver--"all of us. The Duke liked your dear father so much. It was
quite a shock to him."

"You are very good," Violet said mechanically.

She sat by him, pale and still as marble, looking at the ground. His
voice and presence impressed her but faintly, like something a long way
off. She was thinking of her dead father. She saw nothing but that one
awful figure. They had laid him in his grave by this time. The cold
cruel earth had fallen upon him and hidden him for ever from the light;
he was shut away for ever from the fair glad world; he who had been so
bright and cheerful, whose presence had carried gladness everywhere.

"Is the funeral quite over?" she asked presently, without lifting her
heavy eyelids.

"Yes, dear. It was a noble funeral. Everybody was there--rich and poor.
Everybody loved him."

"The poor most of all," she said. "I know how good he was to them."

Somebody knocked at the door and asked something of Miss McCroke, which
obliged the governess to leave her pupil. Roderick was glad at her
departure, That substantial figure in its new black dress had been a
hinderance to freedom of conversation.

Miss McCroke's absence did not loosen Violet's tongue. She sat looking
at the ground, and was dumb. That silent grief was very awful to
Roderick.

"Violet, why don't you talk to me about your sorrow?" he said. "Surely
you can trust me--your friend--your brother!"

That last word stung her into speech. The hazel eyes shot a swift angry
glance at him.

"You have no right to call yourself that," she said, "you have not
treated me like a sister."

"How not, dear?"

"You should have told me about your engagement--that you were going to
marry Lady Mabel Ashbourne."

"Should I?" exclaimed Rorie, amazed. "If I had I should have told you
an arrant falsehood. I am not engaged to my cousin Mabel. I am not
going to marry her."

"Oh, it doesn't matter in the least whether you are or not," returned
Vixen, with a weary air. "Papa is dead, and trifles like that can't
affect me now. But I felt it unkind of you at the time I heard it."

"And where and how did you hear this wonderful news, Vixen?" asked
Rorie, very pleased to get her thoughts away from her grief, were it
only for a minute.

"Mamma told me that everybody said you were engaged, and that the fact
was quite obvious."

"What everybody says, and what is quite obvious, is very seldom true,
Violet. You may take that for a first principle in social science. I am
not engaged to anyone. I have no thought of getting married--for the
next three years."

Vixen received this information with chilling silence. She would have
been very glad to hear it, perhaps, a week ago--at which time she had
found it a sore thing to think of her old playfellow as Lady Mabel's
affianced husband--but it mattered nothing now. The larger grief had
swallowed up all smaller grievances. Roderick Vawdrey had receded into
remote distance. He was no one, nothing, in a world that was suddenly
emptied of all delight.

"What are you going to do, dear?" asked Roderick presently. "If you
shut yourself up in your room and abandon yourself to grief, you will
make yourself very ill. You ought to go away somewhere for a little
while."

"For ever!" exclaimed Vixen passionately. "Do you think I can ever
endure this dear home without papa? There is not a thing I look at that
doesn't speak to me of him. The dogs, the horses. I almost hate them
for reminding me so cruelly. Yes, we are going away at once, I believe.
Mamma said so when I saw her this morning."

"Your poor mamma! How does she bear her grief?"

"Oh, she cries, and cries, and cries," said Vixen, rather
contemptuously. "I think it comforts her to cry. I can't cry. I am like
the dogs. If I did not restrain myself with all my might I should howl.
I should like to lie on the ground outside his door--just as his dog
does--and to refuse to eat or drink till I died."

"But, dear Violet, you are not alone in the world. You have your poor
mamma to think of."

"Mamma--yes. I am sorry for her, of course. But she is only like a
lay-figure in my life. Papa was everything."

"Do you know where your mamma is going to take you?"

"No; I neither know nor care. It will be to a house with four walls and
a roof, I suppose. It will be all the same to me wherever it is."

What could Roderick say? It was too soon to talk about hope or comfort.
His heart was rent by this dull silent grief; but he could do nothing
except sit there silently by Vixen's side with her cold unresponsive
hands held in his.

Miss McCroke came back presently, followed by a maid carrying a pretty
little Japanese tea-tray.

"I have just been giving your poor mamma a cup of tea, Violet," said
the governess. "Mr. Clements has been telling her about the will, and
it has been quite too much for her. She was almost hysterical. But
she's better now, poor dear. And now we'll all have some tea. Bring the
table to the fire, Mr. Vawdrey, please, and let us make ourselves
comfortable," concluded Miss McCroke, with an assumption of mild
cheerfulness.

Perhaps there is not in all nature so cheerful a thing as a good
sea-coal fire, with a log of beechwood on the top of the coals. It will
be cheerful in the face of affliction. It sends out its gushes of
warmth and brightness, its gay little arrowy flames that appear and
disappear like elves dancing their midnight waltzes on a barren moor.
It seems to say: "Look at me and be comforted! Look at me and hope! So
from the dull blackness of sorrow rise the many coloured lights of
new-born joy."

Vixen suffered her chair to be brought near that cheery fire, and just
then Argus crept into the room and nestled at her knee. Roderick seated
himself at the other side of the hearth--a bright little fire-place
with its border of high-art tiles, illuminated with the story of "Mary,
Mary, quite contrary," after quaintly mediaeval designs, by Mr. Stacey
Marks. Miss McCroke poured out the tea in the quaint old red and blue
Worcester cups, and valiantly sustained that assumption of
cheerfulness. She would not have permitted herself to smile yesterday;
but now the funeral was over, the blinds were drawn up, and a mild
cheerfulness was allowable.

"If you would condescend to tell me where you are going, Vixen, I might
contrive to come there too, by-and-by. We could have some rides
together. You'll take Arion, of course."

"I don't know that I shall ever ride again," answered Violet with a
shudder.

Could she ever forget that awful ride? Roderick hated himself for his
foolish speech.

"Violet will have to devote herself to her studies very assiduously for
the next two years," said Miss McCroke. "She is much more backwards
than I like a pupil of mine to be at sixteen."

"Yes, I am going to grind at three or four foreign grammars, and to
give my mind to latitude and longitude, and fractions, and decimals,"
said Vixen, with a bitter laugh. "Isn't that cheering?"

"Whatever you do, Vixen," cried Roderick earnestly, "don't be a
paradigm."

"What's that?"

"An example, a model, a paragon, a perfect woman nobly planned, &c. Be
anything but that, Vixen, if you love me."

"I don't think there is much fear of any of us being perfect," said
Miss McCroke severely. "Imperfection is more in the line of humanity."

"Do you think so?" interrogated Rorie. "I find there is a great deal
too much perfection in this world, too many faultless people--I hate
them."

"Isn't that a confession of faultiness on your side?" suggested Miss
McCroke.

"It may be. But it's the truth."

Vixen sat with dry hollow eyes staring at the fire. She had heard their
talk as if it had been the idle voices of strangers sounding in the
distance, ever so far away. Argus nestled closer and closer at her
knee, and she patted his big blunt head absently, with a dim sense of
comfort in this brute love, which she had not derived from human
sympathy.

Miss McCroke went on talking and arguing with Rorie, with a view to
sustaining that fictitious cheerfulness which might beguile Vixen into
brief oblivion of her griefs. But Vixen was not so to be beguiled. She
was with them, but not of them. Her haggard eyes stared at the fire,
and her thoughts were with the dear dead father, over whose
newly-filled grave the evening shadows were closing.



CHAPTER X.

Captain Winstanley.

Two years later, and Vixen was sitting with the same faithful Argus
nestling beside her, by the fireside of a spacious Brighton
drawing-room, a large, lofty, commonplace room, with tall windows
facing seawards. Miss McCroke was there too, standing at one of the
windows taking up a dropped stitch in her knitting, while Mrs. Tempest
walked slowly up and down the expanse of Brussels carpet, stopping now
and then at a window to look idly out at the red sunset beyond the
low-lying roofs and spars of Shoreham. Those two years had changed
Violet Tempest from a slender girl to a nobly-formed woman; a woman
whom a sculptor would have worshipped as his dream of perfection, whom
a painter would have reverenced for her glow and splendour of
colouring; but about whose beauty the common run of mankind, and more
especially womankind, had not quite made up their minds. The pretty
little women with eighteen-inch waists opined that Miss Tempest was too
big.

"She's very handsome, you know, and all that," they said deprecatingly,
"and her figure is quite splendid; but she's on such a very large
scale. She ought to be painted in fresco, you know, on a high cornice.
As Autumn, or Plenty, or Ceres, or something of that kind, carrying a
cornucopia. But in a drawing-room she looks so very massive."

The amber-haired women--palpably indebted to auricomous fluids for the
colour of their tresses--objected to the dark burnished gold of Violet
Tempest's hair. There was too much red in the gold, they said, and a
colour so obviously natural was very unfashionable. That cream-white
skin of hers, too, found objectors, on the score of a slight powdering
of freckles; spots which the kindly sun leaves on the fruit he best
loves. In fact, there were many reservations made by Miss Tempest's
pretended admirers when they summed up her good looks; but when she
rode her pretty bay horse along the King's Road, strangers turned to
look at her admiringly; when she entered a crowded room she threw all
paler beauties in the shade. The cabbage-rose is a vulgar flower
perhaps, but she is queen of the garden notwithstanding.

Lest it should be supposed, after this, that Vixen was a giantess, it
may be as well to state that her height was five feet six, her waist
twenty-two inches at most, her shoulders broad but finely sloping, her
arms full and somewhat muscular, her hands not small, but exquisitely
tapering, her foot long and narrow, her instep arched like an Arab's,
and all her movements instinct with an untutored grace and dignity. She
held her head higher than is common to women, and on that score was
found guilty of pride.

"I think we ought to go back before Christmas, Violet," said Mrs.
Tempest, continuing a discussion that had been dragging itself slowly
along for the last half-hour.

"I am ready, mamma," answered Vixen submissively. "It will break our
hearts afresh when we go home, but I suppose we must go home some day."

"But you would like to see the dear old house again, surely, Violet?"

"Like to see the frame without the picture? No, no, no, mamma. The
frame was very dear while the picture was in it--but--yes," cried Vixen
passionately, "I should like to go back. I should like to see papa's
grave, and carry fresh flowers there every day. It has been too much
neglected."

"Neglected, Violet! How can you say such a thing? When Manotti's bill for
the monument was over nine hundred pounds."

"Oh, mamma, there is more love in a bunch of primroses that my own hand
gathers and carries to the grave than in all the marble or granite in
Westminster Abbey."

"My dear, for poor people wild flowers are very nice, and show good
feeling--but the rich must have monuments. There could be nothing too
splendid for your dear papa," added the widow tearfully.

She was always tearful when she spoke of her dear Edward, even now;
though she was beginning to find that life had some savour without him.

"No," said Vixen, "but I think papa will like the flowers best."

"Then if all is well, Miss McCroke," pursued Mrs. Tempest, "we will go
back at the end of November. It would be a pity to lose the season
here."

Vixen yawned despondently.

"What do we care about the season, mamma?" she exclaimed. "Can it
matter to us whether there are two or three thousand extra people in
the place? It only makes the King's Road a little more uncomfortable."

"My dear Violet, at your age gaiety is good for you," said Mrs. Tempest.

"Yes, and, like most other things that are good, it's very
disagreeable," retorted Vixen.

"And now, about this ball," pursued Mrs. Tempest, taking up a dropped
stitch in the previous argument; "I really think we ought to go, if it
were only on Violet's account. Don't you, Maria?"

Mrs. Tempest always called her governess Maria when she was anxious to
conciliate her.

"Violet is old enough to enter society, certainly," said Miss McCroke,
with some deliberation; "but whether a public ball----"

"If it's on my account, mamma, pray don't think of going," protested
Vixen earnestly. "I hate the idea of a ball--I hate----"

"Captain Winstanley," announced Forbes, in the dusky end of the
drawing-room by the door.

"He has saved me the trouble of finishing my sentence," muttered Vixen.

The visitor came smiling though the dusk into the friendly glow of the
fire. He shook hands with Mrs. Tempest with the air of an old friend,
went over to the window to shake hands with Miss McCroke, and then came
back to Vixen, who gave him a limp cold hand, with an indifference that
was almost insolent, while Argus lifted his head an inch or so from the
carpet and saluted him with a suppressed growl. Whether this arose from
a wise instinct in the animal, or from a knowledge that his mistress
disliked the gentleman, would be too nice a point to decide.

"I was that moment thinking of you, Captain Winstanley," said the widow.

"An honour and a happiness for me," murmured the Captain.

Mrs. Tempest seated herself in her own particular chair, beside which
was her own particular table with one of those pretty tea-services
which were her chief delight--a miniature silver tea-kettle with a
spirit-lamp, a cosy little ball-shaped teapot, cups and saucers of old
Battersea.

"You'll take a cup of tea?" she said insinuatingly.

"I shall be delighted. I feel as if I ought to go home and write verses
or smart paragraphs for the society papers after drinking your tea, it
is so inspiring. Addison ought to have drunk just such tea before
writing one of his Spectators, but unfortunately his muse required old
port."

"If the Spectator came out nowadays I'm afraid we should think it
stupid." suggested Mrs. Tempest.

"Simply because the slipshod writers of the present day have spoiled
our taste for fine English," interjected Miss McCroke severely.

"Well, I fear we should find Addison a little thin," said Captain
Winstanley; "I can't imagine London society existing for a week on such
literary pabulum as 'The Vision of Mirza.' We want something stronger
than that. A little scandal about our neighbours, a racy article on
field sports, some sharpish hits at the City, a libel or two upon men
we know, a social article sailing very near the wind, and one of
Addison's papers on cherry-coloured hoods, or breast-knots, patches or
powder, thrown in by the way of padding. Our dear Joseph is too purely
literary for the present age."

"What monsters newspapers have grown," remarked Mrs. Tempest. "It's
almost impossible to get through them."

"Not if you read anything else," answered the captain. "The majority do
not."

"We were talking about the ball just as you came in," said Mrs.
Tempest. "I really think Vixen ought to go."

"I am sure she ought," said the Captain.

Vixen sat looking at the fire and patting Argus. She did not favour the
Captain with so much as a glance; and yet he was a man upon whom the
eyes of women were apt to dwell favourably. He was not essentially
handsome. The most attractive men rarely are. He was tall and thin,
with a waist as small as a woman's, small hands, small feet--a general
delicacy of mould that was accounted thoroughbred. He had a long nose,
a darkly-pale complexion, keen gray eyes under dark brows, dark hair,
cropped close to his small head; thin lips, white teeth, a neat black
moustache, and a strictly military appearance, though he had sold out
of a line regiment three years ago, and was now a gentleman at large,
doing nothing, and living in a gentleman-like manner on a very small
income. He was not in debt, and was altogether respectable. Nothing
could be said against him, unless it were some dark hint of a gambling
transaction at a fast and furious club, some vague whisper about the
mysterious appearance of a king at ecarte--the kind of a rumour which
is apt to pursue a man who, like Bulwer's Dudley Smooth, does not cheat
but always wins.

Despite those vague slanders, which are generally baseless--the mere
expression of society's floating malice, the scum of ill-nature on the
ocean of talk--Captain Winstanley was a universal favourite. He went
everywhere, and was liked wherever he went. He was gifted with that
adaptability and hardiness which is, of all cleverness, most valuable
in polite society. Of him, as of Goldsmith, it might be said that he
touched nothing he did not adorn. True, that the things he touched were
for the most part small things, but they were things that kept him
before the eye of society, and found favour in that eye.

He was a good horseman, a good oarsman, a good swimmer, a good
cricketer. He played and sang; he was a first-rate amateur actor; he
was great at billiards and all games of skill; he could talk any
language society wanted him to talk--society not requiring a man to
excel in Coptic or Chinese, or calling upon him suddenly for Japanese
or Persian; he dressed with perfect taste, and without the slightest
pretence of dandyism; he could write a first-rate letter, and
caricature his dearest friends of last year in pen and ink for the
entertainment of his dearest friends of this year; he was known to have
contributed occasionally to fashionable periodicals, and was supposed
to have a reserve of wit and satire which would quite have annihilated
the hack writers of the day had he cared to devote himself to
literature.

Mrs. Tempest and her daughter had met the Captain early in the previous
spring among the Swiss mountains. He knew some of Mrs. Tempest's
Hampshire friends, and with no other credentials had contrived to win
her friendship. Vixen took it into her obstinate young head to detest
him. But then, Vixen, at seventeen and a half, was full of ridiculous
dislikes and irrational caprices. Mrs. Tempest, in her lonely and
somewhat depressed condition, considered the Captain a particularly
useful acquaintance. Miss McCroke was dubious, but finding any
expression of her doubts ungraciously received, took the safer line of
silence.

The ball in question was a charity ball at the Pavilion, a perfectly
unobjectionable ball. The list of patronesses bristled with noble
names. There was nothing to be said against Vixen's appearance there,
except Miss McCroke's objection that Squire Tempest's daughter and
heiress ought not to make her _debut_ in society at any public ball
whatever; ought, in a manner, hardly to be seen by the human eye as a
grown-up young lady, until she had been presented to her gracious
sovereign. But Mrs. Tempest had set her heart upon Vixen's going to the
ball; or, in other words, she had set her heart upon going herself. On
her way through Paris, in September, she had gone to Worth's--out of
curiosity, just to see what the great man's salons were like--and there
she had been tempted into the purchase of an artistic arrangement in
black silk and jet, velvet and passementerie. She did not require the
costume, but the thing in itself was so beautiful that she could not
help buying it. And having spent a hundred guineas on this masterpiece,
there arose in her mind a natural craving to exhibit it; to feel that
she was being pointed out as one of the best-dressed women in the
crowded room; to know that women were whispering to each other
significantly, "Worth," as the nocturn in velvet and silk and
glimmering jet swept by them.

There was a good deal more discussion, and it was ultimately settled
that Vixen should go to the ball. She had no positive objection. She
would have liked the idea of the ball well enough perhaps, if it had
not been for Captain Winstanley. It was his advocacy that made the
subject odious.

"How very rudely you behaved to Captain Winstanley, Violet," said Mrs.
Tempest, when her visitor had departed.

"Did I, mamma?" inquired Vixen listlessly. "I thought I was
extraordinarily civil. If you knew how I should have liked to behave to
him, you would think so too."

"I can not imagine why you are so prejudiced against him," pursued Mrs.
Tempest fretfully.

"It is not prejudice, mamma, but instinct, like Argus's. That man is
destined to do us some great wrong, if we do not escape out of his
clutches."

"It is shameful of you to say such things," cried the widow, pale with
anger. "What have you to say against him? What fault can you find with
him? You cannot deny that he is most gentlemanlike."

"No, mamma; he is a little too gentlemanlike. He makes a trade of his
gentlemanliness. He is too highly polished for me."

"You prefer a rough young fellow, like Roderick Vawdrey, who talks
slang, and smells of the stables."

"I prefer anyone who is good and true," retorted Vixen. "Roderick is a
man, and not to be named in the same breath with your fine gentleman."

"I admit that the comparison would be vastly to his disadvantage," said
the widow. "But it's time to dress for dinner."

"And we are to dine with the Mortimers," yawned Vixen. "What a bore!"

This young lady had not that natural bent for society which is
symptomatic of her age. The wound that pierced her young heart two
years ago had not healed so completely that she could find pleasure in
inane conversation across a primeval forest of sixpenny ferns, and the
factitious liveliness of a fashionable dinner-table.



CHAPTER XI.

"It shall be Measure for Measure."

The night of the ball came, and, in spite of her aversion for Captain
Winstanley, and general dislike of the whole thing, Violet Tempest
began the evening by enjoying herself. She was young and energetic, and
had an immense reserve of animal spirits after her two years of sadness
and mourning. She danced with the partners her friends brought
her--some of the most eligible men in the room--and was full of life
and gaiety; yet the festival seemed to her in somewise horrible all the
time.

"If papa could know that we are dancing and smiling at each other, as
if all life was made up of gladness, when he is lying in his cold
grave!" thought Vixen, after joining hands with her mother in the
ladies' chain.

The widow looked as if she had never known a care. She was conscious
that Worth's _chef-d'oeuvre_ was not thrown away. She saw herself in
the great mirrors which once reflected George and his lovely
Fitzherbert in their days of gladness--which reflected the same George
later, old, and sick, and weary.

"That French _grande dame_ was right," thought Mrs. Tempest, "who said,
'_Le noir est si flattant pour les blondes_.'"

Black was flattering for Vixen's auburn hair also. Though her
indifferent eye rarely glanced at the mirrored walls, she had never
looked lovelier. A tall graceful figure, in billowy black tulle,
wreathed with white chrysanthemums; a queen-like head, with a red-gold
coronal; a throat like an ivory pillar, spanned with a broad black
ribbon, fastened with a diamond clasp; diamond stars in her ears, and a
narrow belt of diamonds round each white arm.

"How many waltzes have you kept for me?" Captain Winstanley asked
presently, coming up to Vixen.

"I have not kept waltzes for anyone," she answered indifferently.

"But surely you were under a promise to keep some for me? I asked you a
week ago."

"Did you? I am sure I never promised anything of the kind."

"Here is only one little shabby waltz left," said the Captain, looking
at her programme. "May I put my name down for that?"

"If you like," answered Vixen indifferently; and then, with the
faintest suspicion of malice, she added, "as mamma does not dance round
dances."

She was standing up for the Lancers presently, and her partner had just
led her to her place, when she saw that she had her mother and Captain
Winstanley again for her _vis-a-vis_. She grew suddenly pale, and
turned away.

"Will you let me sit this out?" she said. "I feel awfully ill."

Her partner was full of concern, and carried her off at once to a
cooler room.

"It is too bad!" she muttered to herself. "The Lancers! To go romping
round with a lot of wild young men and women. It is as bad as the Queen
in Hamlet."

This was the last dance before supper. Vixen went in to the supper-room
presently with her attentive partner, who had kept by her side
devotedly while the lively scramble to good old English tunes was going
on in the dancing-room.

"Are you better?" he asked tenderly, fanning her with her big black
fan, painted with violets and white chrysanthemums. "The room is
abominably hot."

"Thanks. I'm quite well now. It was only a momentary faintness. But I
rather hate the Lancers, don't you?"

"Well, I don't know. I think, sometimes, you know, with a nice partner,
they're good fun. Only one can't help treading on the ladies' trains,
and they wind themselves round one's legs like snakes. I've seen
fellows come awful croppers, and the lady who has done it look so
sweetly unconcerned. But if one tears a lace flounce, you know, they
look daggers. It's something too dreadful to feel oneself walking into
honiton at ten guineas a yard, and the more one tries to extricate
oneself the more harm one does."

Vixen's supper was the merest pretence. Her mother sat opposite her,
with Captain Winstanley still in attendance. Vixen gave them one
scathing look, and then sat like an image of scorn. Her partner could
not get a word from her, and when he offered her the fringed end of a
cracker bonbon, she positively refused to have anything to do with it.

"Please don't," she said. "It's too inane. I couldn't possibly pretend
to be interested in the motto."

When she went back to the ball-room Captain Winstanley followed her and
claimed his waltz. The band was just striking up the latest love-sick
German melody, "_Weit von dir!_" a strain of drawling tenderness.

"You had better go and secure your supper," said Vixen coldly.

"I despise all ball-suppers. This one most particularly, if it were to
deprive me of my waltz."

Vixen shrugged her shoulders, and submitted to take those few
preliminary steps which are like the strong swimmer's shiverings on the
bank ere he plunges in the stream. And then she was whirling round to
the legato strains, "_Weit von dir! Weit von dir! Wo ist mein Lebens
Lust?--Weit von dir--Weit von dir!_"

Captain Winstanley's waltzing was simple perfection. It was not the
Liverpool Lurch, or the Scarborough Scramble, the Bermondsey Bounce, or
the Whitechapel Wiggle; it was waltzing pure and simple, unaffected,
graceful; the waltzing of a man with a musical ear, and an athlete's
mastery of the art of motion. Vixen hated the Captain, but she enjoyed
the waltz. They danced till the last bar died away in a tender
diminuendo.

"You look pale," said the Captain, "let us go into the garden." He
brought her cloak and wrapped it round her, and she took his offered
arm without a word. It was one of those rare nights in late October,
when the wind is not cold. There was hardly the flutter of a leaf in
the Pavilion garden. The neighbouring sea made the gentlest music--a
melancholy ebb and flow of sound, like the murmuring of some great
imprisoned spirit.

In the searching light of day, when its adjacent cab-stands and
commonnesses are visible, and its gravelled walks are peopled with
nursemaids and small children, the Pavilion garden can hardly be called
romantic. But by this tender moonlight, in this cool stillness of a
placid autumn midnight, even the Pavilion garden had its air of romance
and mystery. The various roofs and chimneys stood up against the sky,
picturesque as a city of old time. And, after all, this part of
Brighton has a peculiar charm which all the rest of Brighton lacks. It
speaks of the past, it tells its story of the dead. They were not great
or heroic, perhaps, those departed figures, whose ghosts haunt us in
the red and yellow rooms, and in the stiff town garden; but they had
their histories. They lived, and loved, and suffered; and, being dead
so long, come back to us in the softened light of vanished days, and
take hold of our fancy with their quaint garments and antique
head-gear, their powder, and court-swords, and diamond shoe-buckles,
and little loves and little sorrows.

Vixen walked slowly along the shining gravel-path with her black and
gold mantle folded round her, looking altogether statuesque and
unapproachable. They took one turn in absolute silence, and then
Captain Winstanley, who was not inclined to beat about the bush when he
had something particular to say, and a good opportunity for saying it,
broke the spell.

This was perhaps the first time, in an acquaintance of more than six
months, that he had ever found himself alone with Violet Tempest,
without hazard of immediate interruption.

"Miss Tempest," he began, with a firmness of tone that startled her, "I
want to know why you are so unkind to me."

"I hardly know what you mean by unkindness. I hope I have never said
anything uncivil?"

"No; but you have let me see very plainly that you dislike me."

"I am sorry nature has given me an unpleasantly candid disposition."

Those keen gray eyes of the Captain's were watching her intently. An
angry look shot at her from under the straight dark brows--swift as an
arrow.

"You admit then that you do not like me?" he said.

Vixen paused before replying. The position was embarrassing.

"I suppose if I were ladylike and proper, I should protest that I like
you immensely; that there is no one in the world, my mother excepted,
whom I like better. But I never was particularly proper or polite,
Captain Winstanley, and I must confess there are very few people I do
like, and----"

"And I am not one of them," said the Captain.

"You have finished the sentence for me."

"That is hard upon me--no, Violet, you can never know how hard. Why
should you dislike me? You are the first woman who ever told me so"
(flushing with an indignant recollection of all his victories). "I have
done nothing to offend you. I have not been obtrusive. I have
worshipped at a distance--but the Persian's homage of the sun is not
more reverent----"

"Oh, pray don't talk about Persians and the sun," cried Violet. "I am
not worthy that you should be so concerned about my likes and dislikes.
Please think of me as an untaught inexperienced girl. Two years ago I
was a spoiled child. You don't know how my dearest father spoiled me.
It is no wonder I am rude. Remember this, and forgive me if I am too
truthful."

"You are all that is lovely," he exclaimed passionately, stung by her
scorn and fired by her beauty, almost beside himself as they stood
there in the magical moonlight--for once in his life forgetting to
calculate every move on life's chessboard. "You are too lovely for me.
From the very first, in Switzerland, when I was so happy----no, I will
not tell you. I will not lay down my heart to be trampled under your
feet."

"Don't," cried Violet, transfixing him with the angry fire of her eyes,
"for I'm afraid I should trample on it. I am not one of those gentle
creatures who go out of their way to avoid treading on worms--or other
reptiles."

"You are as cruel as you are lovely," he said, "and your cruelty is
sweeter than another woman's kindness. Violet, I laugh at your dislike.
Yes, such aversion as that is often the beginning of closest liking. I
will not be disheartened. I will not be put off by your scornful
candour. What if I were to tell you that you are the only woman I ever
loved?"

"Pray do not. It would transform passive dislike into active hatred. I
should be sorry for that, because," looking at him deliberately, with a
slow scorn, "I think my mother likes you."

"She has honoured me with her confidence, and I hope I shall not prove
unworthy of the trust. I rarely fail to repay any benefit that is
bestowed upon me."

"October nights are treacherous," said Vixen, drawing her cloak closer
around her. "I think we had better go back to the ball-room."

She was shivering a little with agitated feeling, in spite of that
mantle of scorn in which she had wrapped herself. This was the first
man who had ever called her lovely, who had ever talked to her of love
with manhood's strong passion.

The Captain gave her his arm, and they went back to the glare and heat
of the yellow dragons and scarlet griffins. Another Lancer scramble was
in full progress, to the old-fashioned jigging tunes, but Mrs. Tempest
was sitting among the matrons in a corner by an open window.

"Are we ever going home any more, mamma?" inquired Vixen.

"My dear Violet, I have been waiting for you ever so long."

"Why should you leave so early?" exclaimed Captain Winstanley. "There
are half-a-dozen more dances, and you are engaged for them all, I
believe, Miss Tempest."

"Then I will show mercy to my partners by going away," said Violet.
"Are all balls as long as this? We seem to have been here ages; I
expect to find my hair gray to-morrow morning."

"I really think we had better go," said Mrs. Tempest, in her undecided
way.

She was a person who never quite made up her mind about anything, but
balanced every question gently, letting somebody else turn the scale
for her--her maid, her governess, her daughter; she was always trying
to have her own way, but never quite knew what her own way was, and
just managed things skillfully enough to prevent other people having
theirs.

"If you are determined, I will see you to your carriage, and then the
ball is over for me," said the Captain gallantly.

He offered Mrs. Tempest his arm, and they went put into the vestibule,
where the Captain left them for a few minutes, while he went into the
porch to hasten the arrival of the carriage.

"Where were you and Captain Winstanley all that time, Violet?" asked
Mrs. Tempest.

"In the garden."

"How imprudent!"

"Indeed, dear mamma, it wasn't cold."

"But you were out there so long. What could you find to talk about all
that time?"

"We were not talking all the time, only enjoying the cool air and the
moonlight."

"Mrs. Tempest's carriage!" roared one of the door-keepers, as if it had
been his doing that the carriage had appeared so quickly.

Captain Winstanley was ready to hand them to their brougham.

"Come and take a cup of tea to-morrow afternoon, and let as talk over
the ball," said the widow.

"With infinite pleasure."

"Shall we drop you at your house?"

"A thousand thanks--no--my lodgings are so close, I'll walk home."

He went back for his overcoat, and then walked slowly away, without
another glance at the crowded ball-room, or the corridors where the
ladies who were waiting for their carriages were contriving to improve
the time by a good deal of quiet, or even noisy, flirtation. His
lodgings were on the Old Steine, close by. But he did not go home
immediately. There are times in a man's life when four walls are to
small too hold the bigness of his thoughts. Captain Winstanley paced
the Marine Parade for half-an-hour or so before he went home.

"_Va pour la mere_," he said to himself, at the close of that half
hour's meditations; "she is really very nice, and the position
altogether advantageous, perhaps as much as one has the right to expect
in the general decadence of things. But, good heavens, how lovely that
girl is! She is the first woman who ever looked me in the face and told
me she disliked me; the first woman who ever gave me contemptuous looks
and scornful words. And yet--for that very reason, perhaps--I----"

The dark brows contracted over the keen eyes, which seemed closer than
usual to the hawk nose.

"Look to yourself, my queen, in the time to come," he said, as he
turned his back on the silvery sea and moonlight sky. "You have been
hard to me and I will be hard to you. It shall be measure for measure."



CHAPTER XII.

"I have no Wrong, where I can claim no Right."

Going home again. That was hard to bear. It reopened all the old
wounds. Violet Tempest felt as if her heart must really break, as if
this new grief were sharper than the old one, when the carriage drove
in through the familiar gates, in the December dusk, and along the
winding shrubberied road, and up to the Tudor porch, where the lion of
the Tempests stood, _passant regardant_, with lifted paw and backwards
gaze, above the stone shield. The ruddy firelight was shining across
the wide doorway. The old hearth looked as cheerful as of old. And
there stood the empty chair beside it. That had been Vixen's particular
wish.

"Let nothing be disturbed, dear mamma," she had said ever so many
times, when her mother was writing her orders to the housekeeper. "Beg
them to keep everything just as it was in papa's time."

"My dear, it will only make you grieve more."

"Yes; but I had rather grieve for him than forget him. I am more afraid
of forgetting him than of grieving too much for him," said Vixen.

And now, as she stood on the hearth after her journey, wrapped in black
furs, a little black fur _toque_ crowning her ruddy gold hair, fancy
filled the empty chair as she gazed at it. Yes, she could see her
father sitting there in his hunting-clothes, his whip across his knee.

The old pointer, the Squire's favourite, came whining to her feet. How
old he looked! Old, and broken, and infirm, as if from much sorrow.

"Poor Nip! poor Nip!" she said, patting him. "The joy of your life went
with papa, didn't it?"

"It's all very sad," murmured Mrs. Tempest, loosening her wraps. "A
sad, sad home-coming. And it seems only yesterday that I came here as a
bride. Did I ever tell you about my travelling-dress, Violet? It was a
shot-silk--they were fashionable then, you know--bronze and blue--the
loveliest combination of colour!"

"I can't imagine a shot-silk being anything but detestable," said Vixen
curtly. "Poor Nip! How faithful dogs are! The dear thing is actually
crying!"

Tears were indeed running from the poor old eyes, as the pointer's head
lay in Vixen's lap; as if memory, kindled by her image, brought back
the past too keenly for that honest canine heart.

"It is very mournful," said Mrs. Tempest. "Pauline, let us have a cup
of tea."

She sank into an arm-chair opposite the fire. Not the squire's old
carved oak-chair, with its tawny leather cushions. That must needs be
sacred evermore--a memento of the dead, standing beside the hearth,
revered as the image of an honoured ancestor in a Roman citizen's home.

"I wonder if anyone is alive that we knew here?" said Vixen, lying back
in her low chair, and idly caressing the dogs.

"My dear Violet, why should people be dead? We have only been away two
years."

"No; but it seems so long. I hardly expect to see any of the old faces.
He is not here," with a sudden choking sob. "Why should all be
left--except him?"

"The workings of Providence are full of mystery," sighed the widow.
"Dear Edward! How handsome he looked that day he brought me home. And
he was a noble-looking man to the last. Not more than two spoonfuls of
pekoe, Pauline. You ought to know how I like it by this time."

This to the handmaiden, who was making tea at the gipsy table in front
of the fire--the table at which Vixen and Rorie had drunk tea so
merrily on that young man's birthday.

After tea mother and daughter went the round of the house. How
familiar, how dear, how strange, how sad all things looked! The
faithful servants had done their duty. Everything was in its place. The
last room they entered was the Squire's study. Here were all his
favourite books. The "Sporting Magazine" from its commencement, in
crimson morocco. "Nimrod" and "The Druid," "Assheton Smith's Memoirs,"
and many others of the same class. Books on farming and farriery, on
dogs and guns. Here were the Squire's guns and whips, a motley
collection, all neatly arranged by his own hands. The servants had done
nothing but keep them free from dust. There, by the low and cosy
fireplace, with its tiled hearth, stood the capacious crimson morocco
chair, in which the master of the Abbey House had been wont to sit when
he held audience with his kennel-huntsman, or gamekeeper, his
farm-bailiff, or stud-groom.

"Mamma, I should like you to lock the door of this room and keep the
key, so that no one may ever come here," said Vixen.

"My dear, that is just the way to prolong your grief; but I will do it
if you like."

"Do, dear mamma. Or, if you will let me keep the key, I will come in
and dust the room every day. It would be a pleasure for me, a mournful
one, perhaps, but still a pleasure."

Mrs. Tempest made no objection, and, when they left the room, Vixen
locked the door and put the key in her pocket.

Christmas was close at hand. The saddest time for such a home-coming,
Vixen thought. The gardeners brought in their barrows of holly, and
fir, and laurel; but Vixen would take no part in the decoration of hall
and corridors, staircase and gallery--she who in former years had been
so active in the labour. The humble inhabitants of the village rejoiced
in the return of the family at the great house, and Vixen was pleased
to see the kind faces again, the old men and women, the rosy-cheeked
children, and careworn mothers, withered and wrinkled before their time
with manifold anxieties. She had a friendly word for everyone, and
gifts for all. Home was sweet to her after her two years' absence,
despite the cloud of sadness that overhung all things. She went out to
the stables and made friends with the old horses, which had been out at
grass all through the summer, and had enjoyed a paradise of rest for
the last two years. Slug and Crawler, Mrs. Tempest's carriage horses,
sleek even-minded bays, had been at Brighton, and so had Vixen's
beautiful thorough-bred, and a handsome brown for the groom; but all
the rest had stayed in Hampshire. Not one had been sold, though the
stud was a wasteful and useless one for a widow and her daughter. There
was Bullfinch, the hunter Squire Tempest had ridden in his last hour of
life. Violet went into his box, and caressed him, and fed him, and
cried over him with bitterest tears. This home-coming brought back the
old sorrow with overwhelming force. She ran out of the stables to hide
her tears, and ran up to her own room, and abandoned herself to her
grief, almost as utterly as she had done on those dark days when her
father's corpse was lying in the house.

There was no friendly Miss McCroke now to be fussy and anxious, and to
interpose herself between Violet Tempest and her grief. Violet was
supposed to be "finished," or, in other words, to know everything under
the sun which a young lady of good birth and ample fortune can be
required to know. Everything, in this case, consisted of a smattering
of French, Italian, and German, a dubious recollection of the main
facts in modern history, hazy images of Sennacherib, Helen of Troy,
Semiramis, Cyrus, the Battle of Marathon, Romulus and Remus, the murder
of Julius Caesar, and the loves of Antony and Cleopatra flitting dimly
athwart the cloudy background of an unmapped ancient world, a few vague
notions about astronomy, some foggy ideas upon the constitution of
plants and flowers, sea-weeds and shells, rocks and hills--and a
general indifference for all literature except poetry and novels.

Miss McCroke, having done her duty conscientiously after her lights,
had now gone to finish three other young ladies, the motherless
daughters of an Anglo-Indian colonel, over whom she was to exercise
maternal authority and guidance, in a tall narrow house in Maida Vale.
She had left Mrs. Tempest with all honours, and Violet had lavished
gifts upon her at parting, feeling fonder of her governess in the last
week of their association than at any other period of her tutelage.
To-day, in her sorrow, it was a relief to Violet to find herself free
from the futile consolations of friendship. She flung herself into the
arm-chair by the fire and sobbed out her grief.

"Oh, kindest, dearest, best of fathers," she cried, "what is home
without you!"

And then she remembered that awful day of the funeral when Roderick
Vawdrey had sat with her beside this hearth, and had tried to comfort
her, and remembered how she had heard his voice as a sound far away, a
sound that had no meaning. That was the last time she had seen him.

"I don't suppose I thanked him for his pity or his kindness," she
thought. "He must have gone away thinking me cold and ungrateful; but I
was like a creature at the bottom of some dark dismal pit. How could I
feel thankful to someone looking down at me and talking to me from the
free happy world at the top?"

Her sobs ceased gradually, she dried her tears, and that unconscious
pleasure in life which is a part of innocent youth came slowly back.
She looked round the room in which so much of her childhood had been
spent, a room full of her own fancies and caprices, a room whose
prettiness had been bought with her own money, and was for the most
part the work of her own hands.

In spite of home's sorrowful association she was glad to find herself
at home. Mountains, and lakes, and sunny bays, and dark pathless
forests, may be ever so good to see, but there is something sweet in
our return to the familiar rooms of home; some pleasure in being shut
snugly within four walls, surrounded by one's own belongings.

The wood-fire burnt merrily, and sparkled on the many-coloured pots and
pans upon the panelled wall; here an Etruscan vase of India red, there
a Moorish water-jar of vivid amber. Outside the deep mullioned windows
the winter blast was blowing, with occasional spurts of flying snow.
Argus crept in presently, and stretched himself at full length upon the
fleecy rug. Vixen lay back in her low chair, musing idly in the glow of
the fire, and by-and-by the lips which had been convulsed with grief
parted in a smile, the lovely brown eyes shone with happy memories.

She was thinking of her old playfellow and friend, Rorie.

"I wonder if he will come to-day?" she mused. "I think he will. He is
sure to be at home for the hunting. Yes, he will come to-day. What will
he be like, I wonder? Handsomer than he was two years ago? No, that
could hardly be. He is quite a man now. Three-and-twenty! I must not
laugh at him any more."

The thought of his coming thrilled her with a new joy. She seemed to
have been living an artificial life in the two years of her absence, to
have been changed in her very self by change of surroundings. It was
almost as if the old Vixen had been sent into an enchanted sleep, while
some other young lady, a model of propriety and good manners, went
about the world in Vixen's shape. Her life had been made up, more or
less, of trifles and foolishness, with a background of grand scenery.
Tepid little friendships with agreeable fellow-travellers at Nice;
tepid little friendships of the same order in Switzerland; well-dressed
young people smiling at each other, and delighting in each other's
company; and parting, probably for ever, without a pang.

But now she had come back to the friends, the horses, the dogs, the
rooms, the gardens, the fields, the forests of youth, and was going to
be the real Vixen again; the wild, thoughtless, high-spirited girl whom
Squire Tempest and all the peasantry round about had loved.

"I have been ridiculously well-behaved," she said to herself, "quite a
second edition of mamma. But now I am back in the Forest my good
manners may go hang. 'My foot's on my native heath, and my name is
McGregor.'"

Somehow in all her thoughts of home--after that burst of grief for her
dead father--Roderick Vawdrey was the central figure. He filled the gap
cruel death had made.

Would Rorie come soon to see her? Would he be very glad to have her at
home again? What would he think of her? Would he fancy her changed? For
the worse? For the better?

"I wonder whether he would like my good manners or the original Vixen
best?" she speculated.

The morning wore on, and still Violet Tempest sat idly by the fire. She
had made up her mind that Roderick would come to see her at once. She
was sufficiently aware of her own importance to feel sure that the fact
of her return had been duly chronicled in the local papers. He would
come to-day--before luncheon, perhaps, and they three, mamma, Rorie,
and herself, would sit at the round table in the library--the snug warm
room where they had so often sat with papa. This thought brought back
the bitterness of her loss.

"I can bear it better if Rorie is with us," she thought, "and he is
almost sure to come. He would not be so unkind as to delay bidding
welcome to such poor lonely creatures as mamma and I."

She looked at her little watch--a miniature hunter in a case of black
enamel, with a monogram in diamonds, one of her father's last gifts. It
was one o'clock already, and luncheon would be at half-past.

"Only half-an-hour for Rorie," she thought.

The minute-hand crept slowly to the half-hour, the luncheon-gong
sounded below, and there had been no announcement of Mr. Vawdrey.

"He may be downstairs with mamma all this time," thought Vixen. "Forbes
would not tell me, unless he were sent."

She went downstairs and met Forbes in the hall.

"Oh, if you please, ma'am, Mrs. Tempest does not feel equal to coming
down to luncheon. She will take a wing of chicken in her own room."

"And I don't feel equal to sitting in the library alone, Forbes," said
Violet; "so you may tell Phoebe to bring me a cup of tea and a biscuit.
Has nobody called this morning?"

"No, ma'am."

Vixen went back to her room, out of spirits and out of temper. It was
unkind of Rorie, cold, neglectful, heartless.

"If he had come home after an absence of two years--absence under such
sad circumstances--how anxious I should be to see him," she thought.
"But I don't suppose there is frost enough to stop the hunting, and I
daresay he is tearing across the heather on some big raw-boned horse,
and not giving me a thought. Or perhaps he is dancing attendance upon
Lady Mabel. But no, I don't think he cares much for that kind of thing."

She moved about the room a little, rearranging things that were already
arranged exactly as she had left them two years ago. She opened a book
and flung it aside; tried the piano, which sounded muffled and woolly.

"My poor little Broadwood is no better for being out at grass," she
said.

She went to one of the windows, and stood there looking out, expecting
every instant to see a dog-cart with a rakish horse, a wasp-like body,
and high red wheels, spin round the curve of the shrubbery. She stood
thus for a long time, as she had done on that wet October afternoon of
Rorie's home-coming; but no rakish horse came swinging round the curve
of the carriage-drive. The flying snow drifted past the window; the
winter sky looked blue and clear between the brief showers, the tall
feathery fir-trees and straight slim cypresses stood up against the
afternoon light, and Vixen gazed at them with angry eyes, full of
resentment against Roderick Vawdrey.

"The ground is too hard for the scent to lie well, that's one comfort,"
she reflected savagely.

And then she thought of the dear old kennels given over to a new
master; the hounds whose names and idiosyncrasies she had known as well
as if they had been human acquaintances. She had lost all interest in
them now. Pouto and Gellert, Lightfoot, Juno, Ringlet, Lord
Dundreary--they had forgotten her, no doubt.

Here was someone at last, but not the one for whom she was watching. A
figure clothed in a long loose black cloak and slouched felt hat, and
carrying a weedy umbrella, trudged sturdily around the curve, and came
briskly towards the porch. It was Mr. Scobel, the incumbent of the
pretty little Gothic church in the village--a church like a toy.

He was a good man and a benevolent, this Mr. Scobel; a hard-worker, and
a blessing in the neighbourhood. But just at this moment Violet Tempest
did not feel grateful to him for coming.

"What does he want?" she thought. "Blankets and coals and things, I
suppose."

She turned sullenly from the window, and went back to her seat by the
fire, and threw on a log, and gave herself up to disappointment. The
blue winter sky had changed to gray; the light was fading behind the
feathery fir-tops.

"Perhaps he will come to afternoon tea," she thought; and then, with a
discontented shrug of her shoulders: "No, he is not coming at all. If
he cared about us, he would have been the first to bid us welcome;
knowing, as he must, how miserable it was for me to come home at
all--without papa!"

She sat looking at the fire.

"How idle I am!" she mused; "and poor Crokey did so implore me to go on
with my education, and read good useful books and enlarge my mind. I
don't think my poor little mind would bear any more stretching, or that
I should be much happier if I knew all about Central Africa, and the
nearest way from Hindostan to China, or old red sandstone, and
tertiary, and the rest of them. What does it matter to me what the
earth is made of, if I can but be happy upon it? No, I shall never try
to be a highly cultivated young woman. I shall read Byron, and
Tennyson, and Wordsworth, and Keats, and Bulwer, and Dickens, and
Thackeray, and remain an ignoramus all the days of my life. I think
that would be quite enough for Rorie, if he and I were to be much
together; for I don't believe he ever opens a book at all. And what
would be the use of my talking to him about old red sandstone or the
centre of Africa?"

Phoebe, Miss Tempest's fresh-faced Hampshire maid, appeared at this
moment.

"Oh, if you please, miss, your ma says would you go to the
drawing-room? Mr. Scobel is with her, and would like to see you."

Violet rose with a sigh.

"Is my hair awfully untidy, Phoebe?"

"I think I had better arrange the plaits, miss."

"That means that I'm an object. It's four o'clock; I may as well change
my dress for dinner. I suppose I must go down to dinner?"

"Lor' yes, miss; it will never do to shut yourself up in your own room
and fret. You're as pale as them there Christmas roses already."

Ten minutes later Vixen went down to the drawing-room, looking very
stately in her black Irish poplin, whose heavy folds became the tall
full figure, and whose dense blackness set off the ivory skin and warm
auburn hair. She had given just one passing glance at herself in the
cheval-glass, and Vanity had whispered:

"Perhaps Rorie would have thought me improved; but he has not taken the
trouble to come and see. I might be honeycombed by the small-pox, or
bald from the effects of typhus, for aught he cares."

The drawing-room was all aglow with blazing logs, and the sky outside
the windows looking pale and gray, when Violet went in. Mrs. Tempest
was in her favourite arm-chair by the fire, Tennyson's latest poem on
the velvet-coloured gipsy table at her side, in company with a large
black fan and a smelling-bottle. Mr. Scobel was sitting in a low chair
on the other side of the hearth, with his knees almost up to his chin
and his trousers wrinkled up ever so far above his stout Oxford shoes,
leaving a considerable interval of gray stocking. He was a man of about
thirty, pale, and unpretending of aspect, who fortified his native
modesty with a pair of large binoculars, which interposed a kind of
barrier between himself and the outer world.

He rose as Violet came towards him, and turned the binoculars upon her,
glittering in the glow of the fire.

"How tall you have grown," he cried, when they had shaken hands. "And
how----" here he stopped, with a little nervous laugh; "I really don't
think I should have known you if we had met elsewhere."

"Perhaps Rorie would hardly know me," thought Vixen.

"How are all the poor people?" she asked, when Mr. Scobel had resumed
his seat, and was placidly caressing his knees, and blinking, or
seeming to blink, at the fire with his binoculars.

"Oh, poor souls!" he sighed. "There has been a great deal of sickness
and distress, and want of work. Yes, a very great deal. The winter
began early, and we have had some severe weather. James Parsons is in
prison again for rabbit-snaring. I'm really afraid James is
incorrigible. Mrs. Roper's eldest son, Tom--I daresay you remember Tom,
an idle little ruffian, who was always birdnesting--has managed to get
himself run over by a pair of Lord Ellangowan's waggon-horses, and now
Lady Ellangowan is keeping the whole family. An aunt came from
Salisbury to sit up with the boy, and was quite angry because Lady
Ellangowan did not pay her for nursing him."

"That's the worst of the poor," said Mrs. Tempest languidly, the
firelight playing upon her diamond rings, as she took her fan from the
velvet table and slowly unfolded it, to protect her cheek from the
glare, "they are never satisfied."

"Isn't it odd they are not," cried Vixen, coming suddenly out of a deep
reverie, "when they have everything that can make life delightful?"

"I don't know about everything, Violet; but really, when they have such
nice cottages as your dear papa built for them, so well-drained and
ventilated, they ought to be more contented."

"What a comfort good drainage and ventilation must be, when there is no
bread in the larder!" said Violet.

"My dear, it is ridiculous to talk in that way; just in the style of
horrid Radical newspapers. I am sure the poor have an immense deal done
for them. Look at Mr. Scobel, is he not always trying to help them?"

"I do what I can," said the clergyman modestly; "but I only wish it
were more. An income of sixteen shillings a week for a family of seven
requires a good deal of ekeing out. If it were not for the assistance I
get here, and in one or two other directions, things would be very bad
in Beechdale."

Beechdale was the name of the village nearest the Abbey House, the
village to which belonged Mr. Scobel's toy-church.

"Of course, we must have the usual distribution of blanket and wearing
apparel on Christmas Eve," said Mrs. Tempest. "It will seem very sad
without my dear husband. But we came home before Christmas on purpose."

"How good of you! It was very sad last year when the poor people came
up to the Hall to receive your gifts, and there were no familiar faces,
except the servants. There were a good many tears shed over last year's
blankets, I assure you."

"Poor dear things!" sighed Mrs. Tempest, not making it too clear
whether she meant the blankets, or the recipients thereof.

Violet said nothing after her little ironical protest about the poor.
She sat opposite the fire, between her mother and Mr. Scobel, but at
some distance from both. The ruddy light glowed on her ruddy hair, and
lit up her pale cheeks, and shone in her brilliant eyes. The incumbent
of Beechdale thought he had never seen anything so lovely. She was like
a painted window; a Madonna, with the glowing colour of Rubens, the
divine grace of Raffaelle. And those little speeches about the poor had
warmed his heart. He was Violet's friend and champion from that moment.

Mrs. Tempest fanned herself listlessly.

"I wish Forbes would bring the tea," she said.

"Shall I ring, mamma?"

"No, dear. They have not finished tea in the housekeeper's room,
perhaps. Forbes doesn't like to be disturbed. Is there any news, Mr.
Scobel? We only came home yesterday evening, and have seen no one."

"News! Well, no, I think not much. Lady Ellangowan has got a new
orchid."

"And there has been a new baby, too, hasn't there?"

"Oh yes. But nobody talks about the baby, and everybody is in raptures
with the orchid."

"What is it like?"

"Rather a fine boy. I christened him last week."

"I mean the orchid."

"Oh, something really magnificent; a brilliant blue, a butterfly-shaped
blossom that positively looks as if it were alive. They say Lord
Ellangowan gave five hundred guineas for it. People come from the other
side of the county to see it."

"I think you are all orchid mad," exclaimed Mrs. Tempest. "Oh, here
comes the tea!" as Forbes entered with the old silver tray and Swansea
cups and saucers. "You'll take some, of course, Mr. Scobel. I cannot
understand this rage for orchids--old china, or silver, or lace, I can
understand, but orchids--things that require no end of trouble to keep
them alive, and which I daresay are as common as buttercups and daisies
in the savage places where they grow. There is Lady Jane Vawdrey now, a
perfect slave to the orchid-houses."

Violet's face flamed crimson at this mention of Lady Jane. Not for
worlds would she have asked a question about her old playfellow, though
she was dying to hear about him. Happily no one saw that sudden blush,
or it passed for a reflection of the fire-glow.

"Poor Lady Jane!" sighed the incumbent of Beechdale, looking very
solemn, "she has gone to a land in which there are fairer flowers than
ever grew on the banks of the Amazon."

"What do you mean?"

"Surely you have heard----"

"Nothing," exclaimed Mrs. Tempest. "I have corresponded with nobody but
my housekeeper while I have been away. I am a wretched correspondent at
the best of times, and, after dear Edward's death, I was too weary, too
depressed, to write letters. What is the matter with Lady Jane Vawdrey?"

"She died at Florence last November of bronchitis. She was very ill
last winter, and had to be taken to Cannes for the early part of the
year; but she came back in April quite well and strong, as everyone
supposed, and spent the summer at Briarwood. Her doctors told her,
however, that she was not to risk another winter in England, so in
September she went to Italy, taking Lady Mabel with her."

"And Roderick?" inquired Vixen, "He went with them of course."

"Naturally," replied Mr. Scobel. "Mr. Vawdrey was with his mother till
the last."

"Very nice of him," murmured Mrs. Tempest approvingly; "for, in a
general way, I don't think they got on too well together. Lady Jane was
rather dictatorial. And now, I suppose, Roderick will marry his cousin
as soon as he is out of mourning."

"Why should you suppose so, mamma?" exclaimed Violet. "It is quite a
mistake of yours about their being engaged. Roderick told me so
himself. He was not engaged to Lady Mabel. He had not the least idea of
marrying her."

"He has altered his mind since then, I conclude," said Mr. Scobel
cheerily--those binoculars of his could never have seen through a
stone-wall, and were not much good at seeing things under his
nose--"for it is quite a settled thing that Mr. Vawdrey and Lady Mabel
are to be married. It will be a splendid match for him, and will make
him the largest landowner in the Forest, for Ashbourne is settled on
Lady Mabel. The Duke bought it himself, you know, and it is not in the
entail," added the incumbent, explaining a fact that was as familiar as
the church catechism to Violet, who sat looking straight at the fire,
holding her head as high as Queen Guinevere after she had thrown the
diamonds out of window.

"I always knew that it would be so," said Mrs. Tempest, with the air of
a sage. "Lady Jane had set her heart upon it. Worldly greatness was her
idol, poor thing! It is sad to think of her being snatched away from
everything. What has become of the orchids?"

"Lady Jane left them to her niece. They are building houses to receive
them at Ashbourne."

"Rather a waste of money, isn't it?" suggested Violet, in a cold hard
voice. "Why not let them stay at Briarwood till Lady Mabel is mistress
there?"

Mr. Scobel did not enter into this discussion. He sat serenely gazing
at the fire, and sipping his tea, enjoying this hour of rest and warmth
after a long day's fatigue and hard weather. He had an Advent service
at seven o'clock that evening, and would but just have time to tramp
home through the winter dark, and take a hurried meal, before he ran
across to his neat little vestry and shuffled on his surplice, while
Mrs. Scobel played her plaintive voluntary on the twenty-guinea
harmonium.

"And where is young Vawdrey now?" inquired Mrs. Tempest blandly.

She could only think of the Squire of Briarwood as the lad from
Eton--clumsy, shy, given to breaking teacups, and leaving the track of
his footsteps in clay or mud upon the Aubusson carpets.

"He has not come home yet. The Duke and Duchess went to Florence just
before Lady Jane's death, and I believe Mr. Vawdrey is with them in
Rome. Briarwood has been shut up since September."

"Didn't I tell you, mamma, that somebody would be dead," cried Violet.
"I felt when we came into this house yesterday evening, that everything
in our lives was changed."

"I should hardly think mourning can be very becoming to Lady Mabel,"
ruminated Mrs. Tempest. "Those small sylph-like figures rarely look
well in black."

Mr. Scobel rose with an effort to make his adieux. The delicious warmth
of the wood-fire, the perfume of arbutus logs, had made him sleepy.

"You'll come and see our new school, I hope," he said to Violet, as
they shook hands. "You and your dear mamma have contributed so largely
to its erection that you have a right to be critical; but I really
think you will be pleased."

"We'll come to-morrow afternoon, if it's fine," said Mrs. Tempest
graciously. "You must bring Mrs. Scobel to dinner at seven, and then we
can talk over all we have seen."

"You are very kind. I've my young women's scripture-class at a
quarter-past eight; but if you will let me run away for an hour----"

"Certainly."

"I can come back for Mrs. Scobel. Thanks. We shall be delighted."

When he was gone, Violet walked towards the door without a word to her
mother.

"Violet, are you going away again? Pray stop, child, and let us have a
chat."

"I have nothing to talk about, mamma."

"Nonsense. You have quite deserted me since we came home. And do you
suppose I don't feel dull and depressed as well as you? It is not
dutiful conduct, Violet. I shall really have to engage a companion if
you go on so. Miss McCroke was dreary, but she was not altogether
uncompanionable. One could talk to her."

"You had better have a companion, mamma. Someone who will be lively,
and talk pleasantly about nothing particular all day long. No doubt a
well-trained companion can do that. She has an inexhaustible
well-spring of twaddle in her own mind. I feel as if I could never be
cheerful again."

"We had better have stopped at Brighton----"

"I hate Brighton!"

"Where we knew so many nice people----"

"I detest nice people!"

"Violet, do you know that you have an abominable temper?"

"I know that I am made up of wickedness!" answered Vixen vehemently.

She left the room without another word, and went straight to her den
upstairs, not to throw herself on the ground, and abandon herself to a
childish unreasoning grief, as she had done on the night of Roderick's
coming of age, but to face the situation boldly. She walked up and down
the dim fire-lit room, thinking of what she had just heard.

"What does it matter to me? Why should I be so angry?" she asked
herself. "We were never more than friends and playfellows. And I think
that, on the whole, I rather disliked him. I know I was seldom civil to
him. He was papa's favourite. I should hardly have tolerated him but
for that."

She felt relieved at having settled this point in her mind. Yet there
was a dull blank sense of loss, a vague aching in her troubled heart,
which she could not get rid of easily. She walked to and fro, to and
fro, while the fire faded out and the pale windows darkened.

"I hate myself for being so vexed about this," she said, clasping her
hands above her head with a vehemence that showed the intensity of her
vexation. "Could I--I--Violet Tempest--ever be so despicable a creature
as to care for a man who does not care for me; to be angry, sorry,
broken-hearted, because a man does not want me for his wife? Such a
thing is not possible; if it were, I think I would kill myself. I
should be ashamed to live. I could not look human beings in the face. I
should take poison, or turn Roman Catholic and go into a convent, where
I should never see the face of a man again. No; I am not such an odious
creature. I have no regard for Rorie except as my old playfellow, and
when he comes home I will walk straight up to him and give him my hand,
and congratulate him heartily on his approaching marriage. Perhaps Lady
Mabel will ask me to be one of her bridesmaids. She will have a round
dozen, I daresay. Six in pink, and six in blue, no doubt, like wax
dolls at a charity-fair. Why can't people be married without making
idiots of themselves?"

The half-hour gong sounded at this moment, and Vixen ran down to the
drawing-room, where the candles and lamps were lighted, and where there
was plenty of light literature lying about to distract the troubled
mind. Violet went to her mother's chair and knelt beside it.

"Dear mamma, forgive me for being cross just now," she said gently; "I
was out of spirits. I will try to be better company in future--so that
you may not be obliged to engage a companion."

"My dear, I don't wonder at your feeling low-spirited," replied Mrs.
Tempest graciously. "This place is horribly dull. How we ever endured
it, even in your dear papa's time, is more than I can understand. It is
like living on the ground-floor of one of the Egyptian pyramids. We
must really get some nice people about us, or we shall both go
melancholy mad."



CHAPTER XIII.

"He belongs to the Tame-Cat Species."

Life went on smoothly enough at the Abbey House after that evening.
Violet tried to make herself happy among the surroundings of her
childhood, petted the horses, drove her basket-carriage with the
favourite old pony, went among the villagers, rode her thoroughbred bay
for long wild explorations of the Forest and neighbouring country,
looked with longing eyes, sometimes, at the merry groups riding to the
meet, and went her lonely way with a heavy heart. No more hunting for
her. She could not hunt alone, and she had declined all friendly offers
of escort. It would have seemed a treason against her beloved dead to
ride across country by anyone else's side.

Everyone had called at the Abbey House and welcomed Mrs. Tempest and
her daughter back to Hampshire. They had been asked to five-o'clock at
Ellangowan Park, to see the marvellous orchid. They had been invited to
half-a-dozen dinner-parties.

Violet tried her utmost to persuade her mother that it was much too
soon after her father's death to think of visiting.

"My dear Violet," cried the widow, "after going to that ball at
Brighton, we could not possibly decline invitations here. It would be
an insult to our friends. If we had not gone to the ball----"

"We ought not to have gone," exclaimed Vixen.

"My love, you should have said so at the time."

"Mamma, you know I was strongly against it."

Mrs. Tempest shrugged her shoulders as who should say, "This is too
much!"

"I know your dress cost a small fortune, and that you danced every
waltz, Violet," she answered, "that is about all I do know."

"Very well, mamma, let us accept all the invitations. Let us be as
merry as grigs. Perhaps it will make papa more comfortable in Paradise
to know how happy we are without him. He won't be troubled by any
uneasy thoughts about our grief, at all events," added Vixen, with a
stifled sob.

"How irreverently you talk. Mr. Scobel would be dreadfully shocked to
hear you." said Mrs. Tempest.

The invitations were all accepted, and Mrs. Tempest for the rest of the
winter was in a flutter about her dresses. She was very particular as
to the exact shade of silver-gray or lavender which might be allowed to
relieve the sombre mass of black; and would spend a whole morning in
discussing the propriety of a knot of scarlet ribbon, or a border of
gold passementerie.

They went to Ellangowan Park and did homage to the wonderful orchid,
and discussed Roderick's engagement to the Duke's only daughter.
Everybody said that it was Lady Jane's doing, and there were some who
almost implied that she had died on purpose to bring about the happy
conjuncture. Violet was able to talk quite pleasantly about the
marriage, and to agree with everybody's praises of Lady Mabel's beauty,
elegance, good style, and general perfection.

Christmas and the New Year went by, not altogether sadly. It is not
easy for youth to be full of sorrow. The clouds come and go, there are
always glimpses of sunshine. Violet was grateful for the kindness that
greeted her everywhere among her old friends, and perhaps a little glad
of the evident admiration accorded to her beauty in all circles. Life
was just tolerable, after all. She thought of Roderick Vawdrey as of
something belonging to the past; something which had no part, never
would have any part, in her future life. He too was dead and passed
away, like her father. Lady Mabel's husband, the master of Briarwood
_in esse_, and of Ashbourne _in posse_, was quite a different being
from the rough lad with whom she had played at battledore and
shuttlecock, billiards, croquet, and rounders.

Early in February Mrs. Tempest informed her daughter that she was going
to give a dinner.

"It will seem very dreadful without dearest Edward," she said; "but of
course having accepted hospitalities, we are bound to return them."

"Do you really think we ought to burst out into dinner-parties so soon,
mamma?"

"Yes, dear, as we accepted the dinners. If we had not gone it would
have been different."

"Ah," sighed Vixen, "I suppose it all began with that ball at Brighton,
like 'Man's first disobedience, and the fruit----'"

"I shall miss poor McCroke to fill in the invitation cards."

"Let me do it, mamma. I can write a decent hand. That is one of the few
ladylike accomplishments I have been able to master; and even that is
open to objection as being too masculine."

"If you would slope more, Violet, and make your up-strokes finer, and
not cross your T's so undeviatingly," Mrs. Tempest murmured amiably. "A
lady's T ought to be less pronounced. There is something too assertive
in your consonants."

Violet wrote the cards. The dinner was to be quite a grand affair,
three weeks' notice, and a French cook from The Dolphin at Southampton
to take the conduct of affairs in the kitchen; whereby the Abbey House
cook declared afterwards that there was nothing that Frenchman did
which she could not have done as well, and that his wastefulness was
enough to make a Christian woman's hair stand on end.

Three days before the dinner, Vixen, riding Arion home through the
shrubbery, after a long morning in the Forest, was startled by the
vision of a dog-cart a few yards in front of her, a cart, which, at the
first glance, she concluded must belong to Roderick Vawdrey. The wheels
were red, the horse had a rakish air, the light vehicle swung from side
to side as it spun around the curve.

No, that slim figure, that neat waist, that military air did not belong
to Roderick Vawdrey.

"He here!" ejaculated Vixen inwardly, with infinite disgust. "I thought
we had seen the last of him."

She had been out for two hours and a half, and felt that Arion had done
quite enough, or she would have turned her horse's head and gone back
to the Forest, in order to avoid this unwelcome visitor.

"I only hope mamma won't encourage him to come here," she thought; "but
I'm afraid that smooth tongue of his has too much influence over her.
And I haven't even poor Crokey to stand by me. I shall feel like a bird
transfixed by the wicked green eyes of a velvet-pawed murdering cat."

"And I have not a friend in the world," she thought. "Plenty of
pleasant acquaintance, ready to simper at me and pay me compliments,
because I am Miss Tempest of the Abbey House, but not one honest friend
to stand by me, and turn that man out of doors. How dare he come here?
I thought I spoke plainly enough that night at Brighton."

She rode slowly up to the house, slipped lightly out of her saddle, and
led her horse round to the stables, just as she had led the pony in her
happy childish days. The bright thoroughbred bay was as fond of her as
if he had been a dog, and as tame. She stood by his manger caressing
him while he ate his corn, and feeling very safe from Captain
Winstanley's society in the warm clover-scented stable.

She dawdled away half-a-hour in this manner, before she went back to
the house, and ran up to her dressing-room.

"If mamma sends for me now, I shan't be able to go down," she thought.
"He can hardly stay more than an hour. Oh, horror! he is a tea-drinker;
mamma will persuade him to stop till five o'clock."

Violet dawdled over her change of dress as she had dawdled in the
stable. She had never been more particular about her hair.

"I'll have it all taken down, Phoebe," she told her Abigail; "I'm in no
hurry."

"But really, miss, it's beautiful----"

"Nonsense after a windy ride; don't be lazy, Phoebe. You may give my
hair a good brushing while I read."

A tap at the door came at this moment, and Phoebe ran to open it.

"Mrs. Tempest wishes Miss Tempest to come down to the drawing-room
directly," said a voice in the corridor.

"There now, miss," cried Phoebe, "how lucky I didn't take your hair
down. It never was nicer."

Violet put on her black dress, costly and simple as the attire Polonius
recommended to his son. Mrs. Tempest might relieve her costume with
what bright or delicate hues she liked. Violet had worn nothing but
black since her father's death. Her sole ornaments were a pair of black
earrings, and a large black enamel locket, with one big diamond shining
in the middle of it, like an eye. This locket held the Squire's
portrait, and his daughter wore it constantly.

The Louis Quatorze clock on the staircase struck five as Violet went
down.

"Of course he is staying for tea," she thought, with an impatient shrug
of her shoulders. "He belongs to the tame-cat species, and has an
inexhaustible flow of gossip, spiced with mild malevolence. The kind of
frivolous ill-nature which says: 'I would not do anyone harm for the
world, but one may as well think the worst of everybody.'"

Yes, kettledrum was in full swing. Mrs. Scobel had come over from her
tiny Vicarage for half-an-hour's chat, and was sitting opposite her
hostess's fire, while Captain Winstanley lounged with his back to the
canopied chimneypiece, and looked benignantly down upon the two ladies.
The Queen Anne kettle was hissing merrily over its spirit-lamp, the
perfume of the pekoe was delicious, the logs blazed cheerily in the low
fireplace, with its shining brass andirons. Not a repulsive picture,
assuredly; yet Vixen came slowly towards this charming circle, looking
black as thunder.

Captain Winstanley hurried forward to receive her.

"How do you do?" she said, as stiffly as a child brought down to the
drawing-room, bristling in newly-brushed hair and a best frock, and
then turning to her mother, she asked curtly: "What did you want with
me, mamma?"

"It was Captain Winstanley who asked to see you, my dear. Won't you
have some tea?"

"Thanks, no," said Vixen, seating herself in a corner between Mrs.
Scobel and the mantelpiece, and beginning to talk about the schools.

Conrad Winstanley gave her a curious look from under his dark brows,
and then went on talking to her mother. He seemed hardly disconcerted
by her rudeness.

"Yes, I assure you, if it hadn't been for the harriers, Brighton would
have been unbearable after you left," he said. "I ran across to Paris
directly the frost set in. But I don't wonder you were anxious to come
back to such a lovely old place as this."

"I felt it a duty to come back," said Mrs. Tempest, with a pious air.
"But it was very sad at first. I never felt so unhappy in my life. I am
getting more reconciled now. Time softens all griefs."

"Yes," said the Captain, in a louder tone than before, "Time is a
clever horse. There is nothing he won't beat if you know how to ride
him."

"You'll take some tea?" insinuated Mrs. Tempest, her attention absorbed
by the silver kettle, which was just now conducting itself as
spitfireishly as any blackened block-tin on a kitchen hob.

"I can never resist it. And perhaps after tea you will be so good as to
give me the treat you talked about just now."

"To show you the house?" said Mrs. Tempest. "Do you think we shall have
light enough?"

"Abundance. An old house like this is seen at its best in the twilight.
Don't you think so, Mrs. Scobel?"

"Oh, yes," exclaimed Mrs. Scobel, with a lively recollection of her
album. "'They who would see Melrose aright, should see it'--I think,
by-the-bye, Sir Walter Scott says, 'by moonlight.'"

"Yes, for an ancient Gothic abbey; but twilight is better for a Tudor
manor-house. Are you sure it will not fatigue you?" inquired the
Captain, with an air of solicitude, as Mrs. Tempest rose languidly.

"No; I shall be very pleased to show you the dear old place. It is full
of sad associations, of course, but I do not allow my mind to dwell
upon them more than I can help."

"No," cried Vixen bitterly. "We go to dinner-parties and kettledrums,
and go into raptures about orchids and old china, and try to cure our
broken hearts that way."

"Are you coming, Violet?" asked her mother sweetly.

"No, thanks, mamma. I am tired after my ride. Mrs. Scobel will help you
to play cicerone."

Captain Winstanley left the room without so much as a look at Violet
Tempest. Yet her rude reception had galled him more than any cross that
fate had lately inflicted upon him. He had fancied that time would have
softened her feeling towards him, that rural seclusion and the society
of rustic nobodies would have made him appear at an advantage, that she
would have welcomed the brightness and culture of metropolitan life in
his person. He had hoped a great deal from the lapse of time since
their last meeting. But this sullen reception, this silent expression
of dislike, told him that Violet Tempest's aversion was a plant of deep
root.

"The first woman who ever disliked me," he thought. "No wonder that she
interests me more than other women. She is like that chestnut mare that
threw me six times before I got the better of her. Yet she proved the
best horse I ever had, and I rode her till she hadn't a leg to stand
upon, and then sold her for twice the money she cost me. There are two
conquests a man can make over a woman, one to make her love him, the
other----"

"That suit of chain-armour was worn by Sir Gilbert Tempest at Acre,"
said the widow. "The plate-armour belonged to Sir Percy, who was killed
at Barnet. Each of them was knighted before he was five-and-twenty
years old, for prowess in the field. The portrait over the chimneypiece
is the celebrated Judge Tempest, who was famous for----Well, he did
something wonderful, I know. Perhaps Mrs. Scobel remembers," concluded
Mrs. Tempest, feebly.

"It was at the trial of the seven bishops," suggested the Vicar's wife.

"In the time of Queen Elizabeth," assented Mrs. Tempest. "That one with
the lace cravat and steel breastplate was an admiral in Charles the
Second's reign, and was made a baronet for his valiant behaviour when
the Dutch fleet were at Chatham. The baronetcy died with his son, who
left only daughters. The eldest married a Mr. Percival, who took the
name of Tempest, and sat for the borough of----Perhaps Mrs. Scobel
knows. I have such a bad memory for these things; though I have heard
my dear husband talk about them often."

Captain Winstanley looked round the great oak-panelled hall dreamily,
and heard very little of Mrs. Tempest's vague prattling about her
husband's ancestors.

What a lovely old place, he was thinking. A house that would give a man
importance in the land, supported, as it was, by an estate bringing in
something between five and six thousand a year. How much military
distinction, how many battles must a soldier win before he could make
himself master of such a fortune?

"And it needed but for that girl to like me, and a little gold ring
would have given me the freehold of it all," thought Conrad Winstanley
bitterly.

How many penniless girls, or girls with fortunes so far beneath the
measure of a fine gentleman's needs as to be useless, had been over
head and ears in love with the elegant Captain; how many pretty girls
had tempted him by their beauty and winsomeness to be false to his
grand principle that marriage meant promotion. And here was an
obstinate minx who would have realised all his aims, and whom he felt
himself able to love to distraction into the bargain; and, behold, some
adverse devil had entered into her mind, and made Conrad Winstanley
hateful to her.

"It's like witchcraft," he said to himself. "Why should this one woman
be different from all other women? Perhaps it's the colour. That ruddy
auburn hair, the loveliest I ever saw, means temper. But I conquered
the chestnut, and I'll conquer Miss Tempest--or make her smart for it."

"A handsome music-gallery, is it not?" said the widow. "The carved
balustrade is generally admired."

Then they went into the dining-room, and looked cursorily at about a
dozen large dingy pictures of the Italian school, which a man who knew
anything about art would have condemned at a glance. Fine examples of
brown varnish, all of them. Thence to the library, lined with its
carved-oak dwarf bookcases, containing books which nobody had opened
for a generation--Livy, Gibbon, Hume, Burke, Smollett, Plutarch,
Thomson. These sages, clad in shiny brown leather and gilding, made as
good a lining for the walls as anything else, and gave an air of
snugness to the room in which the family dined when there was no
company.

They came presently to the Squire's den, at the end of a corridor.

"That was my dear husband's study," sighed Mrs. Tempest. "It looks
south, into the rose garden, and is one of the prettiest rooms in the
house. But we keep it locked, and I think Violet has the key."

"Pray don't let Miss Tempest be disturbed," said Captain Winstanley. "I
have seen quite enough to know what a delightful house you have--all
the interest of days that are gone, all the luxuries of to-day. I think
that blending of past and present is most fascinating. I should never
be a severe restorer of antiquity, or refuse to sit in a chair that
wasn't undeniably Gothic."

"Ah," sighed the Vicar's wife, who was an advanced disciple in the
school of Eastlake, "but don't you think everything should be in
harmony? If I were as rich as Mrs. Tempest, I wouldn't have so much as
a teapot that was not strictly Tudor."

"Then I'm afraid you'd have to go without a teapot, and drink your tea
out of a tankard," retorted Captain Winstanley.

"At any rate, I would be as Tudor as I could be."

"And not have a brass bedstead, a spring mattress, a moderator lamp, or
a coal-scuttle in your house," said the captain. "My dear madam, it is
all very well to be mediaeval in matters ecclesiastic, but home
comforts must not be sacrificed in the pursuit of the aesthetic, or a
modern luxury discarded because it looks like an anachronism."

Mrs. Scobel was delighted with Captain Winstanley. He was just the kind
of man to succeed in a rustic community. His quiet self-assurance set
other people at their ease. He carried with him an air of life and
movement, as if he were the patentee of a new pleasure.

"My husband would be so pleased to see you at the Vicarage, if you are
staying any time in the neighbourhood," she said.

But after this little gush of friendliness, she reflected that there
could not be much sympathy between the man of society and her Anglican
parson; and that it was she, and not Ignatius Scobel, who would be glad
to see Captain Winstanley at the Vicarage.

"I shall be charmed," he replied. "I never was so delighted with any
place as your Forest. It is a new world to me. I hate myself for having
lived in England so long without knowing this beautiful corner of the
land. I am staying with my old chief, Colonel Pryke, at Warham Court,
and I'm only here for a few days."

"But you are coming to my dinner-party?" said Mrs. Tempest.

"That is a pleasure I cannot deny myself."

"And you will come and see our church and schools?" said Mrs. Scobel.

"I shall be more than pleased. I passed your pretty little church, I
think, on my way here. There was a tin tea-ket--a bell ringing----"

"For vespers," exclaimed Mrs. Scobel.

The exploration of the house took a long time, conducted in this
somewhat desultory and dawdling manner; but the closing in of night and
the sound of the dinner-gong gave the signal for Captain Winstanley's
departure.

Mrs. Tempest would have liked to ask him to dinner; but she had an idea
that Violet might make herself objectionable, and refrained from this
exercise of hospitality. He was coming to the great dinner. He would
see her dress with the feather trimming, which was really prettier than
Worth's masterpiece, or, at any rate, newer; though it only came from
Madame Theodore, of Bruton Street. Sustained by this comforting
reflection, she parted with him quite cheerfully.



CHAPTER XIV.

"He was worthy to be loved a Lifetime."

Conrad Winstanley had come to the New Forest with his mind resolved
upon one of two things. He meant to marry Violet Tempest or her mother.
If the case was quite hopeless with the daughter, he would content
himself with winning the lesser prize; and though Vanity whispered that
there was no woman living he might not win for himself if he chose to
be sufficiently patient and persevering, instinct told him that Violet
frankly detested him.

"After all," argued Worldly Wisdom, "the alternative is not to be
despised. The widow is somewhat rococo; an old-fashioned jewel kept in
cotton-wool, and brought out on occasions to shine with a factitious
brilliancy, like old Dutch garnets backed with tinfoil; but she is
still pretty. She is ductile, amiable, and weak to a degree that
promises a husband the sovereign dominion. Why break your heart for
this fair devil of a daughter, who looks capable, if offended, of
anything in the way of revenge, from a horsewhip to slow poison? Are a
pair of brown eyes and a coronal of red gold hair worth all this wasted
passion?"

"But the daughter is the greater catch," urged Ambition. "The dowager's
jointure is well enough, and she has the Abbey House and gardens for
her life, but Violet will be sole mistress of the estate when she comes
of age. As Violet's husband, your position would be infinitely better
than it could be as her stepfather. Unhappily, the cantankerous minx
has taken it into her head to dislike you."

"Stay," interjected the bland voice of Vanity; "may not this dislike be
only an assumption, a mask for some deeper feeling? There are girls who
show their love in that way. Do not be in a hurry to commit yourself to
the mother until you have made yourself quite sure about the daughter."

Mrs. Tempest's dinner-party was a success. It introduced Captain
Winstanley to all that was best in the surrounding society; for
although in Switzerland he had seemed very familiar with the best
people in the Forest, in Hampshire he appeared almost a stranger to
them. It was generally admitted, however, that the Captain was an
acquisition, and a person to be cultivated. He sang a French comic song
almost as well as Monsieur de Roseau, recited a short Yankee poem,
which none of his audience had ever heard before, with telling force.
He was at home upon every subject, from orchids to steam-ploughs, from
ordnance to light literature. A man who sang so well, talked so well,
looked so well, and behaved so well, could not be otherwise than
welcome in county society. Before the evening was over, Captain
Winstanley had been offered three hunters for the next day's run, and
had been asked to write in four birthday-books.

Violet did not honour him with so much as a look, after her one cold
recognition of his first appearance in the drawing-room. It was a party
of more than twenty people, and she was able to keep out of his way
without obvious avoidance of him. He was stung, but had no right to be
offended.

He took Mrs. Scobel in to dinner, and Mrs. Scobel played the
accompaniment of his song, being a clever little woman, able to turn
her hand to any thing. He would have preferred to be told off to some
more important matron, but was not sorry to be taken under Mrs.
Scobel's wing. She could give him the carte du pays, and would be
useful to him, no doubt, in the future; a social Iris, to fetch and
carry for him between Beechdale and the Abbey House.

"Do you know that I am quite in love with your Forest?" he said to Mrs.
Tempest, standing in front of the ottoman where that lady sat with two
of her particular friends; "so much so, that I am actually in treaty
for Captain Hawbuck's cottage, and mean to stay here till the end of
the hunting."

Everybody knew Captain Hawbuck's cottage, a verandahed box of a house,
on the slope of the hill above Beechdale.

"I'm afraid you'll find the drawing-room chimney smokes," said a
matter-of-fact lady in sea-green; "poor Mrs. Hawbuck was a martyr to
that chimney."

"What does a bachelor want with a drawing-room? If there is one
sitting-room in which I can burn a good fire, I shall be satisfied. The
stable is in very fair order."

"The Hawbucks kept a pony-carriage," assented the sea-green lady.

"If Mrs. Hawbuck accepts my offer, I shall send for my horses next
week," said the Captain.

Mrs. Tempest blushed. Her life had flowed in so gentle and placid a
current, that the freshness of her soul had not worn off, and at
nine-and-thirty she was able to blush. There was something so
significant in Captain Winstanley's desire to establish himself at
Beechdale, that she could not help feeling fluttered by the fact. It
might be on Violet's account, of course, that he came; yet Violet and
he had never got on very well together.

"Poor fellow!" she thought blandly, "if he for a moment supposes that
anything would tempt me to marry again, he is egregiously mistaken."

And then she looked round the lovely old room, brightened by a crowd of
well-dressed people, and thought that next to being Edward Tempest's
wife, the best thing in life was to be Edward Tempest's widow.

"Dear Edward!" she mused, "how strange that we should miss him so
little to-night."

It had been with everyone as if the squire had never lived. Politeness
exacted this ignoring of the past, no doubt; but the thing had been so
easily done. The noble presence, the jovial laugh, the friendly smile
were gone, and no one seemed conscious of the void--no one but Violet,
who looked round the room once when conversation was liveliest, with a
pale indignant face, resenting this forgetfulness.

"I wish papa's ghost would come in at that door and scare his
hollow-hearted friends," she said to herself; and she felt as if it
would hardly have been a surprise to her to see the door open slowly
and that familiar figure appear.

"Well, Violet," Mrs. Temple said sweetly, when the guests were gone,
"how do you think it all went off?"

"It," of course, meant the dinner-party.

"I suppose, according to the nature of such things, it was all right
and proper," Vixen answered coldly; "but I should think it must have
been intensely painful to you, mamma."

Mrs. Tempest sighed. She had always a large selection of sighs in
stock, suitable to every occasion.

"I should have felt it much worse if I had sat in my old place at
dinner," she said; "but sitting at the middle of the table instead of
at the end made it less painful. And I really think it's better style.
How did you like the new arrangement of the glasses?"

"I didn't notice anything new."

"My dear Violet, you are frightfully unobservant."

"No, I am not," answered Vixen quickly. "My eyes are keen enough,
believe me."

Mrs. Tempest felt uncomfortable. She began to think that, after all, it
might be a comfortable thing to have a companion--as a fender between
herself and Violet. A perpetually present Miss Jones or Smith would
ward off these unpleasantnesses.

There are occasions, however, on which a position must be faced
boldly--in proverbial phrase, the bull must be taken by the horns. And
here, Mrs. Tempest felt, was a bull which must be so encountered. She
knew that her poor little hands were too feeble for the office; but she
told herself that she must make the heroic attempt.

"Violet, why have you such a rooted dislike to Captain Winstanley?"

"Why is my hair the colour it is, mamma, or why are my eyes brown
instead of blue? If you could answer my question, I might be able to
answer yours. Nature made me what I am, and nature has implanted a
hatred of Captain Winstanley in my mind."

"Do you not think it wrong to hate anyone--the very word hate was
considered unladylike when I was a girl--without cause?"

"I have cause to hate him, good cause, sufficient cause. I hate all
self-seekers and adventurers."

"You have no right to call him one or the other."

"Have I not? What brings him here, but the pursuit of his own interest?
Why does he plant himself at our door as if he were come to besiege a
town? Do you mean to say, mamma, that you can be so blind as not to see
what he wants?"

"He has come for the hunting."

"Yes, but not to hunt our foxes or our stags. He wants a rich wife,
mamma. And he thinks that you or I will be foolish enough to marry him."

"There would be nothing unnatural in his entertaining some idea of that
kind about you," replied Mrs. Tempest, with a sudden assertion of
matronly dignity. "But for him to think of me in that light would be
too absurd. I must be some years, perhaps four or five years, his
senior, to begin with."

"Oh, he would forgive you that; he would not mind that."

"And he ought to know that I should never dream of marrying again."

"He ought, if he had any idea of what is right and noble in a woman,"
answered Vixen. "But he has not. He has no ideas that do not begin and
end in himself and his own advantage. He sees you here with a handsome
house, a good income, and he thinks that he can persuade you to marry
him."

"Violet, you must know that I shall never marry."

"I hope I do know it. But the world ought to know it too. People ought
not to be allowed to whisper, and smile, and look significant; as I saw
some of them do to-night when Captain Winstanley was hanging over your
chair. You ought not to encourage him, mamma. It is a treason against
my father to have that man here."

Here was a bull that required prompt and severe handling, but Mrs.
Tempest felt her powers inadequate to the effort.

"I am surprised at you, Violet!" she exclaimed; "as if I did not know,
as well as you, what is due to my poor Edward; as if I should do
anything to compromise my own dignity. Is it to encourage a man to ask
him to a dinner-party, when he happens to be visiting in the
neighbourhood? Can I forbid Captain Winstanley to take the Hawbucks'
cottage?"

"No, you have gone too far already. You gave him too much encouragement
in Switzerland, and at Brighton. He has attached himself to us, like a
limpet to a rock. You will not easily get rid of him; unless you let
him see that you understand and despise him."

"I see nothing despicable in him, and I am not going to insult him at
your bidding," answered the widow, tremulous with anger. "I do not
believe him to be a schemer or an adventurer. He is a gentleman by
birth, education, profession. It is a supreme insolence on your part to
speak of him as you do. What can you know of the world? How can you
judge and measure a man like Captain Winstanley? A girl like you,
hardly out of the nursery! It is too absurd. And understand at once and
for ever, Violet, that I will not be hectored or lectured in this
manner, that I will not be dictated to, or taught what is good taste,
in my own house. This is to be my own house, you know, as long as I
live."

"Yes; unless you give it a new master," said Violet gravely. "Forgive
me if I have been too vehement, mamma. It is my love that is bold. Whom
have I in this world to love now, except you? And when I see you in
danger--when I see the softness of your nature---- Dear mother, there
are some instincts that are stronger than reason. There are some
antipathies which are implanted in us for warnings. Remember what a
happy life you led with my dear father--his goodness, his overflowing
generosity, his noble heart. There is no man worthy to succeed him, to
live in his house. Dear mother, for pity's sake----"

She was kneeling at her mother's feet, clinging to her hands, her voice
half-choked with sobs. Mrs. Tempest began to cry too.

"My dearest Violet, how can you be so foolish? My love, don't cry. I
tell you that I shall never marry again--never. Not if I were asked to
become a countess. My heart is true to your dear father; it always will
be. I am almost sorry that I consented to these scarlet bows on my
dress, but the feather trimming looked so heavy without them, and
Theodore's eye for colour is perfect. My dear child, be assured I shall
carry his image with me to my grave."

"Dear mother, that is all I ask. Be as happy as you can; but be true to
him. He was worthy to be loved for a lifetime; not to be put off with
half a life, half a heart."



CHAPTER XV.

Lady Southminster's Ball.

Captain Winstanley closed with Mrs. Hawbuck for the pretty little
verandah-surrounded cottage on the slope of the hill above Beechdale.
Captain Hawbuck, a retired naval man, to whom the place had been very
dear, was in his grave, and his wife was anxious to try if she and her
hungry children could not live on less money in Belgium than they could
in England. The good old post-captain had improved and beautified the
place from a farm-labourer's cottage into a habitation which was the
quintessence of picturesque inconvenience. Ceilings which you could
touch with your hand; funny little fireplaces in angles of the rooms; a
corkscrew staircase, which a stranger ascended or descended at peril of
life or limb; no kitchen worth mentioning, and stuffy little bedrooms
under the thatch. Seen from the outside the cottage was charming; and
if the captain and his family could only have lived over the way, and
looked at it, they would have had full value for the money invested in
its improvement. Small as the rooms were, however, and despite that
dark slander which hung over the chimneys, Captain Winstanley declared
that the cottage would suit him admirably.

"I like the situation," he said, discussing his bargain in the
coffee-room at The Crown, Lyndhurst.

"I should rather think you did!" cried Mr. Bell, the local surgeon.
"Suits you down to the ground, doesn't it?"

Whereby it will be seen that there was already a certain opinion in the
neighbourhood as to the Captain's motive for planting himself at
Beechdale--so acute is a quiet little community of this kind in
divining the intentions of a stranger.

Captain Winstanley took up his quarters at Beechdale Cottage in less
than a week after Mrs. Tempest's dinner-party. He sent for his horses,
and began the business of hunting in real earnest. His two hunters were
unanimously pronounced screws; but it is astonishing how well a good
rider can get across country on a horse which other people call a screw.
Nobody could deny Captain Winstanley's merits as a horseman. His costume
and appointments had all the finish of Melton Mowbray, and he was always
in the first flight.

Before he had occupied Captain Hawbuck's cottage a month the new-comer
had made friends for himself in all directions. He was as much at home
in the Forest as if he had been native and to the manner born. His
straight riding, his good looks, and agreeable manners won him
everybody's approval. There was nothing dissipated or Bohemian about
him. His clothes never smelt of stale tobacco. He was as punctual at
church every Sunday morning as if he had been a family man, bound to
set a good example. He subscribed liberally to the hounds, and was
always ready with those stray florins and half-crowns by which a man
purchases a cheap popularity among the horse-holding and
ragged-follower class.

Having distinctly asserted her intention of remaining a widow to
Violet, Mrs. Tempest allowed herself the privilege of being civil to
Captain Winstanley. He dropped in at afternoon tea at least twice a
week; he dined at the Abbey House whenever the Scobels or any other
intimate friends were there "in a quiet way." He generally escorted
Mrs. Tempest and her daughter from church on Sunday morning, Violet
persistently loitering twenty yards or so behind them on the narrow
woodland path that led from Beechdale to the Abbey House.

After walking home from church with Mrs. Tempest, it was only natural
that the Captain should stop to luncheon, and after luncheon--the
Sabbath afternoon being, in a manner, a legitimate occasion for
dawdling--it was equally natural for him to linger, looking at the
gardens and greenhouses, or talking beside the drawing-room fire, till
the appearance of the spitfire Queen Anne tea-kettle and Mrs. Tempest's
infusion of orange pekoe.

Sometimes the Scobels were present at these Sunday luncheons, sometimes
not. Violet was with her mother, of course, on these occasions; but,
while bodily present, she contrived to maintain an attitude of
aloofness which would have driven a less resolute man than Conrad
Winstanley to absent himself. A man more sensitive to the opinions of
others could hardly have existed in such an atmosphere of dislike; but
Captain Winstanley meant to live down Miss Tempest's aversion, or to
give her double cause for hating him.

"Why have you given up hunting, Miss Tempest?" he asked one Sunday
afternoon, when they had gone the round of the stables, and Arion had
been fondled and admired--a horse as gentle as an Italian greyhound in
his stable, as fiery as a wild-cat out of it.

"Because I have no one I care to hunt with, now papa is gone."

"But here in the Forest, where everybody knows you, where you might
have as many fathers as the Daughter of the Regiment----"

"Yes, I have many kind friends. But there is not one who could fill my
father's place--for an hour."

"It is a pity," said the Captain sympathetically. "You were so fond of
hunting, were you not?"

"Passionately."

"Then it is a shame you should forego the pleasure. And you must find
it very dull, I should think, riding alone in the forest."

"Alone! I have my horse."

"Surely he does not count as a companion."

"Indeed he does. I wish for no better company than Arion, now papa is
gone."

"Violet is so eccentric!" Mrs. Tempest murmured gently.

Captain Winstanley had taken Mrs. Hawbuck's cottage till the first of
May. The end of April would see the last of the hunting, so this
arrangement seemed natural enough. He hunted in good earnest. There was
no pretence about him. It was only the extra knowing ones, the little
knot of choice spirits at The Crown, who saw some deeper motive than a
mere love of sport for his residence at Beechdale. These advanced minds
had contrived to find out all about Captain Winstanley by this
time--the date of his selling out, his ostensible and hidden reasons
for leaving the army, the amount of his income, and the general
complexion of his character. There was not much to be advanced against
him. No dark stories; only a leading notion that he was a man who
wanted to improve his fortunes, and would not be over-scrupulous as to
the means. But as your over-scrupulous man is one in a thousand, this
was ranking Captain Winstanley with the majority.

The winter was over; there were primroses peeping out of the moss and
brambles, and a shy little dog-violet shining like a blue eye here and
there. The flaunting daffodils were yellow in every glade, and the
gummy chestnut buds were beginning to swell. It was mid-March, and as
yet there had been no announcement of home-coming from Roderick Vawdrey
or the Dovedales. The Duke was said to have taken a fancy to the Roman
style of fox-hunting; Lady Mabel was studying art; the Duchess was
suspected of a leaning to Romanism; and Roderick was dancing attendance
upon the family generally.

"Why should he not stay there with them?" said Mr. Scobel, sipping his
pekoe in a comfortable little circle of gossipers round Mrs. Tempest's
gipsy table. "He has very little else to do with his life. He is a
young man utterly without views or purpose. He is one of our many
Gallios. You could not rouse him to an interest in those stirring
questions that are agitating the Catholic Church to her very
foundation. He has no mission. I have sounded him, and found him full
of a shallow good-nature. He would build a church if people asked him,
and hardly know, when it was finished, whether he meant it for Jews or
Gentiles."

Vixen sat in her corner and said nothing. It amused her--rather with a
half-bitter sense of amusement--to hear them talk about Roderick. He
had quite gone out of her life. It interested her to know what people
thought of him in his new world.

"If the Duke doesn't bring them all home very soon the Duchess will go
over to Rome," said Mrs. Scobel, with conviction. "She has been
drifting that way for ever so long. Ignatius isn't high enough for her."

The Reverend Ignatius sighed. He hardly saw his way to ascending any
higher. He had already, acting always in perfect good faith and
conscientious desire for the right, made his pretty little church
obnoxious to many of the simple old Foresters, to whom a pair of brazen
candlesticks on an altar were among the abominations of Baal, and a
crucifix as hateful as the image of Ashtaroth; obstinate old people of
limited vision, who wanted Mr. Scobel to stick to what they called the
old ways, and read the Liturgy as they had heard it when they were
children. In the minds of these people, Mr. Scobel's self-devotion and
hard service were as nothing, while he cut off the ten commandments
from the Sunday morning service, and lighted his altar candles at the
early celebration.

It was in this month of March that an event impended which caused a
considerable flutter among the dancing population of the Forest. Lord
Southminster's eldest daughter, Lady Almira Ringwood, was to marry Sir
Ponto Jones, the rich ironmaster--an alliance of ancient aristocracy
and modern wealth which was considered one of the grandest achievements
of the age, like the discovery of steam or the electric telegraph; and
after the marriage, which was to be quietly performed in the presence
of about a hundred and fifty blood relations, there was to be a ball,
to which all the county families were bidden, with very little more
distinction or favouritism than in the good old fairy-tale times, when
the king's herald went through the streets of the city to invite
everybody, and only some stray Cinderella, cleaning boots and knives in
a back kitchen, found herself unintentionally excluded. Lady
Southminster drew the line at county families, naturally, but her
kindly feelings allowed a wide margin for parsons, doctors, and
military men--and among these last Captain Winstanley received a card.

Mrs. Scobel declared that this ball would be a grand thing for Violet.
"You have never properly come out, you know, dear," she said; "but at
Southminster you will be seen by everybody; and, as I daresay Lady
Ellangowan will take you under her wing, you'll be seen to the best
advantage."

"Do you think Lady Ellangowan's wing will make any difference--in me?"
inquired Vixen.

"It will make a great deal of difference in the Southminster set,"
replied Mrs. Scobel, who considered herself an authority upon all
social matters.

She was a busy good-natured little woman, the chosen confidante of all
her female friends. People were always appealing to her on small social
questions, what they ought to do or to wear on such and such an
occasion. She knew the wardrobes of her friends as well as she knew her
own. "I suppose you'll wear that lovely pink," she would say when
discussing an impending dinner-party. She gave judicious assistance in
the composition of a _menu_. "My love, everyone has pheasants at this
time of year. Ask your poulterer to send you guinea-fowls, they are
more _distingue_," she would suggest. Or: "If you have dessert ices,
let me recommend you coffee-cream. We had it last week at Ellangowan
Park."

Vixen made no objection to the Southminster ball. She was young, and
fond of waltzing. Whirling easily round to the swing of some German
melody, in a great room garlanded with flowers, was a temporary
cessation of all earthly care, the idea of which was in no wise
unpleasant to her. She had enjoyed her waltzes even at that
charity-ball at the Pavilion, to which she had gone so unwillingly.

The March night was fine, but blustery, when Mrs. Tempest and her
daughter started for the Southminster ball. The stars were shining in a
windy sky, the tall forest trees were tossing their heads, the brambles
were shivering, and a shrill shriek came up out of the woodland every
now and then like a human cry for help.

Mrs Tempest had offered to take Mrs. Scobel and Captain Winstanley in
her roomy carriage. Mr. Scobel was not going to the ball. All such
entertainments were an abhorrence to him; but this particular ball,
being given in Lent, was more especially abhorrent.

"I shouldn't think of going for my own amusement," Mrs. Scobel told her
husband, "but I want to see Violet Tempest at her first local ball
dance. I want to see the impression she makes. I believe she will be
the belle of the ball."

"That would mean the belle of South Hants," said the parson. "She has a
beautiful face for a painted window--there is such a glow of colour."

"She is absolutely lovely, when she likes," replied his wife; "but she
has a curious temper; and there is something very repellent about her
when she does not like people. Strange, is it not, that she should not
like Captain Winstanley?"

"She would be a very noble girl under more spiritual influences,"
sighed the Reverend Ignatius. "Her present surroundings are appallingly
earthly. Horses, dogs, a table loaded with meat in Lent and Advent, a
total ignoring of daily matins and even-song. It is sad to see those we
like treading the broad path so blindly. I feel sorry, my dear, that
you should go to this ball."

"It is only on Violet's account," repeated Mrs. Scobel. "Mrs. Tempest
will be thinking of nothing but her dress; there will be nobody
interested in that poor girl."

Urged thus, on purely benevolent grounds, Mr. Scobel could not withhold
his consent; more especially as he had acquired the habit of letting
his wife do what she liked on most occasions--a marital custom not
easily broken through. So Mrs. Scobel, who was an economical little
woman, "did up" her silver-gray silk dinner-dress with ten shillings'
worth of black tulle and pink rosebuds, and felt she had made a success
that Madame Elise might have approved. Her faith in the silver-gray and
the rosebuds was just a little shaken by her first view of Mrs. Tempest
and Violet; the widow in black velvet, rose-point, and scarlet--Spanish
as a portrait by Velasquez; Violet in black and gold, with white
stephanotis in her hair.

The drive was a long one, well over ten miles, along one of those
splendid straight roads which distinguish the New Forest. Mrs. Tempest
and Mrs. Scobel were in high spirits, and prattled agreeably all the
way, only giving Captain Winstanley time to get a word in edgeways now
and then. Violet looked out of the window and held her peace. There was
always a charm for her in that dark silent forest, those waving
branches and flitting clouds, stars gleaming like lights on a stormy
sea. She was not much elated at the idea of the ball, and "that small,
small, imperceptibly small talk" of her mother's and Mrs. Scobel's was
beyond measure wearisome to her.

"I hope we shall get there after the Ellangowans," said Mrs. Scobel,
when they had driven through the little town of Ringwood, and were
entering a land of level pastures and fertilising streams, which seemed
wonderfully tame after the undulating forest; "it would be so much
nicer for Violet to be in the Ellangowan set from the first."

"I beg to state that Miss Tempest has promised me the first waltz,"
said Captain Winstanley. "I am not going to be ousted by any offshoot
of nobility in Lady Ellangowan's set."

"Oh, of course, if Violet has promised---- What a lot of carriages! I
am afraid there'll be a block presently."

There was every prospect of such a calamity. A confluence of vehicles
had poured into a narrow lane bounded on one side by a treacherous
water-meadow, on the other by a garden-wall. They all came to a
standstill, as Mrs. Scobel had prophesied. For a quarter of an hour
there was no progress whatever, and a good deal of recrimination among
coachmen, and then the rest of the journey had to be done at a walking
pace.

The reward was worth the labour when, at the end of a long winding
drive, the carriage drew up before the Italian front of Southminster
House; a white marble portico, long rows of tall windows brilliantly
lighted, a vista of flowers, and statues, and lamps, and pictures, and
velvet hangings, seen through the open doorway.

"Oh, it is too lovely!" cried Violet, fresh as a schoolgirl in this new
delight; "first the dark forest and then a house like this--it is like
Fairyland."

"And you are to be the queen of it--my queen," said Conrad Winstanley
in a low voice. "I am to have the first waltz, remember that. If the
Prince of Wales were my rival I would not give way."

He detained her hand in his as she alighted from the carriage. She
snatched it from him angrily.

"I have a good mind not to dance at all," she said.

"Why not?"

"It is paying too dearly for the pleasure to be obliged to dance with
you."

"In what school did you learn politeness, Miss Tempest?"

"If politeness means civility to people I despise, I have never learned
it," answered Vixen.

There was no time for further skirmishing. He had taken her cloak from
her, and handed it to the attendant nymph, and received a ticket; and
now they were drifting into the tea-room, where a row of ministering
footmen were looking at the guests across a barricade of urns and
teapots, with countenances that seemed to say, "If you want anything,
you must ask for it. We are here under protest, and we very much wonder
how our people could ever have invited such rabble!"

"I always feel small in a tea-room when there are only men in
attendance," whispered Mr. Scobel, "they are so haughty. I would sooner
ask Gladstone or Disraeli to pour me out a cup of tea than one of those
supercilious creatures."

Lady Southminster was stationed in the Teniers room--a small apartment
at the beginning of the suite which ended in the picture-gallery or
ball-room. She was what Joe Gargery called a "fine figure of a woman,"
in ruby velvet and diamonds, and received her guests with an
indiscriminating cordiality which went far to heal the gaping wounds
of county politics.

The Ellangowans had arrived, and Lady Ellangowan, who was full of
good-nature, was quite ready to take Violet under her wing when Mrs.
Scobel suggested that operation.

"I can find her any number of partners," she said. "Oh, there she
goes--off--already with Captain Winstanley."

The Captain had lost no time in exacting his waltz. It was the third on
the programme, and the band were beginning to warm to their work. They
were playing a waltz by Offenbach--"_Les Traineaux_"--with an
accompaniment of jingling sleigh-bells--music that had an almost
maddening effect on spirits already exhilarated.

The long lofty picture-gallery made a magnificent ball-room--a polished
floor of dark wood--a narrow line of light under the projecting
cornice, the famous Paul Veronese, the world-renowned Rubens, the
adorable Titian--ideal beauty looking down with art's eternal
tranquillity upon the whisk and whirl of actual life--here a calm
Madonna, contemplating, with deep unfathomable eyes, these brief
ephemera of a night--there Judith with a white muscular arm holding the
tyrant's head aloft above the dancers--yonder Philip of Spain frowning
on this Lenten festival.

Violet and Captain Winstanley waltzed in a stern silence. She was vexed
with herself for her loss of temper just now. In his breast there was a
deeper anger. "When would my day come?" he asked himself. "When shall I
be able to bow this proud head, to bend this stubborn will?" It must be
soon--he was tired of playing his submissive part--tired of holding his
cards hidden.

They held on to the end of the waltz--the last clash of the
sleigh-bells.

"Who's that girl in black and gold?" asked a Guardsman of Lady
Ellangowan; "those two are the best dancers in the room--it's a
thousand to nothing on them."

That final clash of the bells brought the Captain and his partner to
anchor at the end of the gallery, which opened through an archway into
a spacious palm-house with a lofty dome. In the middle of this archway,
looking at the dancers, stood a figure at sight of which Violet
Tempest's heart gave a great leap, and then stood still.

It was Roderick Vawdrey. He was standing alone, listlessly
contemplating the ball-room, with much less life and expression in his
face than there was in the pictured faces on the walls.

"That was a very nice waltz thanks," said Vixen, giving the captain a
little curtsey.

"Shall I take you back to Mrs. Tempest?"

Roderick had seen her by this time, and was coming towards her with a
singularly grave and distant countenance, she thought; not at all like
the Rorie of old times. But of course that was over and done with. She
must never call him Rorie any more, not even in her own thoughts. A
sharp sudden memory thrilled her, as they stood face to face in that
brilliant gallery--the memory of their last meeting in the darkened
room on the day of her father's funeral.

"How do you do?" said Roderick, with a gush of originality. "Your mamma
is here, I suppose."

"Haven't you seen her?"

"No; we've only just come."

"We," no doubt, meant the Dovedale party, of which Mr. Vawdrey was
henceforth a part.

"I did not know you were to be here," said Vixen, "or then that you
were in England."

"We only came home yesterday, or I should have called at the Abbey
House. We have been coming home, or talking about it, for the last
three weeks. A few days ago the Duchess took it into her head that she
ought to be at Lady Almira's wedding--there's some kind of
relationship, you know, between the Ashbournes and the
Southminsters--so we put on a spurt, and here we are."

"I am very glad," said Vixen, not knowing very well what to say; and
then seeing Captain Winstanley standing stiffly at her side, with an
aggrieved expression of countenance, she faltered: "I beg your pardon;
I don't think you have ever met Mr. Vawdrey. Captain Winstanley--Mr.
Vawdrey."

Both gentlemen acknowledged the introduction with the stiffest and
chilliest of bows; and then the Captain offered Violet his arm, and
she, having no excuse for refusing it, submitted quietly to be taken
away from her old friend. Roderick made no attempt to detain her.

The change in him could hardly have been more marked, Vixen thought.
Yes, the old Rorie--playfellow, scapegoat, friend of the dear old
childish days--was verily dead and gone.

"Shall we go and look at the presents?" asked Captain Winstanley.

"What presents?"

"Lady Almira's wedding presents. They are all laid out in the library.
I hear they are very splendid. Everybody is crowding to see them."

"I daresay mamma would like to go, and Mrs. Scobel," suggested Vixen.

"Then we will all go together."

They found the two matrons side by side on a settee, under a lovely
girlish head by Greuze. They were both delighted at the idea of seeing
the presents. It was something to do. Mrs. Tempest had made up her mind
to abjure even square dances this evening. There was something
incongruous in widowhood and the Lancers; especially in one's own
neighbourhood.



CHAPTER XVI.

Rorie asks a Question.

The library was one of the finest rooms at Southminster. It was not
like the library at Althorpe--a collection for a nation to be proud of.
There was no priceless Decameron, no Caxton Bible, no inestimable "Book
of Hours," or early Venetian Virgil; but as a library of reference, a
library for all purposes of culture or enjoyment, it left nothing to be
desired. It was a spacious and lofty room, lined from floor to ceiling
with exquisitely bound books; for, if not a collector of rare editions,
Lord Southminster was at least a connoisseur of bindings. Creamy
vellum, flowered with gold, antique brown calf, and russia in every
shade of crimson and brown, gave brightness to the shelves, while the
sombre darkness of carved oak made a background for this variety of
colour.

Not a mortal in the crowded library this evening thought of looking at
the books. The room had been transformed into a bazaar. Two long tables
were loaded with the wedding gifts which rejoicing friends and aspiring
acquaintances had lavished upon Lady Almira. Each gift was labelled
with the name of the giver; the exhibition was full of an intensely
personal interest. Everybody wanted to see what everybody had given.
Most of the people looking at the show had made their offerings, and
were anxious to see if their own particular contribution appeared to
advantage.

Here Mrs. Scobel was in her element. She explained everything,
expatiated upon the beauty and usefulness of everything. If she had
assisted at the purchase of all these gifts, or had actually chosen
them, she could not have been more familiar with their uses and merits.

"You must look at the silver candelabra presented by Sir Ponto's
workpeople, so much more sensible than a bracelet. I don't think
Garrard--yes, it is Garrard--ever did anything better; so sweetly
mythological--a goat and a dear little chubby boy, and ever so many
savage-looking persons with cymbals."

"The education of Jupiter, perhaps," suggested Captain Winstanley.

"Of course. The savage persons must be teaching him music. Have you
seen this liqueur cabinet, dear Mrs. Tempest? The most exquisite thing,
from the servants at Southminster. Could anything be nicer?"

"Looks rather like a suggestion that Lady Almira may be given to
curacoa on the quiet," said the Captain.

"And this lovely, lovely screen in crewels, by the Ladies Ringwood,
after a picture by Alma Tadema," continued Mrs. Scobel. "Was there ever
anything so perfect? And to think that our poor mothers worked staring
roses and gigantic lilies in Berlin wool and glass beads, and imagined
themselves artistic!"

The ladies went the round of the tables, in a crush of other ladies,
all rapturous. The Louis Quatorze fans, the carved ivory, the Brussels
point, the oxydised silver glove-boxes, and malachite blotting-books,
the pearls, opals, ormolu; the antique tankards and candlesticks,
Queen-Anne teapots; diamond stars, combs, tiaras; prayer-books, and
"Christian Years." The special presents which stood out from this chaos
of common place were--a _riviere_ of diamonds from the Earl of
Southminster, a cashmere shawl from Her Majesty, a basket of orchids,
valued at five hundred guineas, from Lady Ellangowan, a pair of
priceless crackle jars, a Sevres dinner-service of the old
_bleu-du-roi_, a set of knives of which the handles had all been taken
from stags slaughtered by the Southminster hounds.

"This is all very well for the wallflowers," said Captain Winstanley to
Violet, "but you and I are losing our dances."

"I don't much care about dancing," answered Vixen wearily.

She had been looking at this gorgeous display of bracelets and teacups,
silver-gilt dressing-cases, and ivory hairbrushes, without seeing
anything. She was thinking of Roderick Vawdrey, and how odd a thing it
was that he should seem so utter a stranger to her.

"He has gone up into the ducal circle," she said to herself. "He is
translated. It is almost as if he had wings. He is certainly as far
away from me as if he were a bishop."

They struggled back to the picture-gallery, and here Lady Ellangowan
took possession of Violet, and got her distinguished partners for all
the dances till supper-time. She found herself receiving a gracious
little nod from Lady Mabel Ashbourne in the ladies' chain. Neither the
lapse of two years nor the experience of foreign travel had made any
change in the hope of the Dovedales. She was still the same sylph-like
being, dressed in palest green, the colour of a duck's egg, with
diamonds in strictest moderation, and pearls that would have done
honour to a princess.

"Do you think Lady Mabel Ashbourne very beautiful?" Vixen asked Lady
Ellangowan, curious to hear the opinion of experience and authority.

"No; she's too shadowy for my taste," replied her ladyship, who was the
reverse of sylph-like. "Wasn't there someone in Greek mythology who
fell in love with a cloud? Lady Mabel would just suit that sort of
person. And then she is over-educated and conceited; sets up for a
modern Lady Jane Grey, quotes Greek plays, I believe, and looks
astounded if people don't understand her. She'll end by establishing a
female college, like Tennyson's princess."

"Oh, but she is engaged to be married to Mr. Vawdrey."

"Her cousin? Very foolish! That may go off by-and-by. First engagements
seldom come to anything."

Violet thought herself a hateful creature for being inwardly grateful
to Lady Ellangowan for this speech.

She had seen Roderick spinning round with his cousin. He was a good
waltzer, but not a graceful one. He steered his way well, and went with
a strong swing that covered a great deal of ground; but there was a
want of finish. Lady Mabel looked as if she were being carried away by
a maelstrom. And now people began to move towards the supper-rooms, of
which there were two, luxuriously arranged with numerous round tables
in the way that was still a novelty when "Lothair" was written. This
gave more room for the dancers. The people for whom a ball meant a
surfeit of perigord pie, truffled turkey, salmon _mayonnaise_, and
early strawberries, went for their first innings, meaning to return to
that happy hunting-ground as often as proved practicable. Violet was
carried off by a partner who was so anxious to take her to supper that
she felt sure he was dying to get some for himself.

Her cavalier found her a corner at a snug little table with three
gorgeous matrons. She ate a cutlet and a teaspoonful of peas, took
three sips from a glass of champagne, and wound up with some
strawberries, which tasted as if they had been taken by mistake out of
the pickle-jar.

"I'm afraid you haven't had a very good supper." said her partner, who
had been comfortably wedged between two of the matrons, consuming
mayonnaise and pate to his heart's content.

"Excellent, thanks. I shall be glad to make room for someone else."
Whereat the unfortunate young man was obliged to stand up, leaving the
choicest morsel of truffled goose-liver on his plate.

The crowd in the picture-gallery was thinner when Violet went back. In
the doorway she met Roderick Vawdrey.

"Haven't you kept a single dance for me, Violet?" he asked.

"You didn't ask me to keep one."

"Didn't I? Perhaps I was afraid of Captain Winstanley's displeasure. He
would have objected, no doubt."

"Why should he object, unless I broke an engagement to him?"

"Would he not? Are you actually free to be asked by anyone? If I had
known that two hours ago! And now, I suppose your programme is full.
Yes, to the very last galop; for which, of course, you won't stop. But
there's to be an extra waltz presently. You must give me that."

She said neither yes nor no, and he put her hand through his arm and
led her up the room.

"Have you seen mamma?"

"Yes. She thinks I am grown. She forgets that I was one-and-twenty when
we last met. That does not leave much margin for growing, unless a man
went on getting taller indefinitely, like Lord Southminster's palms. He
had to take the roof off his palm-house last year, you know. What a
dreadful thing if I were to become a Norfolk giant--giants are
indigenous to Norfolk, aren't they?--and were obliged to take the roof
off Briarwood. Have you seen the Duchess?"

"Only in the distance. I hardly know her at all, you know."

"That's absurd. You ought to know her very well. You must be quite
intimate with her by-and-by, when we are all settled down as
steady-going married people."

The little gloved hand on his arm quivered ever so slightly. This was a
distinct allusion to his approaching marriage.

"Lovely room, isn't it? Just the right thing for a ball. How do you
like the Rubens? Very grand--a magnificent display of
carmines--beautiful, if you are an admirer of Rubens. What a
draughtsman! The Italian school rarely achieved that freedom of pencil.
Isn't that Greuze enchanting? There is an innocence, a freshness, about
his girlish faces that nobody has ever equalled. His women are not
Madonnas, or Junos, or Helens--they are the incarnation of girlhood;
girlhood without care or thought; girlhood in love with a kitten, or
weeping over a wounded robin-redbreast."

How abominably he rattled on. Was it the overflow of joyous spirits? No
doubt. He was so pleased with life and fate, that he was obliged to
give vent to his exuberance in this gush of commonplace.

"You remind me of Miss Bates, in Jane Austen's 'Emma,'" said Vixen,
laughing.

The band struck up "_Trauriges Herz_," a waltz like a wail, but with a
fine swing in it.

"Now for the old three-time," said Roderick; and the next minute they
were sailing smoothly over the polished floor, with all the fair
pictured faces, the crimson draperies, the pensive Madonnas, Dutch
boors, Italian temples, and hills, and skies, circling round them like
the figures in a kaleidoscope.

"Do you remember our boy-and-girl waltzes in the hall at the Abbey
House?" asked Rorie.

Happily for Vixen her face was so turned that he could not see the
quiver on her lips, the sudden look of absolute pain that paled her
cheeks.

"I am not likely to forget any part of my childhood," she answered
gravely. "It was the one happy period of my life."

"You don't expect me to believe that the last two years have been
altogether unhappy."

"You may believe what you like. You who knew my father, ought to
know----"

"The dear Squire! do you think I am likely to undervalue him, or to
forget your loss? No, Violet, no. But there are compensations. I heard
of you at Brighton. You were very happy there, were you not?"

"I liked Brighton pretty well. And I had Arion there all the while.
There are some capital rides on the Downs."

"Yes, and you had agreeable friends there."

"Yes, we knew a good many pleasant people, and went to a great many
concerts. I heard all the good singers, and Madame Goddard ever so many
times."

They went on till the end of the waltz, and then walked slowly round
the room, glancing at the pictures as they went by. The Duchess was not
in sight.

"Shall we go and look at the palms?" asked Roderick, when they came to
the archway at the end of the gallery.

"If you like."

"This was the roof that had to be taken off, you know. It is a
magnificent dome, but I daresay the palms will outgrow it within Lord
Southminster's time."

It was like entering a jungle in the tropics; if one could fancy a
jungle paved with encaustic tiles, and furnished with velvet-covered
ottomans for the repose of weary sportsmen.

There was only a subdued light, from lamps thinly sprinkled among the
ferns and flowers. There were four large groups of statuary, placed
judiciously, and under the central dome there was a fountain, where,
half hidden by a veil of glittering spray, Neptune was wooing Tyro,
under the aspect of a river-god, amongst bulrushes, lilies, and
water-plants.

Violet and her companion looked at the tropical plants, and admired,
with a delightful ignorance of the merits of these specimens. The tall
shafts and the thick tufts of huge leaves were not Vixen's idea of
beauty.

"I like our beeches and oaks in the Forest ever so much better," she
exclaimed.

"Everything in the Forest is dear," said Rorie.

Vixen felt, with a curious choking sensation, that this was a good
opening for her to say something polite. She had always intended to
congratulate him, in a straightforward sisterly way, upon his
engagement to Lady Mabel.

"I am so glad to hear you say that," she began. "And how happy you must
be to think that your fate is fixed here irrevocably; doubly fixed now;
for you can have no interest to draw you away from us, as you might if
you were to marry a stranger. Briarwood and Ashbourne united will make
you the greatest among us."

"I don't highly value that kind of greatness, Violet--a mere question
of acreage; but I am glad to think myself anchored for life on my
native soil."

"And you will go into Parliament and legislate for us, and take care
that we are not disforested. They have taken away too much already,
with their horrid enclosures."

"The enclosures will make splendid pine-woods by-and-by."

"Yes, when we are all dead and gone."

"I don't know about Parliament. So long as my poor mother was living I
had an incentive to turn senator, she was so eager for it. But now that
she is gone, I don't feel strongly drawn that way. I suppose I shall
settle down into the approved pattern of country squire: breed fat
cattle--the aristocratic form of cruelty to animals--spend the best
part of my income upon agricultural machinery, talk about guano, like
the Duke, and lecture delinquents at quarter-sessions."

"But Lady Mabel will not allow that. She will be ambitious for you."

"I hope not. I can fancy no affliction greater than an ambitious wife.
No. My poor mother left Mabel her orchids. Mabel will confine her
ambition to orchids and literature. I believe she writes poetry, and
some day she will be tempted to publish a small volume, I daresay.
'AEolian Echoes,' or 'Harp Strings,' or 'Broken Chords,' 'Consecutive
Fifths,' or something of that kind."

"You believe!" exclaimed Vixen. "Surely you have read some of Lady
Mabel's poetry, or heard it read. She must have read some of her verses
to you."

"Never. She is too reserved, and I am too candid. It would be a
dangerous experiment. I should inevitably say something rude. Mabel
adores Shelley and Browning; she reads Greek, too. Her poetry is sure
to be unintelligible, and I should expose my obtuseness of intellect. I
couldn't even look as if I understood it."

"If I were Lady Mabel, I think under such circumstances I should leave
off writing poetry."

"That would be quite absurd. Mabel has a hundred tastes which I do not
share with her. She is devoted to her garden and hot-houses. I hardly
know one flower from another, except the forest wildlings. She detests
horses and dogs. I am never happier than when among them. She reads
AEschylus as glibly as I can read a French newspaper. But she will make
an admirable mistress for Briarwood. She has just that tranquil
superiority which becomes the ruler of a large estate. You will see
what cottages and schools we shall build. There will not be a weed in
our allotment gardens, and our farm-labourers will get all the prizes
at cottage flower-shows."

"You will hunt, of course?"

"Naturally; don't you know that I am to have the hounds next year? It
was all arranged a few days ago. Poor Mabel was strongly opposed to the
plan. She thought it was the first stage on the road to ruin; but I
think I convinced her that it was the natural thing for the owner of
Briarwood; and the Duke was warmly in favour of it."

"The dear old kennels!" said Vixen, "I have never seen them
since--since I came home. I ride by the gate very often, but I have
never had the courage to go inside. The hounds wouldn't know me now."

"You must renew your friendship with them. You will hunt, of course,
next year?"

"No, I shall never hunt again!"

"Oh, nonsense; I hear that Captain Winstanley is a mighty Nimrod--quite
a Leicestershire man. He will wish you to hunt."

"What can Captain Winstanley have to do with it?" asked Vixen, turning
sharply upon him.

"A great deal, I should imagine, by next season."

"I haven't the least idea what you mean."

It was Roderick Vawdrey's turn to look astonished. He looked both
surprised and angry.

"How fond young ladies are of making mysteries about these things," he
exclaimed impatiently; "I suppose they think it enhances their
importance. Have I made a mistake? Have my informants misled me? Is
your engagement to Captain Winstanley not to be talked about yet--only
an understood thing among your own particular friends? Let me at least
be allowed the privilege of intimate friendship. Let me be among the
first to congratulate you."

"What folly have you been listening to?" cried Vixen; "you, Roderick
Vawdrey, my old play-fellow--almost an adopted brother--to know me so
little."

"What could I know of you to prevent my believing what I was told? Was
there anything strange in the idea that you should be engaged to
Captain Winstanley? I heard that he was a universal favourite."

"And did you think that I should like a universal favourite?"

"Why should you not? It seemed credible enough, and my informant was
positive; he saw you together at a picnic in Switzerland. It was looked
upon as a settled thing by all your friends."

"By Captain Winstanley's friends, you mean. They may have looked upon
it as a settled thing that he should marry someone with plenty of
money, and they may have thought that my money would be as useful as
anyone else's."

"Violet, are you mystifying me? are you trying to drive me crazy? or is
this the simple truth?"

"It is the simple truth."

"You are not engaged to this man?--you never have been?--you don't care
for him, never have cared for him?"

"Never, never, never, never!" said Violet, with unmistakable emphasis.

"Then I have been the most consummate----"

He did not finish his sentence, and Violet did not ask him to finish
it. The ejaculation seemed involuntary. He sat staring at the palms,
and said nothing for the next minute and a half, while Vixen unfurled
her great black and gold fan, and looked at it admiringly, as if she
had never seen it before.

"Do you really think those palms will break through the roof again in
the present Lord Southminster's time?" Roderick inquired presently,
with intense interest.

Vixen did not feel herself called upon to reply to a question so purely
speculative.

"I think I had better go and look for mamma and Mrs. Scobel," she said;
"they must have come back from the supper-room by this time."

Roderick rose and offered her his arm. She was surprised to see how
pale he looked when they came out of the dusk into the brilliant light
of the gallery. But in a heated room, and between two and three o'clock
in the morning, a man may naturally be a little paler than usual.

Roderick took Violet straight to the end of the room, where his quick
eye had espied Mrs. Tempest in her striking black and scarlet costume.
He said nothing more about the Duchess or Lady Mabel; and, indeed, took
Violet past the elder lady, who was sitting in one of the deep-set
windows with Lady Southminster, without attempting to bring about any
interchange of civilities.

"Captain Winstanley has been kind enough to go and look for the
carriage, Violet," said Mrs. Tempest. "I told him we would join him in
the vestibule directly I could find you. Where have you been all this
time? You were not in the Lancers. Such a pretty set. Oh, here is Mrs.
Scobel!" as the Vicar's wife approached them on her partner's arm, in a
piteous state of dilapidation--not a bit of tulle puffing left, and all
her rosebuds crushed as flat as dandelions.

"Such a delightful set!" she exclaimed gaspingly.

"I'm afraid your dress has suffered," said her partner.

"Not in the least." protested Mrs. Scobel, with the fortitude of that
ladylike martyr to a clumsy carver, celebrated by Sydney Smith, who,
splashed from head to foot, and with rills of brown gravy trickling
down her countenance, vowed that not a drop had reached her.

"This," says the reverend wit, "I esteem the highest triumph of
civilisation."

"Your carriage will be the third," the captain told Mrs. Tempest, while
Roderick was putting Violet's cloak round her in the vestibule; "there
are a good many people leaving already."

Roderick went with them to the carriage door, and stayed in the porch
till they were gone. The last object Vixen saw under the Southminster
lamps was the pale grave face of her old playfellow.

He went straight from the porch to the supper-room, not to find himself
a place at one of the snug little tables, but to go to the buffet and
pour out a glass of brandy, which he drank at a draught. Yet, in a
general way, there was no man more abstemious than Roderick Vawdrey.

A quarter of an hour afterwards he was waltzing with Lady
Mabel--positively the last dance before their departure.

"Roderick," she said in an awe-stricken undertone, "I am going to say
something very dreadful. Please forgive me in advance."

"Certainly," he said, with a somewhat apprehensive look.

"Just now, when you were talking to me, I fancied you had been drinking
brandy."

"I had."

"Absolute undiluted brandy!"

"Neat brandy, sometimes denominated 'short.'"

"Good heavens! were you ill?"

"I had had what people call 'a turn.'"



CHAPTER XVII.

Where the Red King was slain.

May had come. The red glow of the beech-branches had changed to a
tender green; the oaks were amber; the winding forest-paths, the deep
inaccessible glades where the cattle led such a happy life, were blue
with dog-violets and golden with primroses. Whitsuntide was close at
hand, and good Mr. Scobel had given up his mind to church decoration,
and the entertainment of his school-children with tea and buns in that
delightful valley, where an iron monument, a little less artistic than
a pillar post-office marks the spot where the Red King fell.

Vixen, though not particularly fond of school-feasts, had promised to
assist at this one. It was not to be a stiff or ceremonious affair.
There was to be no bevy of young ladies, oppressively attentive to
their small charges, causing the children to drink scalding tea in a
paroxysm of shyness. The whole thing was to be done in an easy and
friendly manner; with no aid but that of the school-mistress and
master. The magnates of the land were to have no part in the festival.

"The children enjoy themselves so much more when there are no
finely-dressed people making believe to wait upon them," said Mrs.
Scobel; "but I know they'll be delighted to have you, Violet. They
positively adore you!"

"I'm sure I can't imagine why they should," answered Violet truthfully.

"Oh, but they do. They like to look at you. When you come into the
school-room they're all in a flutter; and they point at you awfully,
don't they, Miss Pierson?" said Mrs. Scobel, appealing to the
school-mistress.

"Yes, ma'am. I can't cure them of pointing, do what I will."

"Oh, they are dear little children," exclaimed Violet, "and I don't
care how much they point at me if they really like me. They make me
such nice little bob-curtsies when I meet them in the Forest, and they
all seem fond of Argus. I'm sure you have made them extremely polite,
Miss Pierson. I shall be very pleased to come to your school-feast,
Mrs. Scobel; and I'll tell our good old Trimmer to make no end of
cakes."

"My dear Violet, pray don't think of putting Mrs. Trimmer to any
trouble. Your dear mamma might be angry."

"Angry at my asking for some cakes for the school-children, after being
papa's wife for seventeen years! That couldn't be."

The school-feast was fixed, three weeks in advance, for the Wednesday
in Whitsun week, and during the interval there were many small
meteorologists in Beechdale school intent upon the changes of the moon,
and all those varied phenomena from which the rustic mind draws its
auguries of coming weather. The very crowing of early village cocks was
regarded suspiciously by the school children at this period; and even
the harmless domestic pussy, sitting with his back to the fire, was
deemed a cat of evil omen.

It happened that the appointed Wednesday was a day on which Mrs.
Tempest had chosen to invite a few friends in a quiet way to her seven
o'clock dinner; among the few Captain Winstanley, who had taken Mrs.
Hawbuck's cottage for an extended period of three months. Mrs. Tempest
had known all about the school-feast a fortnight before she gave her
invitations, but had forgotten the date at the moment when she arranged
her little dinner. Yet she felt offended that Violet should insist upon
keeping her engagement to the Scobels.

"But, dear mamma, I am of no use to you at our parties," pleaded Vixen;
"if I were at all necessary to your comfort I would give up the
school-feast."

"My dear Violet, it is not my comfort I am considering; but I cannot
help feeling annoyed that you should prefer to spend your evening with
a herd of vulgar children--playing Oranges and Lemons, or Kiss in the
Ring, or some other ridiculous game, and getting yourself into a most
unbecoming perspiration--to a quiet home evening with a few friends."

"You see, mamma, I know our quiet home evenings with a few friends so
well. I could tell you beforehand exactly what will happen, almost the
very words people will say--how your _jardinieres_ will be admired, and
how the conversation will glance off from your ferns and pelargoniums
to Lady Ellangowan's orchids, and then drift back to your old china;
after which the ladies will begin to talk about dress, and the
wickedness of giving seven guineas for a summer bonnet, as Mrs Jones,
or Green, or Robinson has just done; from which their talk will glide
insensibly to the iniquities of modern servants; and when those have
been discussed exhaustively, one of the younger ladies will tell you
the plot of the last novel she has had from Mudie's, with an infinite
number of you knows and you sees, and then perhaps Captain
Winstanley--he is coming, I suppose--will sing a French song, of which
the company will understand about four words in every verse, and then
you will show Mrs. Carteret your last piece of art needlework--"

"What nonsense you talk, Violet. However, if you prefer the children at
Stony Cross to the society of your mother and your mother's friends,
you must take your own way."

"And you will forgive me in advance, dear mamma?"

"My love, I have nothing to forgive. I only deplore a bent of mind
which I can but think unladylike."

Vixen was glad to be let off with so brief a lecture. In her heart of
hearts she was not at all sorry that her mother's friendly dinner
should fall on a day which she had promised to spend elsewhere. It was
a treat to escape the sameness of that polite entertainment. Yes,
Captain Winstanley was to be there of course, and prolonged
acquaintance had not lessened her dislike to that gentleman. She had
seen him frequently during his residence at the Hawbuck cottage, not at
her mother's house only, but at all the best houses in the
neighbourhood. He had done nothing to offend her. He had been
studiously polite; and that was all. Not by one word had he reminded
Violet of that moonlight walk in the Pavilion garden; not by so much as
a glance or a sigh had he hinted at a hidden passion. So far she could
make no complaint against him. But the attrition of frequent
intercourse did not wear off the sharp edge of her dislike.

Wednesday afternoon came, and any evil auguries that had been drawn
from the noontide crowing of restless village cocks was set at naught,
for the weather was peerless: a midsummer sky and golden sunlight shone
upon all things; upon white-walled cottages and orchards, and gardens
where the pure lilies were beginning to blow, upon the yellow-green oak
leaves and deepening bloom of the beech, and the long straight roads
cleaving the heart of the Forest.

Violet had arranged to drive Mr. and Mrs. Scobel in her pony-carriage.
She was at the door of their snug little Vicarage at three o'clock; the
vivacious Titmouse tossing his head and jingling his bit in a burst of
pettishness at the aggravating behaviour of the flies.

Mrs. Scobel came fluttering out, with the Vicar behind her. Both
carried baskets, and behind them came an old servant, who had been Mrs.
Scobel's nurse, a woman with a figure like a hogshead of wine, and a
funny little head at the top, carrying a third basket.

"The buns and bread have gone straight from the village," said the
Vicar's wife. "How well you are looking, Violet. I hope dear Mrs.
Tempest was not very angry at your coming with us."

"Dear Mrs. Tempest didn't care a straw," Vixen answered, laughing. "But
she thinks me wanting in dignity for liking to have a romp with the
school-children."

All the baskets were in by this time, and Titmouse was in a paroxysm of
impatience; so Mr. and Mrs. Scobel seated themselves quickly, and Vixen
gave her reins a little shake that meant Go, and off went the pony at a
pace which was rather like running away.

The Vicar looked slightly uneasy.

"Does he always go as fast as this?" he inquired.

"Sometimes a good deal faster. He's an old fencer, you know, and hasn't
forgotten his jumping days. But of course I don't let him jump with the
carriage."

"I should think not," ejaculated the Vicar; "unless you wanted to
commit murder and suicide. Don't you think you could make him go a
little steadier? He's going rather like a dog with a tin kettle at his
tail, and if the kettle were to tip over----"

"Oh, he'll settle down presently," said Vixen coolly. "I don't want to
interfere with him; it makes him ill-tempered. And if he were to take
to kicking----"

"If you'll pull him up, I think I'll get out and walk," said Mr.
Scobel, the back of whose head was on a level with the circle which the
pony's hoofs would have been likely to describe in the event of kicking.

"Oh, please don't!" cried Vixen. "If you do that I shall think you've
no confidence in my driving."

She pulled Titmouse together, and coaxed him into an unobjectionable
trot; a trot which travelled over the ground very fast, without giving
the occupants of the carriage the uncomfortable sensation of sitting
behind a pony intent on getting to the sharp edge of the horizon and
throwing himself over.

They were going up a long hill. Halfway up they came to the gate of the
kennels. Violet looked at it with a curious half-reluctant glance that
expressed the keenest pain.

"Poor papa," she sighed. "He never seemed happier than when he used to
take me to see the hounds."

"Mr. Vawdrey is to have them next year," said Mrs. Scobel. "That seems
right and proper. He will be the biggest man in this part of the
country when the Ashbourne and Briarwood estates are united. And the
Duke cannot live very long--a man who gives his mind to eating and
drinking, and is laid up with the gout twice a year."

"Do you know when they are to be married?" asked Vixen, with an
unconcerned air.

"At the end of this year, I am told. Lady Jane died last November. They
would hardly have the wedding before a twelvemonth was over. Have you
seen much of Mr. Vawdrey since he came back?"

"I believe I have seen him three times: once at Lady Southminster's
ball; once when he came to call upon mamma; once at kettledrum at
Ellangowan, where he was in attendance upon Lady Mabel. He looked
rather like a little dog at the end of a string; he had just that
meekly-obedient look, combined with an expression of not wanting to be
there, which you see in a dog. If I were engaged, I would not take my
_fiancee_ to kettledrums."

"Ah, Violet, when are you going to be engaged?" cried Mrs. Scobel, in a
burst of playfulness. "Where is the man worthy of you?"

"Nowhere; unless Heaven would make me such a man as my father."

"You and Mr. Vawdrey were such friends when you were girl and boy. I
used sometimes to fancy that childish friendship of yours would lead to
a lasting attachment."

"Did you? That was a great mistake. I am not half good enough for Mr.
Vawdrey. I was well enough for a playfellow, but he wants something
much nearer perfection in a wife."

"But your tastes are so similar."

"The very reason we should not care for each other."

"'In joining contrasts lieth love's delight.' That's what a poet has
said, yet I can't quite believe that, Violet."

"But you see the event proves the poet's axiom true. Here is my old
playfellow, who cares for nothing but horses and hounds and a country
life, devotedly attached to Lady Mabel Ashbourne, who reads Greek plays
with as much enjoyment as other young ladies derive from a stirring
novel, and who hasn't an idea or an attitude that is not strictly
aesthetic."

"Do you know, Violet, I am very much afraid that this marriage is
rather the result of calculation than of genuine affection?" said Mrs.
Scobel solemnly.

"Oh, no doubt it will be a grand thing to unite Ashbourne and
Briarwood, but Roderick Vawdrey is too honourable to marry a girl he
could not love. I would never believe him capable of such baseness,"
answered Violet, standing up for her old friend.

Here they turned out of the Forest and drove through a peaceful colony
consisting of half-a-dozen cottages, a rustic inn where reigned a
supreme silence and sleepiness, and two or three houses in old-world
gardens.

Vixen changed the conversation to buns and school-children, which
agreeable theme occupied them till Titmouse had walked up a
tremendously steep hill, the Vicar trudging through the dust beside
him; and then the deep green vale in which Rufus was slain lay smiling
in the sunshine below their feet.

Perhaps the panorama to be seen from the top of that hill is absolutely
the finest in the Forest--a vast champaign, stretching far away to the
white walls, tiled roofs, and ancient abbey-church of Romsey; here a
glimpse of winding water, there a humble village--nameless save for its
inhabitants--nestling among the trees, or basking in the broad sunshine
of a common.

At the top of the hill, Bates, the gray-headed groom, who had attended
Violet ever since her first pony-ride, took possession of Titmouse and
the chaise, while the baskets were handed over to a lad, who had been
on the watch for their arrival. Then they all went down the steep path
into the valley, at the bottom of which the children were swarming in a
cluster, as thick as bees, while a pale flame and a cloud of white
smoke went up from the midst of them like the fire beneath a sacrifice.
This indicated the boiling of the kettle, in true gipsy fashion.

For the next hour and a half tea-drinking was the all-absorbing
business with everybody. The boiling of the kettle was a grand feature
in the entertainment. Cups and saucers were provided by a little colony
of civilised gipsies, who seem indigenous to the spot, and whose summer
life is devoted to assisting at picnics and tea-drinkings, telling
fortunes, and selling photographs. White cloths were spread upon the
short sweet turf, and piles of bread-and-butter, cake and buns, invited
the attention of the flies.

Presently arose the thrilling melody of a choral grace, with the sweet
embellishment of a strong Hampshire accent. And then, with a swoop as
of eagles on their quarry, the school-children came down upon the
mountains of bread-and-butter, and ate their way manfully to the buns
and cake.

Violet had never been happier since her return to Hampshire than she
felt that sunny afternoon, as she moved quickly about, ministering to
these juvenile devourers. The sight of their somewhat bovine
contentment took her thoughts away from her own cares and losses; and
presently, when the banquet was concluded--a conclusion only arrived at
by the total consumption of everything provided, whereby the
hungry-eyed gipsy attendants sunk into despondency--Vixen constituted
herself Lord of Misrule, and led off a noisy procession in the
time-honoured game of Oranges and Lemons, which entertainment continued
till the school-children were in a high fever. After this they had Kiss
in the Ring; Vixen only stipulating, before she began, that nobody
should presume to drop the handkerchief before her. Then came
Touchwood--a game charmingly adapted to that wooded valley, where the
trees looked as if they had been planted at convenient distances on
purpose for this juvenile sport.

"Oh, I am so tired," cried Violet at last, when church clocks--all out
of earshot in this deep valley--were striking eight, and the low sun
was golden on the silvery beech-boles, and the quiet half-hidden
water-pools under the trees yonder; "I really don't think I can have
anything to do with the next game."

"Oh, if you please, miss," cried twenty shrill young voices, "oh, if
you please, miss, we couldn't play without you--you're the best on us!"

This soothing flattery had its effect.

"Oh, but I really don't think I can do more than start you," sighed
Vixen, flushed and breathless, "what is it to be?"

"Blindman's Buff," roared the boys.

"Hunt the Slipper," screamed the girls.

"Oh, Blindman's Buff is best," said Vixen. "This little wood is a
splendid place for Blindman's Buff. But mind, I shall only start you.
Now then, who's to be Blindman?"

Mr. Scobel volunteered. He had been a tranquil spectator of the sports
hitherto; but this was the last game, and he felt that he ought to do
something more than look on. Vixen blindfolded him, asked him the usual
question about his father's stable, and then sent him spinning amongst
the moss-grown beeches, groping his way fearfully, with outstretched
arms, amidst shrillest laughter and noisiest delight.

He was not long blindfold, and had not had many bumps against the trees
before he impounded the person of a fat and scant-of-breath scholar, a
girl whose hard breathing would have betrayed her neighbourhood to the
dullest ear.

"That's Polly Sims, I know," said the Vicar.

It was Polly Sims, who was incontinently made as blind as Fortune or
Justice, or any other of the deities who dispense benefits to man.
Polly floundered about among the trees for a long time, making frantic
efforts to catch the empty air, panting like a human steam-engine, and
nearly knocking out what small amount of brains she might possess
against the gray branches, outstretched like the lean arms of Macbeth's
weird women across her path. Finally Polly Sims succeeded in catching
Bobby Jones, whom she clutched with the tenacity of an octopus; and
then came the reign of Bobby Jones, who was an expert at the game, and
who kept the whole party on the _qui vive_ by his serpentine windings
and twistings among the stout old trunks.

Presently there was a shrill yell of triumph. Bobby had caught Miss
Tempest.

"I know'd her by her musling gownd, and the sweet-smelling stuff upon
her pocket-handkercher," he roared.

Violet submitted with a good grace.

"I'm dreadfully tired," she said, "and I'm sure I shan't catch anyone."

The sun had been getting lower and lower. There were splashes of ruddy
light on the smooth gray beech-boles, and that was all. Soon these
would fade, and all would be gloom. The grove had an awful look
already. One would expect to meet some ghostly Druid, or some witch of
eld, among the shadowy tracks left by the forest wildings. Vixen went
about her work languidly. She was really tired, and was glad to think
her day's labours were over. She went slowly in and out among the
trees, feeling her way with outstretched arms, her feet sinking
sometimes into deep drifts of last year's leaves, or gliding
noiselessly over the moss. The air was soft and cool and dewy, with a
perfume of nameless wild flowers--a faint aromatic odour of herbs,
which the wise women had gathered for medicinal uses in days of old,
when your village sorceress was your safest doctor. Everywhere there
was the hush and coolness of fast-coming night. The children's voices
were stilled. This last stage of the game was a thing of breathless
interest.

Vixen's footsteps drifted lower down into the wooded hollow; insensibly
she was coming towards the edge of the treacherously green bog which
has brought many a bold rider to grief in these districts, and still
she had caught no one. She began to think that she had roamed ever so
far away, and was in danger of losing herself altogether, or at least
losing everybody else, and being left by herself in the forest
darkness. The grassy hollow in which she was wandering had an
atmosphere of solitude.

She was on the point of taking off the handkerchief that Mr. Scobel had
bound so effectually across her eyes, when her outstretched hands
clasped something--a substantial figure, distinctly human, clad in
rough cloth.

Before she had time to think who it was she had captured, a pair of
strong arms clasped her; she was drawn to a broad chest; she felt a
heart beating strong and fast against her shoulder, while lips that
seemed too familiar to offend kissed hers with all the passion of a
lover's kiss.

"Don't be angry," said a well-known voice; "I believe it's the rule of
the game. If it isn't I'm sure it ought to be."

A hand, at once strong and gentle, took off the handkerchief, and in
the soft woodland twilight she looked up at Roderick Vawdrey's face,
looking down upon her with an expression which she presumed must mean a
brotherly friendliness--the delight of an old friend at seeing her
after a long interval.

She was not the less angry at that outrageous unwarrantable kiss.

"It is not the rule of the game amongst civilised people; though it
possibly may be among plough-boys and servant-maids!" she exclaimed
indignantly. "You are really a most ungentlemanlike person! I wonder
Lady Mabel Ashbourne has not taught you better manners."

"Is that to be my only reward for saving you from plunging--at least
ankle-deep--in the marshy ground yonder? But for me you would have been
performing a boggy version of Ophelia by this time."

"How did you come here?"

"I have been to Langley Brook for a day's fly-fishing, and was tramping
home across country in a savage humour at my poor sport, when I heard
the chatter of small voices, and presently came upon the Scobels and
the school-children. The juveniles were in a state of alarm at having
lost you. They had been playing the game in severe silence, and at a
turn in the grove missed you altogether. Oh, here comes Scobel, with
his trencher on the back of his head."

The Vicar came forward, rejoicing at sight of Violet's white gown.

"My dear, what a turn you have given us!" he cried; "those silly
children, to let you out of their sight! I don't think a wood is a good
place for Blindman's Buff."

"No more do I," answered Vixen, very pale.

"You look as if you had been frightened, too," said the Vicar.

"It did feel awfully lonely; not a sound, except the frogs croaking
their vespers, and one dismal owl screaming in the distance. And how
cold it has turned now the sun has gone down; and how ghostly the
beeches look in their green mantles; there is something awful in a wood
at sunset."

She ran on in an excited tone, masking her agitation under an unnatural
vivacity. Roderick watched her keenly. Mr. and Mrs. Scobel went back to
their business of getting the children together, and the pots, pans, and
baskets packed for the return-journey. The children were inclined to be
noisy and insubordinate. They would have liked to make a night of it in
this woody hollow, or in the gorse-clothed heights up yonder by Stony
Cross. To go home after such a festival, and be herded in small stuffy
cottages, was doubtless trying to free-born humanity, always more or
less envious of the gipsies.

"Shall we walk up the hill together?" Roderick asked Violet humbly,
"while the Scobels follow with their flock?"

"I am going to drive Mr. and Mrs. Scobel," replied Vixen curtly.

"But where is your carriage?"

"I don t know. I rather think it was to meet us at the top of the hill."

"Then let us go up together and find it--unless you hate me too much to
endure my company for a quarter of an hour--or are too angry with me
for my impertinence just now."

"It is not worth being serious about," answered Vixen quietly, after a
little pause. "I was very angry at the moment, but after all--between
you and me--who were like brother and sister a few years ago, it can't
matter very much. I daresay you may have kissed me in those days,
though I have forgotten all about it."

"I think I did--once or twice," admitted Rorie with laudable gravity.

"Then let your impertinence just now go down to the old account, which
we will close, if you please, to-night. But," seeing him drawing nearer
her with a sudden eagerness, "mind, it is never to be repeated. I could
not forgive that."

"I would do much to escape your anger," said Rorie softly.

"The whole situation just now was too ridiculous," pursued Vixen, with
a spurious hilarity. "A young woman wandering blindfold in a wood all
alone--it must have seemed very absurd."

"It seemed very far from absurd--to me," said Rorie.

They were going slowly up the grassy hill, the short scanty herbage
looking gray in the dimness. Glow-worms were beginning to shine here
and there at the foot of the furze-bushes. A pale moon was rising above
the broad expanse of wood and valley, which sank with gentle
undulations to the distant plains, where the young corn was growing and
the cattle were grazing in a sober agricultural district. Here all was
wild and beautiful--rich, yet barren.

"I'm afraid when we met last--at Lady Southminster's ball--that I
forgot to congratulate you upon your engagement to your cousin," said
Violet by-and-by, when they had walked a little way in perfect silence.

She was trying to carry out an old determination. She had always meant
to go up to him frankly, with outstretched hand, and wish him joy. And
she fancied that at the ball she had said too little. She had not let
him understand that she was really glad. "Believe me, I am very glad
that you should marry someone close at home--that you should widen your
influence among us."

"You are very kind," answered Rorie, with exceeding coldness. "I
suppose all such engagements are subjects for congratulation, from a
conventional point of view. My future wife is both amiable and
accomplished, as you know. I have reason to be very proud that she has
done me so great an honour as to prefer me to many worthier suitors;
but I am bound to tell you--as we once before spoke of this subject, at
the time of your dear father's death, and I then expressed myself
somewhat strongly--I am bound to tell you that my engagement to Mabel
was made to please my poor mother. It was when we were all in Italy
together. My mother was dying. Mabel's goodness and devotion to her had
been beyond all praise; and my heart was drawn to her by affection, by
gratitude; and I knew that it would make poor mother happy to see us
irrevocably bound to each other--and so--the thing came about somehow,
almost unawares, and I have every reason to be proud and happy that
fate should have favoured me so far above my deserts."

"I am very glad that you are happy," said Violet gently.

After this there was a silence which lasted longer than the previous
interval in their talk. They were at the top of the ill before either
of them spoke.

Then Vixen laid her hand lightly upon her old playfellow's arm, and
said, with extreme earnestness:

"You will go into Parliament by-and-by, no doubt, and have great
influence. Do not let them spoil the Forest. Do not let horrid
grinding-down economists, for the sake of saving a few pounds or
gaining a few pounds, alter and destroy scenes that are so beautiful
and a delight to so many. England is a rich country, is she not? Surely
she can afford to keep something for her painters and her poets, and
even for the humble holiday-folks who come to drink tea at Rufus's
stone. Don't let our Forest be altered, Rorie. Let all things be as
they were when we were children."

"All that my voice and influence can do to keep them so shall be done,
Violet," he answered in tones as earnest. "I am glad that you have
asked me something to-night. I am glad, with all my heart, that you
have given me something to do for you. It shall be like a badge in my
helmet, by-and-by, when I enter the lists. I think I shall say: 'For
God and for Violet,' when I run a tilt against the economic devastators
who want to clear our woods and cut off our commoners."

He bent down and kissed her hand, as in token of knightly allegiance.
He had just time to do it comfortably before Mr. and Mrs. Scobel, with
the children and their master and mistress, came marching up the hill,
singing, with shrill glad voices, one of the harvest-home processional
hymns.


  "All good gifts around us
  Are sent from heaven above,
  Then thank the Lord, oh thank the Lord,
  For all His love."


"What a delicious night!" cried Mr. Scobel. "I think we ought all to
walk home. It would be much nicer than being driven."

This he said with a lively recollection of Titmouse's performances on
the journey out, and a lurking dread that he might behave a little
worse on the journey home. A lively animal of that kind, going home to
his stable, through the uncertain lights and shadows of woodland roads,
and driven by such a charioteer as Violet Tempest, was not to be
thought of without a shudder.

"I think I had better walk, in any case," said Mr. Scobel thoughtfully.
"I shall be wanted to keep the children together."

"Let us all walk home," suggested Roderick. "We can go through the
plantations. It will be very jolly in the moonlight. Bates can drive
your pony back, Violet."

Vixen hesitated.

"It's not more than four miles through the plantations," said Roderick.

"Do you think I am afraid of a long walk?"

"Of course not. You were a modern Atalanta three years ago. I don't
suppose a winter in Paris and a season at Brighton have quite spoiled
you."

"It shall be as you like, Mrs. Scobel," said Vixen, appealing to the
Vicar's wife.

"Oh, let us walk by all means," replied Mrs. Scobel, divining her
husband's feelings with respect to Titmouse.

"Then, you may drive the pony home, Bates," said Violet; "and be sure
you give him a good supper."

Titmouse went rattling down the hill at a pace that almost justified
the Vicar's objection to him. He gave a desperate shy in the hollow at
sight of a shaggy donkey, with a swollen appearance about the head,
suggestive, to the equine mind, of hobgoblins. Convulsed at this
appalling spectre, Titmouse stood on end for a second or two, and then
tore violently off, swinging his carriage behind him, so that the
groom's figure swayed to and fro in the moonlight.

"Thank God we're not sitting behind that brute!" ejaculated the Vicar
devoutly.

The pedestrians went off in the other direction, along the brow of the
hill, by a long white road that crossed a wide sweep of heathy country,
brown ridges and dark hollows, distant groups of firs standing black
against the moonlit sky, here and there a solitary yew that looked as
if it were haunted--just such a landscape as that Scottish heath upon
which Macbeth met the three weird women at set of sun, when the battle
was lost and won. Vixen and Rorie led the way; the procession of
school-children followed, singing hymns as they went with a vocal power
that gave no token of diminution.

"Their singing is very melodious when the sharp edge is taken off by
distance," said Rorie; and he and Violet walked at a pace which soon
left the children a good way behind them.

Mellowed by a quarter of a mile or so of interesting space, the music
lent a charm to the tranquil, perfumed night.

By-and-by they came to the gate of an enclosure which covered a large
extent of ground, and through which there was a near way to Beechdale
and the Abbey House. They walked along a grassy track through a
plantation of young pines--a track which led them down into a green and
mossy bottom, where the trees were old and beautiful, and the shadows
fell darker. The tall beech-trunks shone like silver, or like wonderful
frozen trees in some region of eternal ice and snow. It was a
wilderness in which a stranger would incontinently lose himself; but
every foot of the way was familiar to Vixen and Rorie. They had
followed the hounds by these green ways, and ridden and rambled here in
all seasons.

For some time they walked almost in silence, enjoying the beauty of the
night, the stillness only broken by the distant chorus of children
singing their pious strains--old hymn-tunes that Violet had known and
loved all her life.

"Doesn't it almost seem as if our old childish days had come back?"
said Roderick by-and-by. "Don't you feel as if you were a little girl
again, Vixen, going for a ramble with me--fern-hunting or
primrose-gathering?"

"No," answered Vixen firmly. "Nothing can ever bring the past back for
me. I shall never forget that I had a father--the best and dearest--and
that I have lost him."

"Dear Violet," Roderick began, very gently, "life cannot be made up of
mourning for the dead. We may keep their images enshrined in our hearts
for ever, but we must not shut our youth from the sunshine. Think how
few years of youth God gives us; and if we waste those upon vain
sorrow----"

"No one can say that I have wasted my youth, or shut myself from the
sunshine. I go to kettle-drums and dancing-parties. My mother and I
have taken pains to let the world see how happy we can be without papa."

"The dear old Squire!" said Rorie tenderly; "I think he loved me."

"I am sure he did," answered Vixen.

"Well, you and I seem to have entered upon a new life since last we
rode through these woods together. I daresay you are right, and that it
is not possible to fancy oneself back in the past, even for a moment.
Consciousness of the present hangs so heavily upon us."

"Yes," assented Vixen.

They had come to the end of the enclosure, and stood leaning against a
gate, waiting for the arrival of the children.

"And after all, perhaps, it is better to live in the present, and look
back at the past, as at an old picture which we shall sooner or later
turn with its face to the wall."

"I like best to think of my old self as if it were someone else," said
Violet. "I know there was a little girl whom her father called Vixen,
who used to ride after the hounds, and roam about the Forest on her
pony; and who was herself almost as wild as the Forest ponies. But I
can't associate her with this present me," concluded Violet, pointing
to herself with a half-scornful gesture.

"And which is the better, do you think," asked Rorie, "the wild Violet
of the past, or the elegant exotic of the present?"

"I know which was the happier."

"Ah," sighed Rorie, "happiness is a habit we outgrow when we get out of
our teens. But you, at nineteen, ought to have a year or so to the
good."

The children came in sight, tramping along the rutty green walk,
singing lustily, Mr. Scobel walking at their head, and swinging his
stick in time with the tuneful choir.


  "He only is the Maker
  Of all things near and far;
  He paints the wayside flower,
  He lights the evening star."


END OF VOL. I.


PRINTING OFFICE OF THE PUBLISHER.




Transcriber's note: Typographical errors silently corrected:

volume 1 =XI. "It shall be Measure for Measure= replaced by
         =XI. "It shall be Measure for Measure"=

volume 1 chapter 1: =trainante= replaced by =trainante=

volume 1 chapter 4: =I I shan't be for two years= replaced by
                    =I shan't be for two years=

volume 1 chapter 12: =with the orchid?= replaced by
                     =with the orchid.=

volume 1 chapter 12: =hade made him sleepy= replaced by
                     =had made him sleepy=

volume 1 chapter 13: =cat species.= replaced by cat =species."=

volume 1 chapter 15: =Les Traineaux= replaced by =Les Traineaux=

volume 1 chapter 17: =children together.= replaced by
                     =children together."=








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Vixen, Volume I., by M. E. Braddon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK VIXEN, VOLUME I. ***

***** This file should be named 26236.txt or 26236.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/2/3/26236/

Produced by Daniel Fromont.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
