The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Interpreters of Genesis and the
Interpreters of Nature, by Thomas Henry Huxley

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Interpreters of Genesis and the Interpreters of Nature
       Essay #4 from "Science and Hebrew Tradition"

Author: Thomas Henry Huxley

Posting Date: December 3, 2008 [EBook #2630]
Release Date: May, 2001

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INTERPRETERS OF GENESIS ***




Produced by D.R. Thompson





THE INTERPRETERS OF GENESIS AND THE INTERPRETERS OF NATURE

ESSAY #4 FROM "SCIENCE AND HEBREW TRADITION"


By Thomas Henry Huxley



Our fabulist warns "those who in quarrels interpose" of the fate which
is probably in store for them; and, in venturing to place myself between
so powerful a controversialist as Mr. Gladstone and the eminent divine
whom he assaults with such vigour in the last number of this Review, [1]
I am fully aware that I run great danger of verifying Gay's prediction.
Moreover, it is quite possible that my zeal in offering aid to a
combatant so extremely well able to take care of himself as M. Reville
may be thought to savour of indiscretion.

Two considerations, however, have led me to face the double risk. The
one is that though, in my judgment, M. Reville is wholly in the right
in that part of the controversy to which I propose to restrict my
observations, nevertheless he, as a foreigner, has very little chance of
making the truth prevail with Englishmen against the authority and the
dialectic skill of the greatest master of persuasive rhetoric among
English-speaking men of our time. As the Queen's proctor intervenes, in
certain cases, between two litigants in the interests of justice, so
it may be permitted me to interpose as a sort of uncommissioned science
proctor. My second excuse for my meddlesomeness is, that important
questions of natural science--respecting which neither of the combatants
professes to speak as an expert--are involved in the controversy; and
I think it is desirable that the public should know what it is that
natural science really has to say on these topics, to the best belief
of one who has been a diligent student of natural science for the last
forty years.

The original "Prolegomenes de l'Histoire des Religions" has not come in
my way; but I have read the translation of M. Reville's work, published
in England under the auspices of Professor Max Muller, with very great
interest. It puts more fairly and clearly than any book previously known
to me, the view which a man of strong religious feelings, but at the
same time possessing the information and the reasoning power which
enable him to estimate the strength of scientific methods of inquiry and
the weight of scientific truth, may be expected to take of the relation
between science and religion.

In the chapter on "The Primitive Revelation" the scientific worth of
the account of the Creation given in the book of Genesis is estimated
in terms which are as unquestionably respectful as, in my judgment, they
are just; and, at the end of the chapter on "Primitive Tradition," M.
Reville appraises the value of pentateuchal anthropology in a way which
I should have thought sure of enlisting the assent of all competent
judges, even if it were extended to the whole of the cosmogony and
biology of Genesis:--

   As, however, the original traditions of nations sprang up in an
   epoch less remote than our own from the primitive life, it is
   indispensable to consult them, to compare them, and to associate
   them with other sources of information which are available.
   From this point of view, the traditions recorded in Genesis
   possess, in addition to their own peculiar charm, a value of the
   highest order; but we cannot ultimately see in them more than a
   venerable fragment, well-deserving attention, of the great
   genesis of mankind.


Mr. Gladstone is of a different mind. He dissents from M. Reville's
views respecting the proper estimation of the pentateuchal traditions,
no less than he does from his interpretation of those Homeric myths
which have been the object of his own special study. In the latter case,
Mr. Gladstone tells M. Reville that he is wrong on his own authority,
to which, in such a matter, all will pay due respect: in the former, he
affirms himself to be "wholly destitute of that kind of knowledge which
carries authority," and his rebuke is administered in the name and by
the authority of natural science.

An air of magisterial gravity hangs about the following passage:--


   But the question is not here of a lofty poem, or a skilfully
   constructed narrative: it is whether natural science, in the
   patient exercise of its high calling to examine facts, finds
   that the works of God cry out against what we have fondly
   believed to be His word and tell another tale; or whether, in
   this nineteenth century of Christian progress, it substantially
   echoes back the majestic sound, which, before it existed as a
   pursuit, went forth into all lands.

   First, looking largely at the latter portion of the narrative,
   which describes the creation of living organisms, and waiving
   details, on some of which (as in v. 24) the Septuagint seems to
   vary from the Hebrew, there is a grand fourfold division, set
   forth in an orderly succession of times as follows: on the
   fifth day

   1. The water-population;
   2. The air-population;
   and, on the sixth day,
   3. The land-population of animals;
   4. The land-population consummated in man.
   "Now this same fourfold order is understood to have been so
   affirmed in our time by natural science, that it may be taken as
   a demonstrated conclusion and established fact." (p. 696).


"Understood?" By whom? I cannot bring myself to imagine that Mr.
Gladstone has made so solemn and authoritative a statement on a matter
of this importance without due inquiry--without being able to found
himself upon recognised scientific authority. But I wish he had thought
fit to name the source from whence he has derived his information, as,
in that case, I could have dealt with [143] his authority, and I should
have thereby escaped the appearance of making an attack on Mr. Gladstone
himself, which is in every way distasteful to me.

For I can meet the statement in the last paragraph of the above citation
with nothing but a direct negative. If I know anything at all about
the results attained by the natural science of our time, it is "a
demonstrated conclusion and established fact" that the "fourfold order"
given by Mr. Gladstone is not that in which the evidence at our disposal
tends to show that the water, air, and land-populations of the globe
have made their appearance.

Perhaps I may be told that Mr. Gladstone does give his authority--that
he cites Cuvier, Sir John Herschel, and Dr. Whewell in support of his
case. If that has been Mr. Gladstone's intention in mentioning these
eminent names, I may remark that, on this particular question, the only
relevant authority is that of Cuvier. But great as Cuvier was, it is to
be remembered that, as Mr. Gladstone incidentally remarks, he cannot now
be called a recent authority. In fact, he has been dead more than half
a century; and the palaeontology of our day is related to that of his,
very much as the geography of the sixteenth century is related to that
of the fourteenth. Since 1832, when Cuvier died, not only a new world,
but new worlds, of ancient life have been discovered; and those who
have most faithfully carried on the work of the chief founder of
palaeontology have done most to invalidate the essentially negative
grounds of his speculative adherence to tradition.

If Mr. Gladstone's latest information on these matters is derived
from the famous discourse prefixed to the "Ossemens Fossiles," I
can understand the position he has taken up; if he has ever opened a
respectable modern manual of palaeontology, or geology, I cannot.
For the facts which demolish his whole argument are of the commonest
notoriety. But before proceeding to consider the evidence for this
assertion we must be clear about the meaning of the phraseology
employed.

I apprehend that when Mr. Gladstone uses the term "water-population" he
means those animals which in Genesis i. 21 (Revised Version) are spoken
of as "the great sea monsters and every living creature that moveth,
which the waters brought forth abundantly, after their kind." And I
presume that it will be agreed that whales and porpoises, sea fishes,
and the innumerable hosts of marine invertebrated animals, are meant
thereby. So "air-population" must be the equivalent of "fowl" in verse
20, and "every winged fowl after its kind," verse 21. I suppose I may
take it for granted that by "fowl" we have here to understand birds--at
any rate primarily. Secondarily, it may be that the bats and the extinct
pterodactyles, which were flying reptiles, come under the same head.
But whether all insects are "creeping things" of the land-population,
or whether flying insects are to be included under the denomination of
"winged fowl," is a point for the decision of Hebrew exegetes. Lastly,
I suppose I may assume that "land-population" signifies "the cattle" and
"the beasts of the earth," and "every creeping thing that creepeth upon
the earth," in verses 25 and 26; presumably it comprehends all kinds of
terrestrial animals, vertebrate and invertebrate, except such as may be
comprised under the head of the "air-population."

Now what I want to make clear is this: that if the terms
"water-population," "air-population," and "land-population" are
understood in the senses here defined, natural science has nothing to
say in favour of the proposition that they succeeded one another in
the order given by Mr. Gladstone; but that, on the contrary, all the
evidence we possess goes to prove that they did not. Whence it will
follow that, if Mr. Gladstone has interpreted Genesis rightly (on which
point I am most anxious to be understood to offer no opinion), that
interpretation is wholly irreconcilable with the conclusions at present
accepted by the interpreters of nature--with everything that can be
called "a demonstrated conclusion and established fact" of natural
science. And be it observed that I am not here dealing with a question
of speculation, but with a question of fact.

Either the geological record is sufficiently complete to afford us
a means of determining the order in which animals have made their
appearance on the globe or it is not. If it is, the determination of
that order is little more than a mere matter of observation; if it is
not, then natural science neither affirms nor refutes the "fourfold
order," but is simply silent.

The series of the fossiliferous deposits, which contain the remains of
the animals which have lived on the earth in past ages of its history,
and which can alone afford the evidence required by natural science of
the order of appearance of their different species, may be grouped in
the manner shown in the left-hand column of the following table, the
oldest being at the bottom:--

     Formations          First known appearance of
     Quaternary.
     Pliocene.
     Miocene.
     Eocene.             Vertebrate _air_-population (Bats).
     Cretaceous.
     Jurassic.           Vertebrate _air_-population (Birds and
                         Pterodactyles).
     Triassic.
     Upper Palaeozoic.
     Middle Palaeozoic.  Vertebrate _land_-population (Amphibia,
                         Reptilia [?]).
     Lower Palaeozoic.
       Silurian.         Vertebrate _water_-population (Fishes).
                         Invertebrate _air_ and _land_-
                         population (Flying Insects and Scorpions).
       Cambrian.         Invertebrate _water_-population (much
                         earlier, if _Eozoon_ is animal).

In the right-hand column I have noted the group of strata in which,
according to our present information, the _land, air,_ and _water_
populations respectively appear for the first time; and in consequence
of the ambiguity about the meaning of "fowl," I have separately
indicated the first appearance of bats, birds, flying reptiles, and
flying insects. It will be observed that, if "fowl" means only "bird,"
or at most flying vertebrate, then the first certain evidence of the
latter, in the Jurassic epoch, is posterior to the first appearance
of truly terrestrial _Amphibia,_ and possibly of true reptiles, in the
Carboniferous epoch (Middle Palaeozoic) by a prodigious interval of
time.

The water-population of vertebrated animals first appears in the Upper
Silurian. [2] Therefore, if we found ourselves on vertebrated animals
and take "fowl" to mean birds only, or, at most, flying vertebrates,
natural science says that the order of succession was water, land, and
air-population, and not--as Mr. Gladstone, founding himself on Genesis,
says--water, air, land-population. If a chronicler of Greece affirmed
that the age of Alexander preceded that of Pericles and immediately
succeeded that of the Trojan war, Mr. Gladstone would hardly say that
this order is "understood to have been so affirmed by historical science
that it may be taken as a demonstrated conclusion and established fact."
Yet natural science "affirms" his "fourfold order" to exactly the same
extent--neither more nor less.

Suppose, however, that "fowl" is to be taken to include flying insects.
In that case, the first appearance of an air-population must be shifted
back for long ages, recent discovery having shown that they occur in
rocks of Silurian age. Hence there might still have been hope for the
fourfold order, were it not that the fates unkindly determined
that scorpions--"creeping things that creep on the earth" _par
excellence--_turned up in Silurian strata nearly at the same time. So
that, if the word in the original Hebrew translated "fowl" should really
after all mean "cockroach"--and I have great faith in the elasticity
of that tongue in the hands of Biblical exegetes--the order primarily
suggested by the existing evidence--

     2. Land and air-population;
     1. Water-population;

and Mr. Gladstone's order--

     3. Land-population;
     2. Air-population;
     1. Water-population;

can by no means be made to coincide. As a matter of fact, then,
the statement so confidently put forward turns out to be devoid of
foundation and in direct contradiction of the evidence at present at our
disposal. [3]

If, stepping beyond that which may be learned from the facts of the
successive appearance of the forms of animal life upon the surface
of the globe, in so far as they are yet made known to us by natural
science, we apply our reasoning faculties to the task of finding
out what those observed facts mean, the present conclusions of the
interpreters of nature appear to be no less directly in conflict with
those of the latest interpreter of Genesis.

Mr. Gladstone appears to admit that there is some truth in the doctrine
of evolution, and indeed places it under very high patronage.

     I contend that evolution in its highest form has not been a
     thing heretofore unknown to history, to philosophy, or to
     theology. I contend that it was before the mind of Saint Paul
     when he taught that in the fulness of time God sent forth His
     Son, and of Eusebius when he wrote the "Preparation for the
     Gospel," and of Augustine when he composed the "City of God"
     (p. 706).

Has any one ever disputed the contention, thus solemnly enunciated, that
the doctrine of evolution was not invented the day before yesterday? Has
any one ever dreamed of claiming it as a modern innovation? Is there any
one so ignorant of the history of philosophy as to be unaware that it
is one of the forms in which speculation embodied itself long before the
time either of the Bishop of Hippo or of the Apostle to the Gentiles?
Is Mr. Gladstone, of all people in the world, disposed to ignore the
founders of Greek philosophy, to say nothing of Indian sages to whom
evolution was a familiar notion ages before Paul of Tarsus was born?
But it is ungrateful to cavil at even the most oblique admission of the
possible value of one of those affirmations of natural science which
really may be said to be "a demonstrated conclusion and established
fact." I note it with pleasure, if only for the purpose of introducing
the observation that, if there is any truth whatever in the doctrine of
evolution as applied to animals, Mr. Gladstone's gloss on Genesis in the
following passage is hardly happy:--

   God created
   (a) The water-population;
   (b) The air-population.

   And they receive His benediction (v. 20-23).

   6. Pursuing this regular progression from the lower to the
   higher, from the simple to the complex, the text now gives us
   the work of the sixth "day," which supplies the land-population,
   air and water having been already supplied (pp. 695, 696).

The gloss to which I refer is the assumption that the "air-population"
forms a term in the order of progression from lower to higher, from
simple to complex--the place of which lies between the water-population
below and the land-population above--and I speak of it as a "gloss,"
because the pentateuchal writer is nowise responsible for it.

But it is not true that the air-population, as a whole, is "lower" or
less "complex" than the land-population. On the contrary, every beginner
in the study of animal morphology is aware that the organisation of a
bat, of a bird, or of a pterodactyle presupposes that of a terrestrial
quadruped; and that it is intelligible only as an extreme modification
of the organisation of a terrestrial mammal or reptile. In the same way
winged insects (if they are to be counted among the "air-population")
presuppose insects which were wingless, and, therefore, as "creeping
things," were part of the land-population. Thus theory is as much
opposed as observation to the admission that natural science endorses
the succession of animal life which Mr. Gladstone finds in Genesis. On
the contrary, a good many representatives of natural science would be
prepared to say, on theoretical grounds alone, that it is
incredible that the "air-population" should have appeared before
the "land-population"--and that, if this assertion is to be found in
Genesis, it merely demonstrates the scientific worthlessness of the
story of which it forms a part.

Indeed, we may go further. It is not even admissible to say that
the water-population, as a whole, appeared before the air and the
land-populations. According to the Authorised Version, Genesis
especially mentions, among the animals created on the fifth day,
"great whales," in place of which the Revised Version reads "great
sea monsters." Far be it from me to give an opinion which rendering is
right, or whether either is right. All I desire to remark is, that
if whales and porpoises, dugongs and manatees, are to be regarded as
members of the water-population (and if they are not, what animals can
claim the designation?), then that much of the water-population has, as
certainly, originated later than the land-population as bats and birds
have. For I am not aware that any competent judge would hesitate to
admit that the organisation of these animals shows the most obvious
signs of their descent from terrestrial quadrupeds.

A similar criticism applies to Mr. Gladstone's assumption that, as the
fourth act of that "orderly succession of times" enunciated in Genesis,
"the land-population consummated in man."

If this means simply that man is the final term in the evolutional
series of which he forms a part, I do not suppose that any objection
will be raised to that statement on the part of students of natural
science. But if the pentateuchal author goes further than this, and
intends to say that which is ascribed to him by Mr. Gladstone, I think
natural science will have to enter a _caveat._ It is not by any means
certain that man--I mean the species _Homo sapiens_ of zoological
terminology--has "consummated" the land-population in the sense of
appearing at a later period of time than any other. Let me make my
meaning clear by an example. From a morphological point of view,
our beautiful and useful contemporary--I might almost call him
colleague--the horse (_Equus caballus_), is the last term of the
evolutional series to which he belongs, just as _Homo sapiens_ is the
last term of the series of which he is a member. If I want to know
whether the species _Equus caballus_ made its appearance on the surface
of the globe before or after _Homo sapiens,_ deduction from known laws
does not help me. There is no reason, that I know of, why one should
have appeared sooner or later than the other. If I turn to observation,
I find abundant remains of _Equus caballus_ in Quaternary strata,
perhaps a little earlier. The existence of _Homo sapiens_ in the
Quaternary epoch is also certain. Evidence has been adduced in favour of
man's existence in the Pliocene, or even in the Miocene epoch. It does
not satisfy me; but I have no reason to doubt that the fact may be so,
nevertheless. Indeed, I think it is quite possible that further research
will show that _Homo sapiens_ existed, not only before _Equus caballus,_
but before many other of the existing forms of animal life; so that, if
all the species of animals have been separately created, man, in this
case, would by no means be the "consummation" of the land-population.

I am raising no objection to the position of the fourth term in Mr.
Gladstone's "order"--on the facts, as they stand, it is quite open to
any one to hold, as a pious opinion, that the fabrication of man was the
acme and final achievement of the process of peopling the globe. But
it must not be said that natural science counts this opinion among her
"demonstrated conclusions and established facts," for there would be
just as much, or as little, reason for ranging the contrary opinion
among them.

It may seem superfluous to add to the evidence that Mr. Gladstone has
been utterly misled in supposing that his interpretation of Genesis
receives any support from natural science. But it is as well to do one's
work thoroughly while one is about it; and I think it may be advisable
to point out that the facts, as they are at present known, not only
refute Mr. Gladstone's interpretation of Genesis in detail, but are
opposed to the central idea on which it appears to be based.

There must be some position from which the reconcilers of science and
Genesis will not retreat, some central idea the maintenance of which is
vital and its refutation fatal. Even if they now allow that the words
"the evening and the morning" have not the least reference to a natural
day, but mean a period of any number of millions of years that may be
necessary; even if they are driven to admit that the word "creation,"
which so many millions of pious Jews and Christians have held, and still
hold, to mean a sudden act of the Deity, signifies a process of gradual
evolution of one species from another, extending through immeasurable
time; even if they are willing to grant that the asserted coincidence of
the order of Nature with the "fourfold order" ascribed to Genesis is an
obvious error instead of an established truth; they are surely prepared
to make a last stand upon the conception which underlies the whole, and
which constitutes the essence of Mr. Gladstone's "fourfold division, set
forth in an orderly succession of times." It is, that the animal
species which compose the water-population, the air-population, and
the land-population respectively, originated during three distinct and
successive periods of time, and only during those periods of time.

This statement appears to me to be the interpretation of Genesis which
Mr. Gladstone supports, reduced to its simplest expression. "Period
of time" is substituted for "day"; "originated" is substituted for
"created"; and "any order required" for that adopted by Mr. Gladstone.
It is necessary to make this proviso, for if "day" may mean a few
million years, and "creation" may mean evolution, then it is
obvious that the order (1) water-population, (2) air-population,
(3) land-population, may also mean (1) water-population, (2)
land-population, (3) air-population; and it would be unkind to bind down
the reconcilers to this detail when one has parted with so many others
to oblige them.

But even this sublimated essence of the pentateuchal doctrine (if it be
such) remains as discordant with natural science as ever.

It is not true that the species composing any one of the three
populations originated during any one of three successive periods of
time, and not at any other of these.

Undoubtedly, it is in the highest degree probable that animal life
appeared first under aquatic conditions; that terrestrial forms appeared
later, and flying animals only after land animals; but it is, at the
same time, testified by all the evidence we possess, that the great
majority, if not the whole, of the primordial species of each division
have long since died out and have been replaced by a vast succession of
new forms. Hundreds of thousands of animal species, as distinct as those
which now compose our water, land, and air-populations, have come into
existence and died out again, throughout the aeons of geological time
which separate us from the lower Palaeozoic epoch, when, as I have
pointed out, our present evidence of the existence of such distinct
populations commences. If the species of animals have all been
separately created, then it follows that hundreds of thousands of acts
of creative energy have occurred, at intervals, throughout the whole
time recorded by the fossiliferous rocks; and, during the greater part
of that time, the "creation" of the members of the water, land, and
air-populations must have gone on contemporaneously.

If we represent the water, land, and air-populations by _a, b,_ and _c_
respectively, and take vertical succession on the page to indicate
order in time, then the following schemes will roughly shadow forth the
contrast I have been endeavouring to explain:

     Genesis (as interpreted by      Nature (as interpreted by
          Mr. Gladstone).                 natural science).
            _b b b                         c1 a3 b2
               c c c                         c  a2 b1
               a a a                         b  a1 b
                                             a  a  a_

So far as I can see, there is only one resource left for those modern
representatives of Sisyphus, the reconcilers of Genesis with science;
and it has the advantage of being founded on a perfectly legitimate
appeal to our ignorance. It has been seen that, on any interpretation of
the terms water-population and land-population, it must be admitted that
invertebrate representatives of these populations existed during the
lower Palaeozoic epoch. No evolutionist can hesitate to admit that other
land animals (and possibly vertebrates among them) may have existed
during that time, of the history of which we know so little; and,
further, that scorpions are animals of such high organisation that it
is highly probable their existence indicates that of a long antecedent
land-population of a similar character.

Then, since the land-population is said not to have been created until
the sixth day, it necessarily follows that the evidence of the order
in which animals appeared must be sought in the record of those older
Palaeozoic times in which only traces of the water-population have as
yet been discovered.

Therefore, if any one chooses to say that the creative work took place
in the Cambrian or Laurentian epoch, in exactly that manner which Mr.
Gladstone does, and natural science does not, affirm, natural science
is not in a position to disprove the accuracy of the statement. Only
one cannot have one's cake and eat it too, and such safety from the
contradiction of science means the forfeiture of her support.

Whether the account of the work of the first, second, and third days
in Genesis would be confirmed by the demonstration of the truth of the
nebular hypothesis; whether it is corroborated by what is known of the
nature and probable relative antiquity of the heavenly bodies; whether,
if the Hebrew word translated "firmament" in the Authorised Version
really means "expanse," the assertion that the waters are partly under
this "expanse" and partly above it would be any more confirmed by the
ascertained facts of physical geography and meteorology than it
was before; whether the creation of the whole vegetable world, and
especially of "grass, herb yielding seed after its kind, and tree
bearing fruit," before any kind of animal, is "affirmed" by the
apparently plain teaching of botanical palaeontology, that grasses
and fruit-trees originated long subsequently to animals all these are
questions which, if I mistake not, would be answered decisively in
the negative by those who are specially conversant with the sciences
involved. And it must be recollected that the issue raised by Mr.
Gladstone is not whether, by some effort of ingenuity, the pentateuchal
story can be shown to be not disprovable by scientific knowledge, but
whether it is supported thereby.

    There is nothing, then, in the criticisms of Dr. Reville but
    what rather tends to confirm than to impair the old-fashioned
    belief that there is a revelation in the book of Genesis
    (p. 694).

The form into which Mr. Gladstone has thought fit to throw this opinion
leaves me in doubt as to its substance. I do not understand how a
hostile criticism can, under any circumstances, tend to confirm that
which it attacks. If, however, Mr. Gladstone merely means to express his
personal impression, "as one wholly destitute of that kind of knowledge
which carries authority," that he has destroyed the value of these
criticisms, I have neither the wish nor the right to attempt to disturb
his faith. On the other hand, I may be permitted to state my own
conviction, that, so far as natural science is involved, M. Reville's
observations retain the exact value they possessed before Mr. Gladstone
attacked them.


Trusting that I have now said enough to secure the author of a wise and
moderate disquisition upon a topic which seems fated to stir unwisdom
and fanaticism to their depths, a fuller measure of justice than
has hitherto been accorded to him, I retire from my self-appointed
championship, with the hope that I shall not hereafter be called upon by
M. Reville to apologise for damage done to his strong case by imperfect
or impulsive advocacy. But, perhaps, I may be permitted to add a word
or two, on my own account, in reference to the great question of the
relations between science and religion; since it is one about which I
have thought a good deal ever since I have been able to think at all;
and about which I have ventured to express my views publicly, more than
once, in the course of the last thirty years.

The antagonism between science and religion, about which we hear so
much, appears to me to be purely factitious--fabricated, on the one
hand, by short-sighted religious people who confound a certain branch
of science, theology, with religion; and, on the other, by equally
short-sighted scientific people who forget that science takes for
its province only that which is susceptible of clear intellectual
comprehension; and that, outside the boundaries of that province, they
must be content with imagination, with hope, and with ignorance.

It seems to me that the moral and intellectual life of the civilised
nations of Europe is the product of that interaction, sometimes in the
way of antagonism, sometimes in that of profitable interchange, of the
Semitic and the Aryan races, which commenced with the dawn of history,
when Greek and Phoenician came in contact, and has been continued by
Carthaginian and Roman, by Jew and Gentile, down to the present day. Our
art (except, perhaps, music) and our science are the contributions of
the Aryan; but the essence of our religion is derived from the Semite.
In the eighth century B.C., in the heart of a world of idolatrous
polytheists, the Hebrew prophets put forth a conception of religion
which appears to me to be as wonderful an inspiration of genius as the
art of Pheidias or the science of Aristotle.

"And what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?"

If any so-called religion takes away from this great saying of Micah,
I think it wantonly mutilates, while, if it adds thereto, I think it
obscures, the perfect ideal of religion.

But what extent of knowledge, what acuteness of scientific criticism,
can touch this, if any one possessed of knowledge, or acuteness, could
be absurd enough to make the attempt? Will the progress of research
prove that justice is worthless and mercy hateful; will it ever soften
the bitter contrast between our actions and our aspirations; or show us
the bounds of the universe and bid us say, Go to, now we comprehend the
infinite? A faculty of wrath lay in those ancient Israelites, and surely
the prophet's staff would have made swift acquaintance with the head of
the scholar who had asked Micah whether, peradventure, the Lord further
required of him an implicit belief in the accuracy of the cosmogony of
Genesis!

What we are usually pleased to call religion nowadays is, for the most
part, Hellenised Judaism; and, not unfrequently, the Hellenic element
carries with it a mighty remnant of old-world paganism and a great
infusion of the worst and weakest products of Greek scientific
speculation; while fragments of Persian and Babylonian, or rather
Accadian, mythology burden the Judaic contribution to the common stock.

The antagonism of science is not to religion, but to the heathen
survivals and the bad philosophy under which religion herself is often
well-nigh crushed. And, for my part, I trust that this antagonism will
never cease; but that, to the end of time, true science will continue to
fulfil one of her most beneficent functions, that of relieving men from
the burden of false science which is imposed upon them in the name of
religion.

This is the work that M. Reville and men such as he are doing for us;
this is the work which his opponents are endeavouring, consciously or
unconsciously, to hinder.




FOOTNOTES

[Footnote 1: _The Nineteenth Century._]

[Footnote 2: Earlier, if more recent announcements are correct.]

[Footnote 3: It may be objected that I have not put the case fairly
inasmuch as the solitary insect's wing which was discovered twelve
months ago in Silurian rocks, and which is, at present, the sole
evidence of insects older than the Devonian epoch, came from strata of
Middle Silurian age, and is therefore older than the scorpions which,
within the last two years, have been found in Upper Silurian strata in
Sweden, Britain, and the United States. But no one who comprehends the
nature of the evidence afforded by fossil remains would venture to say
that the non-discovery of scorpions in the Middle Silurian strata, up
to this time, affords any more ground for supposing that they did not
exist, than the non-discovery of flying insects in the Upper Silurian
strata, up to this time, throws any doubt on the certainty that they
existed, which is derived from the occurrence of the wing in the Middle
Silurian. In fact, I have stretched a point in admitting that these
fossils afford a colourable pretext for the assumption that the land and
air-population were of contemporaneous origin.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Interpreters of Genesis and the
Interpreters of Nature, by Thomas Henry Huxley

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INTERPRETERS OF GENESIS ***

***** This file should be named 2630.txt or 2630.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/3/2630/

Produced by D.R. Thompson

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
