The Project Gutenberg EBook of Cupology, by Clara

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Cupology
       How to Be Entertaining

Author: Clara

Release Date: August 17, 2008 [EBook #26339]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CUPOLOGY ***




Produced by Ruth Hart







[Transcriber's note: for this online edition I have added a Table of
Contents and have indicated section breaks with three asterisks.
Also I have made the following spelling changes: Chapter II:
"shapened like a shephard's" to "sharpened like a shepherd's";
"course in leaves" to "coarse in leaves". Also the sentence
beginning "This is a retrospective day for your soul" is incomplete.
Chapter IV: "agrandizement" to "aggrandizement"; "repoductions" to
"reproductions". Chapter VI: "sitting ud" to "sitting up". Chapter
VII: "Chapter V" to "Chapter VII". A Few Toasts: "murmer" to "murmur".
Three Great Commanders: "Owen Meridith" to "Owen Meredith".
Entertainment Suggestion: "calender" to "calendar". Characters
in Finger Nails: "strickly" to "strictly". Strange Wills: "There
have been many" to "There have not been many", and "MacCaig" to
MacCraig". Something to Remember: "Spender Percival" to "Spencer
Perceval".]


CUPOLOGY.
HOW TO BE ENTERTAINING.
INTERESTING FACTS FOR BOTH YOUNG AND OLD.
TOASTS -- GEMS.
HOW TO TELL AGE.


PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR, CLARA.


CINCINNATI, OHIO:
PRINTED BY FRANK H. VEHR.
1904.


Entered according to Act of Congress in the year 1904, by CLARA, in
the office of the Librarian of Congress, at Washington.


TABLE OF CONTENTS

             Inspired Cup-Reading.
Chapter I.   Helpful Hints for Friendly Social Gatherings.
Chapter II.  One Year Later.
Chapter III. The Woman's Era of National Import.
Chapter IV.  Mystical Cup.
Chapter V.   The Acquisitive Adept.
Chapter VI.  Three Coquettes.
Chapter VII. Superstition.

Cupology
Popular Toasts
Three Great Commanders
A Hint on Entertaining
Look at Your Cup
Entertainment Suggestion
Have a Peanut
What the Eyes Tell
Revealed by the Thumb
Characters in Finger Nails
Beauty's Seven Nurses
To Discover a Woman's Age
How He May Be Won
Dew Drops
Birth Stones for Luck
Kruger's Unlucky Diamond
Strange Wills
Laughagraphs
The Man Who Can Make Us Laugh
Queer Blunders
A Mysterious Telegram
Fortune
Dead Easy
A Bad Spell of Weather
For An Evening Game
Something to Remember
The Four Leaved Shamrock


INSPIRED CUP-READING.

Not Mere Fortune Telling.

[_From Sun-Flower_.]


PROPHECY.

"Prophecy is the science of being able to sense the casual
influences or vibrations governing the person or subject on
which the consciousness is centered, and knowing the purport
or meaning of these influences. To the non-sensitive this has no
existence, and he must judge the future by surface effects
entirely--his knowledge of human character or of the subject to
which he is devoted. A feeling of peace or quietude; that which
disturbs or irritates; animates or enervates; engenders joy or
gloom; that which attracts or repels without visible effects, are
some of the sensations experienced and have their specific
meanings, which must be grouped, counter-effects considered,
and conclusions drawn from this to make the forecast or outline
of the subject's future. To avert mistakes, however, the reader of
destinies must have sufficient self-knowledge to distinguish his
own influences or vibrations from those sensed in others and
not combine them as coming from one source. Every individual
is governed by this 'cause upon him,' and if he studies himself
he can become his own prophet."

[Illustration: horseshoe]


     THE FOUR-LEAF CLOVER.

     ELLA HIGGINSON.

     I know a place where the sun is like gold,
          And the cherry blooms burst with snow,
     And down underneath is the loveliest nook,
          Where the four-leaf clovers grow.

     One leaf is for hope, and one is faith,
          And one is for love, you know;
     And God put another one in for luck--
          If you search you will find where they grow.

     But you must have hope and you must have faith.
          You must love and be strong, and so,
     If you work, if you wait, you will find the place
          Where the four-leaf clovers grow.


OMENS IN THE TEA CUPS.

When, after making the tea, you forget to replace the lid of the
teapot, expect a caller to drop in and share with you the cup that
cheers.


SENSING OF ATMOSPHERES.

HOW TO BE ENTERTAINING.

READING FROM TEA OR COFFEE CUPS.

As delineated by a Cincinnati lady on different occasions,
for the pleasure of guests, both young and old, who became
desirous of acquiring this fine art, this character reading gift.

[Illustration: calligraphy flourish 1]


     THE GRACE WE SAY TO GOD.

     [JEAN INGELOW.]

          So take joy home,
     And make a place in thy great heart for her,
     And give her time to grow and cherish her;
     Then will she come and oft will sing to thee
     When thou art working in the furrows; ay,
     Or weeding in the sacred hour of dawn.
     It is a comely fashion to be glad--
     Joy is the grace we say to God.


LOVE'S SECRETS READ.

These revelations are honestly dedicated to bright folks, who
study human needs, and to such as possess and inspire a bit of
high-soul, creative imagination, as well as to humanitarians,
who become capable of knowing, advising and showing the
better sides of life by lofty mental concentration, which ever
lifts the thinker into the special soul atmosphere of each
separate mentality, by the power of attraction and repulsion,
verily, by the cosmic law of life, gaining thereby deeper insight
into what seemeth best to think and to do for self and for others.

Believing that these, my life-long experiences, will prove both
instructive and highly entertaining, I am happy to send forth
these _talismanic_ best thoughts, which may indeed become
noble and satisfying possessions to many active and wisely
applying minds, for the healthful enjoyment of their friends and
associates.

[Illustration: fan]


CHAPTER I.

HELPFUL HINTS FOR FRIENDLY SOCIAL GATHERINGS.

First cup turned was by a tall, handsome girl, who, herself,
possesses keen imagination with true power for character-reading,
and with love for the study of the occult sciences.

In her very first turn, the sky with misty scenes and an _airship_
were traced well up in the lines surrounding the lady.

High, sailing hopes, said the reader. You are gifted beyond the
ordinary. You love books, study and art; do not yet care for any
domestic duties. You are in cloud-lands.

In her second toss, the reading was as follows:

You are a little more practical. Here is formed a dusting-brush,
also a _kitchen_ and yard with a happy family of _chickens_,
meaning cares and pets; also a _horse_ and _sleigh_. You love
luxuries. You have traveled over land and seas. The _ferry-boat_
is here.

I read now in your third, the certainty, though not fully, noting
some of the minor events. Everything has changed from your
present thinking. You have climbed the ladder to some public
recognition by the influence of friends. You have yet much to
achieve--will become a real benefactress. So I read by the
people before you. The two _stars_ yet beyond, and the _sword_
which belongs to your family, represent some hero in wars yet to be.

The national bird, either an _eagle_ or _turkey_, promises good
results.

The trials of others will fall upon you, all through life. Your
views here are full of the different objects. A tall visitor will
give you a surprise, attended by coming pleasure, and a new
friend; also a _foe_--a _spider_. You have been disappointed in
three different forms, one is yet to entail a financial loss_--fish_,
you see, have their heads and tails cut off; and the _rings_ are
broken for some past and present enterprise. You are learning
mental philosophy, also, from a male relative to whom you are
very dear.

How truly and wonderfully you have read! I have also gained an
idea how to trace and to hold the mind in other special desires.
Thanks to you for this lesson.

          * * *

The next was a dainty, little, self-conscious lady, who is
desirous of some special, social accomplishment, aside from her
sisters. She is very cunning. See the little head of the _fox_ near
her, though vexations are with her now, yet the three similar
little straight forms, or lines, are realizations, as in this cup, of
some pleasant event. The _road_ here in view, a short and
agreeable journey, upon which you meet a lady friend who is to
visit you soon. These upper _dots_ are letters and small
packages near at hand, with two little _hearts_--love secrets.

You will, said the reader, receive many. One, that is in present
expectation, containing an invitation affording pleasure. The
_flowers_ bespeak it, being near the edge of the cup, with the
formation of letters. H will be the initial of one of the writers.
Now, you have a _little man_ who is to be cut off from some
desire--a broken _road_ is near him--with a period of indecision
and anxiety. Two male forms are holding his desires by their
neglect, not by malice. The wish is in their power, you see, yet
they are looking away from it.

Your third is with tears for a friend, though no death symbol is
near. Ah, here it is! You are to wed with a fair gentleman, not
your slight form--first love. You will be fairly happy. Confusion
is shown by the various objects in crooked and wavy lines, with
those tiny _crosses_, many little cares, and yet the _tree_ shades
the _house_. Your _castle_ on the highway with the little child's
_crib_ and the _parrot_, an imitative, impudent inmate of the
home.

Now, let your own fancy roam over these formations. Set them
in your mind. I have reserved this gift of love for the last sitting.
Do you see the _jeweled ring_ with the light flashing for you?
That will come when years have flown. You will be a widow.
That event will benefit your entire family, as the _wavy lines_
and _tears_ indicate, so do not lose heart. This late blessing is
enough to inspire courage and patience. Yes, it is for your
household. Do you see the broad sky-scenes? That is good.

          * * *

Next: _A hay-mound_ and a _field_. You love rural life, young
man.

I do, said he, as a retreat and recreation. This _square_ promises
you a business house in a commercial city. See the stacks of
letters and the figures 3, 7, 10,--and the many heads of men in
calculation.

Now you stand by an open grave. Your dearest friend has died.
The dark cloak enfolds your form and your wish--_the circle_--
is in doubt. _Spears_ and _weeds_ are near it, also a crude
_cross_. A time of dissatisfaction will come to you before three
years have passed, yet there are promises beyond. Cast, now,
for the better times for certainty.

          * * *

Third: _Friends, horses, dogs, birds, trees_.

In touch with life's blessings you possess a kind, social nature--
a _stream_ of clear water. Health and friends in plenty, great
activity. You are to rise above many ills.

A broken _bridge_ is at the far end of this _road_, but your face
is turned away, in this you are spared an evil, be wise. The
South will offer you last and final protection. See, the light is
shading in that direction. An _old lady_ will be your faithful
friend. There will be also a trusty _colored man_--see how he
stands in _line?_ Your last years will be in rural life, with a
family and an income with fair surroundings. The space is clear.
You see light is over your last scenes. See the young girl--no
doubt your daughter--under the beautiful fruit trees?

Orange groves in the sunny South, said he, smiling.

Most important for yon appears a distant battle-scene with deep
sorrows. Some great personal honors in life for a son. Yes, an
American battle scene with the _eagle_ distant, yet sure to gain
the day.


SOME NATIONAL CRISIS.

NEXT READING.

_Key_ to the situation. See, it is within a short time, only a little
way from the edge of the cup.

Good, said the recipient, I know what that is now, am glad of it.

Well, you are, however, to weep over the matter soon, as
speaking to some friend of this affair. There is much to it. See
the _cross_ and _tears_, as holding up the cup. Yet you would
not now dream that there are complications in this affair. Three
factions, yet all in positive expectations, though fight is coming.
See the little _dog_, how angry, and the _cat_, with her back up,
and the other animal with a spring? Why here. Can't you see it!
Of course it's not quite as distinct as a real dog and cat fight.
One of the animals is retreating from the scene in fear. Your
faces are all turned in the same direction, you know each other.

Well, the _crescent_ is in the lower part of the cup. Some later
news--also the fine _horse_, a _friend_ with some testimonial of
appreciation. A _wreath_ and victory. Here are several _letters,
_one containing news of death. The _coffin_ is here for the little
child. Many tears are shed by two women--each looks into the
grave.

Ah, the spite lines! See them, there are little jealousies, too. We
all have these to content with, said the reader, especially if we
ever rise above the common level of life and as independent
thinkers.

An illness of importance is now developing an event long ago
foretold to your family. A fine steed comes from another city
through a church-yard, much resembling Trinity E of New York
City. Some _letters_ follow--see the succession of _dots_ and
_squares. Houses_ of _smoke, news_ and _trailing objects_,
representing deep-laid intrigues.

Now you are aboard a steamer on the broad ocean. A tall,
military looking man is with you, also a young man and woman.
Something of importance has taken place in your national
life and in your financial position, as well as in political
and church affairs. See the crowing _cock_ and the _stork_, a
change that is to play its part for the tall man. _Flags_ are
waving. You will all return to a new life in America. The
surprising change is for a public man.

NEXT READING.

An enemy is for you, sir, in your present conditions of duty.
Some spoil is here. A _ditch_, a _wasp_, and _serpents_ at the
top with tongues out. If you are now in politics or litigation
defeats await you, for the _briars_ are thick and a blind man at a
desk holds some document. You appear to be very expectant,
though fearing something. A woman is also against you. See,
her head is up. She is fair in appearance and influential, yet
false. Some men are back of her acts.

Dark complexioned people are, at present, your better allies and
friends. Some doctor stands by your side, see his medicine
chest, he is of fine mind. A straight path lies between you,
though some road is cut in two; you are to be disappointed in an
enterprise. _Wheels _are broken. This is connected with cars,
engines and automobiles--have care.

Your mind is often too ready to speed forward. Things are so
confusing.

Now concentrate on the future. You are enmeshed by others.
Your social affairs, too, are meddled with by your family and
pseudo friends. See the quacking _duck_ and the distant
_goose_, with dots, letters, etc. See the heads put together, with
mixture of objects before them. No symbol of peace is in this
realm, no light nor clean spots are as yet seen as results to you.

Ah! here. It is a _long road_ into new conditions. Anger and
loss cause you to turn away from the dark and vexing things.
One true friend will follow. See the _straight form_ and the
_dog_ and _wheat_--that signifies great good as in clean
sheaves. That will be your best destiny in a new life-deal--far
westward--some treasure in minerals, too. See the rocks shining
forth.

          * * *

Next: The _monkey_ and the _skunk_! For a moment the
hostess and the reader exchanged words. "I wonder if there is
such an object now in our midst! I am full of laugh, though not
in the belief of such a fact. Oh, it is too amusing how these
objects will form. I wish some one else to see this strange cup."

This gentleman has need to be most cautious in some of his
undertakings. Do not deal with uncertain characters--see the
_monkey_ and the _cat-tiger_ or _skunk_ looking object--lest
some vile scandal becomes your lot. _Cross-roads, hollows_,
and _eels_--slippery things--are near your _present wishes_.
The _keys, circles, anchor, squares, links_--these represent
realizations. Yours are in other lines, yet a _bell_ is traced near
you. A belated wish lies under cover. It is in a field not yet in
your thoughts, though an _anchor_, a human form and a crooked,
broken path lie yet beyond that.

THIRD TOSS.

Now is revealed some disaster to friends, confusion and a large
family _whirlwind_, also, some obstinate man--see the _rickety
team_ with the _mule_ in the lead, as running away--a woman
in black as the outcome. See how she climbs the steep, jagged
hill. Your face is turning towards her in mutual friendship. The
_moon_ shines on the top of the mountain--your destination.
You will no doubt wed with the widow--this woman in black.

Some of the first lines hit very close to facts, said he.

I know it, said the lady, and there is very much to read. I do not
know all that may transpire before this occurs, yet you will have
a numerous progeny--many relatives. See the people and the
letters from the different localities, again true. You will live to
advanced age--see the grand _old tree_. You will ever have care
over others. The man-mule is to meet his natural death. His
respected widow and household are to become your high possessions.

The mules and the whole team? said he. Thank you, there is
happiness in store.

No doubt as elevated step-father to this numerous family. You
are a genius in this art reading, so fanciful.

          * * *

Next expectant:--A Civil Engineer with fondness for travel and
_inventions_. Perhaps you will also write books on some new
methods in heating houses--an _oven_ and _tubes_ are in
formation; so also a tall man at his desk with pencils. I do like
to get something worth reading, but here is a break-down,
something really thrilling--the mountain topples over on the
road. You are soon to be, or have been, in great peril. I also see
a _fireman_. Do you see his hat?

The man smiled, yet confessed, as I read on.

You carry an atmosphere that aids the reading. You have had an
escape by not being at the "Windsor" that special afternoon.

He was surprised. "She is a fine guesser," said the young man,
highly pleased.

Again, you cherish a happy hope in an elderly couple. They are
your true friends. You are now all in the same lines of thought.
Oh, there is a modest, young lady coming to the elderly folks.
She is now away in some large building--a school, I think. You
will _love her_. She has a lover who writes to her--you do not--
yet the signs are to be favorable to both of you. Now for the last
toss.

I am disappointed in your efforts. Oh, how it storms! See the
snow-flakes and the great stream of water! I really feel its cold
currents now. Something is to be destroyed by it ere you meet
the lady. She is in the bottom of the cup. Why have you left her
so long. I can hardly find her. You will need to strive for your
good fate.

She is to pass out of your life I think some years before you do,
yet you will live an active life. Many artistic _new roads_ and
the _plough. _You will create something truly beautiful--see the
_pedestal_ amid the landscape--the _swing _and _gardening_.
How _restful_ it makes me feel! You will be so, sometime,
young man.

OBJECT LESSONS.

Now, young ladies, concentrate your minds and let us note the
symbols, if your wish really to have views and comprehensive
enjoyment, so that what is shown in each cup may be at the
close interestingly connected. Like in a Primer, let us go
straight through. You have heard other readings, develop your
descriptive faculties. Do not stop till done to discuss in detail,
thereby losing the best effects, and you will thus find some
interesting results. You see how most persons like to lift the veil
to revelations. Much progress lies before us all.

SURPRISED.

Just look here, Florence, said the amateur, _rings_ and a
_sunrise_, not out of the clouds either. Look, too, at the oval
forms like _eggs. _At home we can't get such cups. Here we are
in the higher waves. We are determined to read something to
inspire others, as you read to us, said the girls with eagerness.

But, which one of you ladies turned the cup? I ought to have
directed my occult forces on one at a time. Now, you need to
divide honors and loss.

The one who is herein represented is in a most happy frame of
mind. I wish it were the test cup--the third and certainty--for the
sake of the fortunate lady and her family, then your destiny
were assured and your mentality would advance into lofty
channels by the influence of an elderly couple and their
progressive _sons_, for here is a _tower_ of moral strength.
_Hearts, circles, Bible_ and _clovers_ are in the life-path. The
skies, too, are clear and every thing is high up you see in
optimism.

Let us now to business. Ah! here it is--gains. A large _goose
egg_ is in shape, also a _nest_. That is the home, though a great
care has fallen into it. See the rain and these many little crosses
here together so near the _nest_, which, in this turn, is the
home, as there is no other symbol for it; now you can trace the
square as the home-hearts also.

You are kind and come from sympathetic people who love
truth, books and progress, as does this Bible family. An old man
who is in another city will write. See the _M._, the _letters _and
the _road_. There being no form of a man you take the initial.
He may be _sixty-one _years of age; see, the numbers are
touching the _M_.--man--in the midst of the dots. _Sticks _and
_crossties_ with _wavy lines--_common vexations.

Do not worry. Though you are now apprised of a large theft
which may come into your home. See the sly _rat_--a thief or
burglar hovers nigh, have care. You have a few events in Jupiter
still left.

How is it to be read?

Each reader must speak as the momentary inspirations come to
suit occasions: We must promise the best, to stimulate _all_
good efforts, not only for self.

Well, you are really good and correct. I feel elevated by this
interesting reading.

We are delighted and shall share together this life-reading. Our
families are very dear to each other and may be still further
united. Then she blushed slightly, as whispering confidentially.

Oh, it's lovely, said the two girls, as others said the fates had
favored them most of all.

          * * *

Several of the readings were too ordinary, just as many people
are in truth, who contribute nothing for the benefit of higher
thought and action, while others were not in good mental states
nor in their lucky days, as they said, and as is partly true.

One young man, a news-gatherer, could get nothing as all things
lay distant and for others. "My life is to be forever blocked,"
said he though feigning total scepticism, yet a tone of
disappointment was quite apparent when told that six months
hence he should have a comprehensive word with new hopes.

You are in the wrong world, and somehow I felt that he would
be fairly driven into his real vocation by a lucky circumstance,
for Mother Nature is ever kind to her children, though needing
all honest co-operation. Those keen eyes with fine perceptives
and vivacious mentality would direct his impulses eventually,
for the power of reason and resource lay within his then,
somewhat undecided, brain, so have faith in your higher
destiny, friends.

[Illustration: calligraphy flourish 2]


CHAPTER II.

ONE YEAR LATER.

Being patient and obliging, said a young lady, has cheated me
out of my rights so many times. I was to have a reading that
night at the home of Mrs. M. C. for I served with hopes and
glad expectations into each dainty cup of aromatic coffee that I
poured, yet, as usual, did not get my reading. Never have. I had
either palm reading, cup or solar biology forecast, though
promised each. Oh, I was so disappointed, for it was my desire
to learn your special, catchy methods, and to note the sensations
cast upon me as under the magic spell. I cannot formulate the
things you do, though my friends praise me unstintingly.

You shall not be longer denied, said the adept. Get a cup of
coffee or tea, if not too coarse in leaves, after we lunch. I will
read them, as we can be alone with our atmospheric thought
advisers and our higher selves. I know that your life and labors
will abound in good. Many excellent things await your efforts,
yet do not now think that my auto thoughts will be my full
guides.

Oh, thank you. How nice the conditions are to be alone with
one's future expectations. No one can then pervert what is
promised. I am now most expectant, am glad I have waited for
this propitious time. I love this little room with its dainty
furnishings.

FIRST READING.

You possess fine spiritual gifts; are morally high-toned; you
build many castles--just see the _mountains_ and _balloons_,
the _tower_ in the distance. You could study palmistry and
occult laws to fine advantage. It has become so respectable, too,
you know. Yet few do excel, though many attempts are made.
Try it, you are very susceptible to every personality; you have a
very retentive memory with large formative powers. Just the
requisites with your mentality for doing good to poor humanity.
As a wise teacher you could excel.

SECOND CUP.

Flurries of wind and storms--confusion in your home and heart--
_crooked lines_ with a _crude cross_ and a _sodden log_, out
of which will rise a _broken anchor_--lost hopes or wishes.
Now, an ugly thing is discerned. See the _spitting_ of _cats_
and the _angry dog_. That is some disagreeable quarrel between
friends of yours. A gentleman will pass through cruel loss and
change. Nothing good is yet promised to present wishes.
_Serpents_ are lying low in the grass--see their heads, you will
suffer thereby--your head now lays low in some severe illness.
Fate is silent and sad for a time, as in mourning for the sorrows
of the good and true. See you the _shaft_, draped like a funeral
pall across the cup? You are also to bury a friend, a worthy
minister. The people mourn. Now let us invoke the kindly
powers to a solution of the many evils cast by contending
conditions of jealousies and spite. Let your soul be possessed
and purified, for now I know that you are truly one of the
chosen few who are tried by the fierce fires and floods of life.
This is a retrospective day for your soul--growth beyond your
realization of [sentence is unfinished].

FINAL INFLOW.

A seriousness had fallen over both of them as touching on the
live issues of frail, human hopes and fears, so that each felt the
need of that great unseen, yet ever-living power divine. What a
strange cup-reading it was in the end! Wonderful to both of
them, yet they somehow tarried, as though fearing to reveal the
certainty chapters, as you now know the third is designated, yet
the soul was sated.

Wealth, in some physical form, I find is the great desire, more
even than love or friendship, so that I repeat the golden words
of the poet, though knowing the need of money for worthy
purposes. There will be for us just enough of the pure coin, not
this "God of greed."


     THE GOLDEN GOD.

     [THOMAS HOOD.]

     Gold! gold! gold! gold!
     Bright and yellow, hard and cold;
     Molten, graven, hammered and rolled;
     Heavy to get and light to hold;
     Hoarded, bartered, bought and sold,
     Stolen, borrowed, squandered, doled;
     Spurned by the young, but hugged by the old
     To the very verge of church-yard mould,
     Price of many a crime untold;
     Gold! gold! gold! gold!


Then said the psychometrist: Now, look with me into this cup.
Let us, together, trace the final symbols, now that we are united
as true friends.

The form of a woman--see her head and her garments blown
forward, the wind is at her back. She goes now with some
strong, public tide. That is well. In this clear field there is
recognition for you. An _electric street light_--that, too, is some
public good in process for your sharing;--and here is like a
flowing stream. The mountains are, also, again in view. Each
effort holds in a life-reading like this. Some rubbish before
reaching the heights.

But look! Oh, behold the _moon_ behind the hills. See, it is
surely beginning to rise. Let your mind now concentrate on its
sublime glory. It is the best kind of promise. Honors await
yourself and another member of your family. A full moon
signifies that other events have poured their treasures into
conditions which have required time. Your moon is not yet over
the full scenes of your life. The sunrise, too, appears! How
sublime! Here is the stout man--your future husband with a
child at his side. A man of affairs, with the _triangle_ and a
_ship_ of _state_, and here are the roses growing. You will be
greatly beloved. The _key_ and the _ring_ are in the bottom of
the cup. You will become equal to your high social duties as
mistress of the _castle_, and mother of two well endowed
children, who will bless and survive you. The latter years of
your life will be the most richly frought. See, the bottom of the
third cup, also, has the clear streams.

I shall expect you to wed with this stout, dark complexioned
man, whose wife lies in the little grave that was in the second
toss of the cup. We can now join the parts fittingly together, by
noting first, second and this final. We may now attach other
straying symbols as holding them in mind.

Thank you, ah, so much. I have gained real knowledge from this
very interesting object-lesson reading, which stimulates my
higher mental action with courage and purpose. Some things
delineated I now believe as true. The first _cups_ were a
veritable marvel, yet too sadly comprehensive. I am greatly
indebted to you for this most infatuating pleasure, proving the
old adage, that the last do sometimes come first, by their
patience. We all need just such talks sometimes. These are
beyond the mere realms of pastime, said the reader, who was
then inspired of God.

HALLOWEEN REVELATIONS.

THE ENERGETIC MAN OF HIGH PURPOSE POLITICALLY.

Here is an important cup. A long bridge. You are now in
comprehensive touch with a subject-matter that ought to lead
you with your family into ease and prominence. Have patient
care after you have reached the seeming goal, for, see here still
the danger signal from the broken cart of past obstruction with
the cross-ties. Do not retreat in dismay. A bridge is of good
significance unless you fall between, or it is broken while you
are facing it or are thereon. You must be strong. In your trials,
being magnetic, your forces will bring help to aid you by mental
suggestions.

But see this elephant, tossing about at the end of the bridge--
some imposition upon your family. See, the house being in
touch, you will lose by the elephant, as letters with many lines
mean vexation--strayed or stolen letters--and dead birds are on
the ground. The rabbit is some coward. Do not mind this, you
will yet gain significant prestige by the aid of an old man on the
new path. See him nearing the _trees_ in luxurious foliage--a
true friend.

Now we sum up gains. You have striven. See the three rings or
wreaths, the sunburst, and the distant tower clearly defined in
the light. Victory over loss and cowardice of friends. You are
happy and secure.

The summing up represents the home several years hence.
Many scattered objects have cleared away the defeats belonging
to your life, in order to round it out symmetrically. There is
good cheer. Think of the toiling masses as becomes a true
disciple of the Christ. You will be in position to manifest
to the world some vital principle. Be not then enslaved by
time-serving, selfish man. Stand by the flag of your nation in
honest and worth. Your star shines high.

WOMAN OUT OF THE SHADOWS.

FACTS FORETOLD.

Many streams--mental changes. Though here is a great symbol,
that of the ancients--the serpent--being wisdom. This one is of
different significance. See how its long body has taken up
space. The tail is three-forked and downward, the head being
turned around, sharpened like a shepherd's crook, lower than the
body. Deception--intrigue--house of sickness--see the crosses
and losses? The one tossing such a cup has been assailed in
various ways. Look now well to the above outlines which still
hold a splendid promise. Arches overhead--cannot be vanquished.

SYMBOLS FOR A JUDGESHIP.

FATEFUL SPITE-LINES WITH WOMAN.

Appearances do oft deceive, good reader, though the cup figures
hit my case correctly, beyond words of mine, as to past and
some present events. May the future be as well verified, and I
somehow believe it will be. You say the flame is now on after
twenty-two long years of defeat; I also cross the water often, as
you read, am soon to locate in a large eastern city. May this
flame you describe possess my mind and heart as now.

And your conscience, sir, the Holy Spirit within the higher self.
Your symbols urge you to noble deeds, yet you will never be
blessed by woman's love, nor aid. Do you see the standing
well-poised form of a woman? Rising power--creative force. See she
has her feet firm on the back of the monster snake. You will
soon become master of your higher destiny. I feel inspired by a
mighty impulse. You will stand before many people--see the
tall, straight ladder of fame--I should say that you are holding
some still-cherished, mighty plans, despite many of life's
defeats.

Now, as this is all free play, will you please tell me if this
leading figure defines any of your conditions truthfully, as to
politics? You deeply impress me with the ideas of large affairs.

Will see you later, madam.

Thank you cordially.


CHAPTER III.

THE WOMAN'S ERA OF NATIONAL IMPORT.

AN UNUSUAL KALEIDOSCOPE----HUSBAND AND WIFE.

As the symbols are in uniting conjunction, you may both remain
to formulate ideas and to delineate. You are no doubt desirous
of the full enfranchisement of the human race. You seem just
and liberal, as read by these various lights, amid contentions,
yet with one central apex--the lighted lamp.

NEXT TOSS.

No taxation, without due representation. Now, look into this
remarkable cup, with our Uncle Sam large as American life, one
foot raised in forward move, as firmly holding the grand flag of
the nation. See, upon it sails in earnestness a tall woman of high
modern import. See you these faces? They are no milk and
water characters. They come close together, Uncle Sam and the
woman, as though to embrace in true love and lasting equality.
Now, behold the bird ascending the mountain, and the large hen
and cockrell. Behold the dove still higher up. Justice, wisdom
and peace must go hand in hand by all the people and for all the
people. There is a fine sky scene besides.

How remarkable are the strong outlines as interestingly touched
up by creative imagery! Oh, yes, we believe in true freedom as
well as in all human rights. I tell you, you are destined to wield
political influence. Fear not, though there is to be very great
commotion and strife, as to some bodies of beliefs joining
forces, There is in evidence a serious national gulf, for a period,
See the _seething mass_ below? Yet the large, waving flag is in
the midst of it all. See how its ample folds cover the little
people! Woman comes into full evidence with man and victory
squares these and banners. Now, see you the large moon-faced
man from over the deep water? Behold the many little people.
These represent, without doubt, the toiling masses. See them
look to our great flag, Uncle Sam and America. See the guns
they leave behind, though they appear well armed by some firm
revolves. Some power crowned is near death's gates. There is
some peril on the other shores and on this, yet the links for
chains of co-operation come later on. First, there are spears,
guns, rasping files; secret orders, too, which shall in due time
become fully known to Uncle Sam, for, see you the boxes and
the broken lines, like a serpent yet, living cables with its
intricate workings. I am stirred by its forces, now international.
Oh, yes, you could learn to read by concentration of mind. This
is the first time this great combination has been presented to me.
Your special auras and the cosmic direction in present era of
human action have aided in portraying these objects. Life is full
of signs of the times. You are thinkers.

No doubt the reader is, at times, largely dominated by the
enquirer, though you now prefer to learn of finances. The large
fish is in evidence, however, not yet at hand. Clouds obscure
desires. You will be thrust into this exciting national and more
equal-rights work, with several men of distinction. See
the breast-plates and medallions. This is a suggestive and
interesting chapter to me and requires study to apply.

Do you grasp some of the leading ideas? Hold them fast, to
appropriate as you advance into the vortex of deeper action. See
how the steepled church is in evidence. Not so wonderful. Many
things photograph themselves for further reading by observation.
We are yet in the very infancy of comprehending cause and effect.

_Kismet!_ I detest war, yet mankind is destined to thus make
the annals of future history more complete in equity and in
fraternal justice to humanity. Let us prove that the world is
really advancing. This is the fierce and fermenting time, the
entire world's chemicalizing process. We may all learn from the
great book of life.

Though many noble souls seem vanquished, each actor shall be
his own, yet united historian.

Thank you. Readings of this character are instructive, even to
skeptics. Wish we could all read and retain each helpful part. As
one thinks on these lines the fuller atmospheric waves become
laden with blessings. The Good Book says, "Ask and ye shall
receive," so, ask in wisdom and in faith. You are now charged
with the desires. Perhaps I do inspire inquiry. Look at these
lines of chairs in this fine toss, also men.

Birds again--rows of singing birds, and flowers, too--joyous
expectations. Man with baton--musical matters, attended by
audiences. You either are in full touch with singers, or certainly
will be. The swing up high is a fine sign. Follow it up with
courage, The double triangle, the long road and the unobscured
star are before you. These promise you honors and fame. You
will know the art of growing old sweetly.

See the gallery of pictures you have collected. The park and the
people, too!

Heaven has blessed you with mental gifts and spiritual graces in
the glorious, ever present, because of your doing things with no
dreaded to-morrow. This is a superb final, for the light lines are
within your daily duties. You will travel together in close
relationship--husband and wife, and begin anew very nearly at
the same time. It is really an inspiring text. Thus do we learn to
know each other in one little hour of life as fulfilling worthy
purposes by every act divine.


CHAPTER IV.

MYSTICAL CUP.

Touching, no doubt, on the death of Pope Leo, as also on some
one of the present party somehow connected with nobility. See
you the ocean?

Here is a kingly form, robed and crowned, yet standing with
arms and hands filled, symbolizing someone with great plenty
in foreign lands. At the feet, a severed circle, some disordered
boxes, a pair of large, closed shears pointing toward another
commanding form, though obstacles lie between them. Also a
crouching form, in part human, with large eyes, and now, on his
back a weighty something, facing the less pretentious forms,
one of whom is bowed by some new disappointment, being near
a fallen wall. Some one in mental suffering, as thorns crown one
of the lesser heads, facing a distant city. Some hidden wrongs
are to become manifest.

See the army of men in disorder! Soldiers are in line, too, with
horsemen from all sides of the land and waters. Dread dismay,
yet with keen-edged expectancy in evidence. Behind the kingly
form there is a tower--strength--though there is the unlighted
torch at the top. Some large bird in the back scene will venture
into peril. Near the shaft at its base are caverns. On closer
inspection you can see the vapors arising. You see the entire
world appears interested--so many heads of men.

One of the party had expected some special news from distant
lands, saying: "Verily, the atmosphere is filled with these
things,"--Auto thought or otherwise. Secrets after all are not so
hidden, though I believe this reading to pertain largely to the
city of Rome, the Vatican palace and famed historical Tiber.

You see, we have all been reading the news. We are in this
floating ether of thoughts, no matter what little wishes we have
of our own. Our untutored minds cannot yet apply some of
these lessons. Everything is in form atmospheric, to be
photographed for tangibleness to our crude senses. How then
can we be held in blame for the committal of even some desperate
acts? Are we not at the perpetual mercy of evil men and
powers, which blind fair reason?

Listen, friends, are there not better objects everywhere? Yet
modest things are apt to be overlooked. Are we not dazzled by
pomp and show? Did we not all cry out, "Oh, what a wonderful
cup--a king, a king with a crown?" We must not allow our
morals to thus easily hang like conventional cowards. This cup
of the king's is full of strife. Numerous virtues are not observed.

See the little tables and the tender vines so choked by grasses,
even modest flowers by the fallen walls! Let us note these, yet
glory and pomp are man's highest aim in life. I say we should
all become a freer people, but we are flattered by show and even
despotism. I behold wonderful promises.

This strong trail is for a long time. See the cutting instruments
again. The rasp and the little scissors shadowed beneath the
larger symbols. Behold the bed-rock, with crevices to catch the
feet, and here, a small road comes near a tunnel, looking
ambitiously towards the large avenue where splendor, prestige
and power are seen. See modern fashion so careless of the rights
of others--these poor little people. Yes, I will describe some of
these figures, to teach, if so we may, a bit of entertaining,
benevolent sense.

Again, look at this upper row of soldiers, machine-made men.
See the trumpets, I can almost hear their blast, and see the dust
and life-blood of degrading, cruel wars, which impoverish and
grind into filth the entire afflicted human race, though there
are very excellent people of wealth, were there to wisely
co-operate. There is some promise in this reading. If rich men
could become active benefactors--see the little banners--wars
would at once end, and the Christ would live with mankind.

MINISTER'S SPEECH.

I cannot believe that a loving, merciful God bids man to further
wars, strife and blood-shed for mere aggrandizement. It is really
a libel on all progress, grace and moral justice. The God and
dear Saviors whom I love and honor are not monsters of cruel
vengeance. There exist so many excellent signs of the good time
to dawn on the human race, when the tidal wave once really sets
into combined, perpetual motion. Let us all desire to thus aid the
race along these lines, or in whatsoever ways we can.

I am forever indebted to a dear, high-souled lady, who loved
young folks, for my first deep moral thought-lessons in
cupology, and in character readings. Life-long impressions and
aids have these brought to many others, in this high-art sensing
of human needs, therefore let us supply an atmosphere in which
good thoughts can germinate, believing that nature has a bank
which is a sure one that can never break. A bank of full justice;
life's worthy inheritance; your acts.

Now friends, this collection may end my readings briefly. In
order to learn one must teach. No, I have not added some of
those special past verifications. I try to study the lesser forms as
well as the prominent ones to cultivate patient sensing. Observe
your feelings towards your friends or pupils. Be honest, sincere,
and sympathetic in heart to heart talks. Hold confidence reposed
as a sacred gift. That is one of the secrets of friendship and
success in every walk through life. Let us believe it so.

FIRE IN VATICAN.

BURNS PART OF LIBRARY WITH BARE AND ANCIENT BOOKS.

That portion of the Vatican containing the hall of the
inscriptions, where the Pope gives his audiences, and which is
adjacent to the famous and precious pinacoteca, or gallery of
pictures, was burned Sunday. The smoke and flames were seen
from a mile distant.

The first intimation of fire was had when smoke was seen
issuing from the apartment of M. Mario, which is located above
that of Father Earl, the librarian, who lives over the library. M.
Mario is a celebrated French restorer of ancient manuscripts and
illuminated books. He has been engaged in copying work, and
his first reproductions have been selected for part of the
Vatican's exhibit at the St. Louis exposition. It is supposed that
M. Mario forgot to take proper precautions with his kitchen fire,
which probably blazed up and ignited some nearby hangings.

The entire museum of inscriptions, the rooms of Father Earl,
part of the library and the printing houses were entirely flooded
with water.

It is impossible to reach even an approximate idea of the extent
of damage. Many articles were saved, including some ancient
and very valuable arms which were recently moved to the
library from the Borgia apartment in order to make room for the
new residence of the papal secretary of state.

Many things that escaped the flames were injured by water,
especially the precious private library of Pope Leo.

The above clipping verifies the reading of the King's cup.


CHAPTER V.

THE ACQUISITIVE ADEPT.

BY A BRIGHT GIRL OF SEVENTEEN.

Dear lady, this is not as I should like to promise. You have
suffered deeply. Here are dark caverns, crosses, confusion and
wavy, broken and crooked lines. No good luck to be foretold.
So it appears on the surface. You are overcast by sorrow and
losses, with death to many present hopes. As holding up the
cup, gravestones, tears--heart-tears--seems an ill-omened cup,
yet no one need to be discouraged.

I can now reveal to you, even in this conclusive reading, one
fair remaining sky-scene, with a little sun-burst, and a distant
square. Examine, also, below the tangled rubbish. See you the
head of the little anchor, like some friend in need. Trust still in
the good, and such will come to you.

Let no one say they are doomed. This lady is well along in
years, therefore, this one fair spot of sky-scene is large enough
to fill in the remaining periods with joy and hope. I am not
content to skim over the mere surface. Helpful revelations need
the deeper, mental searchlight.

By turning this cup from left to right, the symbols shadow forth
a peaceful old age, up near the sky-light and the evening star.
The dots, with little rings--some kindly aid until the close, with
loving, retrospective hope in the final All Good.

I feel your deep enthusiasms, my friend. God's blessings on
you, dear child. You thrill my soul with expectant gladness.

It proved that a benevolent Boston family opened their
hospitable doors to this lovely old lady amid her deepest
dilemmas. Also, a small inheritance came to this star-lit dome
of her declining life's protection.

A WOMAN'S WINNING CARD.

A woman's winning card is cheerfulness.

She may be capable of countless self-sacrifices, infinite
tenderness and endless resources of wisdom, but if she cloaks
these very excellent possessions under a garb of melancholy she
may almost as well not have them, so far as the ordinary world
is concerned.


CHAPTER VI.

THREE COQUETTES.

THE FICKLE TRIO--SOCIAL WHIRLWINDS.

You say, "Tell us all you see." Young ladies, there is a
mixed-up state of affairs, yet one must use good judgment, so
steady your minds for correct appreciation of the kindness of your
near associates and friends. These Fourths of July mental
pyrotechnics are not safe playthings, my dear young friends.
Here are outlined so many love gifts, with pleasures too
short-lived. You are pain-giving iconoclasts.

Heart-breakers, said the three, laughing.

You have spoken correctly, for here are broken, also incomplete
circles and squares. These imperfect lines so near the life
symbols _key and wish_ with shattered urns and crushed flowers.
Ah! and here are some blighted trees! This is both the spring
time of your lives as of the seasons, so have care for the sad
heart tears you cause and will reap. Lives are oft thus crushed.
You are acting your funny parts as now you think.

"Know thyself," young man. Trifle not with the happy, little
blonde lady, whose widowed mother passes sleepless nights
thinking of her two pretty daughters. Neither be too attentive to
the young matron, whose master carries the dagger by his side.
L. and H. seem not good letters of names nor localities for you.
Yet, you possess some fine mental gifts. Good books are near.

You girls will soon drift apart by a stolen letter and some dark
cloud of distrust, though you will need each other. See you the
separate roads, with the harsh wind blowing the leafless
branches of the trees? and yet near by shines the beautiful
meadow, just beyond your present thoughts. Strive to cultivate
more of the duties of needed practical life and hopes. These
high thought signs will not serve you, when life's autumn
comes.

Now listen, little Brunette. Accept the old love in about two
years. He will return to you from a distance. You smile, yet you
will not wed with any one now associated. Do not, then, deceive
him. He is keen of mind and heart. See, his sky is clear, and the
ring of promise is in the light.

Yes, we can now see these outlines. You are a psychologist.
You make us see them, as you desire, young man. Note you
their forthcoming. I cannot impel these realities. Emma is the
good name of your best friend, young man. She loves you
thoughtfully. Cultivate her rare graces. The mirror is clear that
is near her home. The birds sing and the children are joyful.
Fine symbols. The home-garden, too, is beautiful. Let us trace
the lines. The old, sick lady, inmate of the home will die in the
Autumn. That will be a decisive change for that family. Do not
allow them to pass out of your kindly care, if real friends you
would possess. Lives can be strangely made or unmade oft
times. One must be wise in order to be happy. These pitchers,
with stout handles, as here seen, signify some lucky circumstances.
The supposed wealth of this globe-trotting, dark clothed lady
friend is to have a big fall. See the objects! The trunks are all
upset and she is in ill temper and very self-willed. See the head?
A mule is near her.

How curiously you read some of these things. I shall note them
more fully, though you do not compliment us three at all. Are
we, then, so soulless in our innocent pleasures? Pray, tell.

I but delineate some truths as your benefactor, and as I am given
them for each. You all love popularity and excitement.

Oh, yes, things appear true in part, as to a few simple things, yet
it is very pleasant to hear you read these fanciful figures. I know
the lady Emma, also the worrysome, aged, sick woman. I expect
an upset at her death, yet we hope for good results, though you
promise me irritating labors by this looked-for change.

How amusing this big frog, the magician or joker, as you term
him. I did not know the tad-pole was so gifted.

Some months later proves the death, and several of the stated
events more than verified. With the young folks asking eager
questions, the clouds had gathered. The lame man came into
view. The good time not yet. Confusion and discord revealing
some added cares as threaded together by the symbols as
previously shown, and from the note-book of the young man.
The hated lame man of letters having rudely flustrated the game
of their lives, yet he was just, though believed to be the cruel
enemy, from the broken, wavy lines and cutting things about
him, then facing towards them. Mental reason, or impressment
plying its parts as touching these mingled, and confusion
atmospheres, proving that all things affect us, consciously or
otherwise, relating to life.

These intricate and wonderful relationships--these cosmic laws--
bind all mankind together for better or, more often, for
needless sorrow and trials. Yet here was some good side to
these life-lines, for their own choosing, had each been more
unselfish and just. Are we, then, arbiters of our own fate? It is
still an open question to many, though there is a time for all
things.

LET US NOT BE FATALISTS.

We must seize the handle of the subject, when the door is
waiting to open. Each association makes some conditions, brief
or life-long. We are not bound to be enslaved forever, though
nothing pays but justice, kindness, patience and useful duty, if
peace we would enjoy here or hereafter.

IN THE CHRIST SPIRIT.

There is at least one good, guardian angel ever ready to aid in
each life, my dear young friends. One of these ladies did marry
that mentioned first love after many sad disappointments, with
little intrigues, as afterward she said: "Be neither too fickle, too
self-opinionated, nor too _submissive_. Be something useful.
Learn to reason with head, heart and soul." The young man is
still plodding on in pessimism. This best friend Emma is still
alone, yet working out some of the noble purposes of her
helpful, progressive life, knowing that "her own will surely
come to her" some good time, and that this brief school-life is
not the end of anything nobly sought for. Simulating big things
allowed the young man to belittle many noble facts in nature,
thus stunting his manly growth, and overgrowing this chilling
pessimism with smart retorts.

One really desiring to aid humanity can become inspired into
consistent kindness, well centered in the lines of forecast, as
also in the cup reading pleasure. So observe the figures, point
them out, summing up as these gems of thought come to life.
One too lazy or disobliging cannot grow these many latent
powers. These are as yet but dimly apprehended. All persons
possess some special gift. God meant it so, and that we give
hope and joy in all honest ways. So try your gift in this
mingling of your aspirations for lofty expressions, which
transmit pleasing convictions, strange as at first these may
appear. Each soul, as reading or listening, creates an atmosphere
of either flippancy, depression, courage, trust, or some vital
power.

Some persons there are, who make us feel happy and well by
simply looking at us, or thinking of us, with that subtle power
that cures one of melancholia, discouragement, or irritability.
Writing a letter with a soul is good. You know there is the soul
of things, a fact in nature. I know of many cases, on turning
backward in memory's pages. One special one of a dear musical
friend, who became very ill from over-work, with nervous
headache and sick stomach, so that all hope of an expected
musical evening had to be abandoned, as she took her bed in
disgust, with sore disappointment. About an hour later, not
entirely unexpected, there called at her home a beloved brother,
whose melodious voice in song proved to the lady better than
any medicine, as he quietly sat down to the piano to sing that
sweetly pathetic song:

     "Only waiting till the shadows
     Have a little longer grown."

Hark? said the sick lady quickly sitting up at hearing the first
notes. Oh, that is my dear brother, Peter--his name signifieth
Lord. Please aid me to dress. I am really better, I am, indeed, do
not fear. I must go down to hear him sing. His charming voice
has lifted me into strength. I will take the tea. Though very pale,
she entertained that evening, and even sang, until midnight. Not
one of the party at that time was a Christian Science believer
either.

We are only in the kindergarten of life. Some time we shall all
possess the high art of selecting our friends and our life
companions, my dear, eager, anxious inquirers. We have power
in ourselves to grow. This was simply an unadulterated fact,
proving the power of mind, soul and spirit on itself from the
stimulus of the brother; there being also very much efficacy in
the harmony of tones as well as of personality. I wish more
persons could be conscious of the power of the voice on the
actions of all we come in contact with. We are now touching but
slightly on the esoteric, as carnal desires are yet in full evidence.

I have now in mind a sensitive lad of fourteen, who, after
four trying years ran away from a really good home and a
step-mother, because of her harsh tones. Though a good woman, his
soul-life seemed to suffer.

"The way she says things," said he, "is awful to something in
me, so that I want to fight. I can't help but shiver. Oh, I don't
know what it is. I want to be good. I know she does some nice
things."

Though the young philosopher chose for himself a severe
taskmaster, with plenty of added work, yet, with some special
kindliness in trustful tones that proved part-pay, some needed,
minor chord was touched in the soul-life of the lad, that gave
him hope in himself and in his future, which proved very true.
He has long been a kind and useful citizen, in precepts for the
young, and an object lesson to many. A practical, reasoning
benefactor of the race, as was the kindly Charles Dickens in the
interest of child-life. So let us work. These times are infinitely
larger, broader, and more full of promise to the world.

Our musical friend has left the shadows that were then
gathering about her life. Gone into the more perfect light and
life of her true inheritance, with God the loving parent of all
human and divine joys.


CHAPTER VII.

SUPERSTITION.

Do not hold to cowardice nor fear of death. The mad bull with
the spade stands near by. Look into this strange cup of figures
and graves. Some recent death and gloom has somehow filled
your mind with renewed horror. You have also felt that you are
about to die. Not a comfortable thought, madam, to be snuffed
out of all earthly hopes! Abandon your cringing fears. Dread
nothing. You must gain mastery over these crude forebodings,
or you will be seriously handicapped. Most discouraging is fear.
The spirit of conscious life cannot be annihilated. Man is
immortal. We should not doubt the word of God nor His prophecies.

Towers, trees, and large scenes are in evidence to aid you into a
larger life career.

See you now the rubbish by the grave! enough to hopelessly
entangle you. See the many wild animals in your path near the
dung heap. Again the tears and the fears. You do not stand
erect. Your ideas of the after-life seem to belie your professed
creeds. One of your sincere friends and true helpers requests my
candid service in your behalf as noting your vibrations. Thank
you.

I will now proceed further with your sanction. Listen well: You
belong to a class who would send dinamic heart-beats to disturb
your entire bodily system on the subject of death. Were it a
necessity to perform even some slight operation, your death in
this state might easily ensue from very fear.

Madam, how is one to overcome nature? I do not brag on my
heroism as others do. I do fear death, the devil and his imps. I
have often dreamed of him as pursuing me. There must be
something to it, as my father believed likewise. I want the good
time of life here. We don't know of the hereafter as promised.

Young man, your birth-right, your reason and education are at
fault, if nineteen years of life's action has brought you no
solace. You are not in life's true logic, nor is the profession of
law well chosen for you by your relatives, neither is the
ministry.

You now think you are in love with a good young girl. How
will you comfort her when sorrows come to you? She, too, fears
death and pain beyond the ordinary. A pair of simple young
folks, indeed, both of you.

See, in this last cup the flame of destruction has come. You
have both lost your heads. Death and loss have invaded the
home. Everything is scattered about. No reason nor care
remains. Indecision, crosses, and breaks are in promise. The
good symbols are yet distant, though inviting you to their ample
folds. You need first to be whipped into life's truer graces, as oft
we are. Your parents were weak, sympathetic and selfish.

There were five of you in family. The figure in first cup was
correct, though not an old man there, that is three years past!
and the one-armed man! that was long ago, too. Yes, but his
letters yet lie near your family thoughts. Do not lose them, there
is value attached. Yet there are imprisoned minds who do not
know their real possessions. Now, these bars and unformed
circles bespeak it. Behold the light on the obscure desk in the
old square.

Oh yes, he was cheated out of his rights, years ago, yet father
keeps the letters. There is nothing in them now.

Yes there is, several years hence, by the death of a child and a
lost woman from near an ocean city. News sudden will come to
you. Let your fancy concentrate a little on these letters.

How peculiar! There was one who died by water, that was a
family connection.

You have now had three readings. Hold your true texts in mind.
Fear nothing but injustice. You will be tested. You will yet love
the ocean, even the lightning's fierce flashes, though after
sudden peril and loss you will make acquaintance with your
higher self--not be so selfish nor material. Eight years of strange
wanderings with indecision and betrayal by a false black hand,
as shown you. Several gravestones and some sickness. After
these experiences you will awaken from some of life's medley
of dreams and fears. You will then meet a strong, true woman,
who will dominate much of your nobler, latent life, and aid you
into position, if you do not mar your life's course in about three
years. Your hand reads likewise. In this last cup of yours are
spears and weeds, with knives and hidden crosses. Your dangers,
as here read, are very many.

There are so many small lives filled with idleness, though some
useful objects could oft be reached. Yours is largely among
these. Yet I am pleased to state you could yet become a fine
mind and life trainer by the age of forty, if wise enough to select
your true helpers--good books. No one can work effectively
alone. My mind has traveled with you up to these years, viewed
the field of resource and its possibilities. You should win two
helpful friends.

Only one comprehensive life-course reading has shown this
entire evening. We do not gain the high art of holding the good
which we gain, so profligate are we. Then we like to blame our
friends or the fates for our poor judgment and our obtuseness.
Until we begin to work as though we belong to and believe in
an immortal life, as an inheritance, the great human family
cannot enjoy that useful cohesion that belongs to mankind as
God designed life's distributives--our higher attributes.

Again, shun the man with the fire-arms and bottles. Behold the
weapons. The dark pit lies near him with many cross-bars,
cages and clouds. An evil combination--_imprisonment_, though
your sunlight has only been dimmed. If so, your will, patient
labor and strong desire can yet win for you. The flag of
victory is now so limp. This fear of kindly death or hell is the
enemy of mankind. Do not again thus cringe to this fair angel of
life to all men eventually. You can live to old age and follow
streams, fishing as pastime. This old man symbolizes your dear
self now calmed in mind--not so dead as in youth. So, hold
your true texts for ready action, and become a brave man to
enjoy the true life here promised to you.

If we have stimulated in any heart some lofty resolves, which
will unfold their fragrance for other lives, we are then well
repaid, as trusting in the Infinite All Good.

A pilgrim on the path.

CLARA.

[Illustration: calligraphy flourish 3]


CUPOLOGY.

_Significance similar to Psychic Readings, Clairvoyant
Symbols, or Dreams_.

If high up in the cup--Early consummation.

If chained to the bottom--Delayed desires.

Uncle Sam--American matters. Statesmanship--Waving flags;
Hopeful signs.

Arm--Proffered aid
Accordion--Primitive talent
Apples--Health, Knowledge
Atlas--Sight, Seeing
Bats--Moral blindness
Bees--Thrift
Bed--Illness or need of rest
Birds--News, Singing, Joys
Bridge--Some event in life
Broom--Industry
Bread--To be sated
Cooks--Learning
Cake--Luxury
Cats--Jealousies
Children--Good omen
Cavern--Near danger
Circles--Fine realizations
Cow--Good nutriment
Crescent--Love token
Cattle--Thrift
Children at play--Universal good
Crosses--Some trials
Chair--To preside
Chicks--Cares
Chickens--Gains
Crowing Cock--Ambitious, Victory
Crows--Intrigues
Ditch--Dangers ahead
Dogs--Friends
Door--Some opening
Dots--Letters, Papers, News
Ears--Listen well
Elephant--Some imposition
Eggs--Gains
Eyes--To observe
Feet--Traveler
Feet, bare--Poverty
Fish--Money, Gains
Fish, headless--Losses
Flowers--Joy, Pleasure
Floods--Sickness, Sorrow
Fountain--Public benefit
Fruit--Health
Forests--Nature loving
Fox--Cunning
Hearts--Artistic love of Unity, Friends, Home
Hand--Friendship
Horse--Much news, Friend
Horse, vicious--Angry friend
Houses--Home building
Jewel-Box--Wealth
Jumping--Vitativeness
Lock and Keys--To be put in trust
Lion--Moral courage
Ledger--In accounts
Lighted Lamp--Great success
Lock--A secret
Moon--Honors
Monkeys--Evolution--Darwin
Medals--Diplomas
News-Boys--Public excitement
Nuts--Problems
Oxen--Patient toil
Palms--Restful victory
Palm-Trees--Tropical scenes
Park--Benevolence
Platform--Oration
Pitcher--To receive
Public seats--People's joy
Quills--Old parchments
Rats--Thieving
Ring--Contract
 Near heart, Wedding
 With child or flowers, Bliss
Road--An outlook
Rabbit--Timidity, Cowardice
Rainbow--Sublime promise
Saw or Scissors--Vexations
Scales--Love of justice
Star--Hope, Promise
Squares--Realizations
Sunlight--Vital life, Health
Ships--Commerce
Sinking Ships--Perils and loss
Spring--Wisdom, Peace
Snake--Enmity, Lies
Staff--Aid
Sofa--Social or Courtship
Spiders, or--
Scorpions--Illness, Venom
Sky-scenes--Sublimity and Peace
Tiger--Onslaught
Tall Shaft--Illustrious dead
Table Set--Feasting
Trees--Lofty thoughts
Tower--Strength
Urns--Veneration, Retrospection
Wells--Wisdom and drawing forth good
Wheat--Plenty
Whirlwind--Distraction
Wavy lines--Vexations
Weeds--Petty trials
Window--In a new light
Monks, Nuns, Priests or Ministers--betoken sectarian controversies
Scattered objects--Lack of harmony and no propitious time for action

Keep the mind well centered in reading. Thus only will the
transmitting powers of soul expand the descriptive faculties.

[Illustration: calligraphy flourish 4]


     GIRLHOOD.

     [AMELIA E. BARR.]

     An exquisite incompleteness,
     The theme of a song unset;
     A waft in the shuttle of life;
     A bud with the dew still wet;
     The dawn of a day uncertain;
     The delicate bloom of fruit;
     The plant with some leaves unfolded,
     The rest asleep at the root.


POPULAR TOASTS.

[Illustration: American flag]

_Our Flag:_ The beautiful banner that represents the precious
_mettle_ of America.


     OUR COUNTRY'S EMBLEM.

     The Lily of France may fade,
          The Thistle and Shamrock wither,
     The Oak of England may decay,
          But the Stars shine on forever.

          * * *

     The standard of Freedom floats proudly on high,
          It's the bright waving Banner of Light,
     Fair symbol of Liberty born of the sky,
          True emblem of Union and Might.


WEBSTER'S MOTTO.

Liberty and Union, now and forever, one and inseparable.


     SHIP OF STATE.

     Nail to the mast her holy flag;
          Set every threadbare sail;
     And give her to the God of Storms,
          The lightning and the gale.


     A TOAST TO OUR NATIVE LAND.

     Huge and alert, irascible yet strong,
     We make our fitful way 'mid right and wrong.
     One time we pour out millions to be free,
     Then rashly sweep an Empire from the Sea!
     One time we pull the shackles from the slaves,
     And then, quiescent, we are ruled by knaves,
     Often we rudely break restraining bars,
     And confidentially reach out toward the stars.
     Yet under all there flows a hidden stream,
     Sprung from the Rock of Freedom, the great dream
     Of Washington and Franklin, men of old,
     Who knew that freedom is not bought with gold;
     This Land we love, our heritage,
     Strange mixture of the gross and fine, yet sage
     And full of promise,--destined to be great,
     Drink to Our Native Land--God bless the State!
               --_Robert Bridges in the Atlantic_.

          * * *

     Here's to the man who loves his wife,
          And loves his wife alone,
     For many a man loves another man's wife,
          When he ought to be loving his own.


TOAST TO THE HORSE.

Dr. Kane, President of the New York Drivers' Association, at a
public dinner recently delivered the following toast to the horse:

"That bundle of sentient nerves, with the heart of a woman, the
eye of a gazelle, the courage of a gladiator, the docility of a
slave, the proud courage of a king, and the blind obedience of a
good soldier. The companion of the desert and the plain; that
turns the moist furrow in the spring in order that all the world
may have abundant harvests; that furnishes the sport of Kings;
that with blazing eye and distended nostril, fearlessly leads our
greatest Generals through carnage and the smoke of battle to
glory and renown; whose blood forms one of the ingredients
that go to make the ink in which all history is written, and that
finally, mutely and sadly, in black trappings, pulls the humblest
of us all to the newly sodded threshold of eternity."


OUR ABSENT FRIENDS.

Although out of sight we recognize them with our glasses.


     FALSE FRIENDS.

     Here's champagne for our real friends,
     And real pain for our sham friends.


OUR INCOMES.

May we have heads to earn and hearts to spend.

Here's wishing us all more friends and less heed of them.

May we ever be able to serve a friend, and noble enough to
conceal it.


     THE SPHERE OF WOMAN.

     They talk about a woman's sphere as though it had a limit;
     There's not a place in earth or heaven,
     There's not a task to mankind given,
     There's not a blessing or a woe,
     There's not a whispered yes or no,
     There's not a life, or death, or birth,
     That has a feather's weight of worth--
          Without a woman in it.

          * * *

     Here's to the friends we class as old,
          And here's to those we class as new,
     May the new soon grow; to us old,
          And the old ne'er grow to us new.


A FEW TOASTS.

Woman. She needs no eulogy--she speaks for herself.

May we have the unspeakable good fortune to win a true heart,
and the merit to keep it.

May we never murmur without cause and never have cause to
murmur.

Woman. The fairest work of the great Author; the edition is
large and no man should be without a copy.

     Happy are we met, happy have we been,
     Happy may we part, and happy meet again.

     May Satan cut the toes of all our foes,
     That we may know them by their limping.

The man we love--he who thinks the most good and speaks the
least ill of his neighbors.

          * * *

          Our National birds--
     The American eagle, the Thanksgiving turkey.
     May the one give us peace in all our States--
     And the other a piece for all our plates.

          * * *

     Here's to the girls of the American shore,
     I love but one, I love no more,
     Since she's not here to drink her part,
     I'll drink her share with all my heart.

     A little health, a little wealth,
     A little house and freedom,
     With some few friends for certain ends,
     But little cause to need 'em.

          * * *

Col. Lovell H. Jerome, who resigned as second lieutenant
Second United States Cavalry, in 1879, and now repels the
invading smuggler in New York City, brought a new toast to the
Hoffman House bar recently:

     To the ladies,
     Our arms your defense,
     Your arms our recompense,
          Fall in!
               --_New York Sun_.


THREE GREAT COMMANDERS.

May we always be under the orders of General Peace, General
Plenty and General Prosperity.

We now toast the superb Electric Flag of the people with every
honorable Elk who has beautified and made memorable these
pleasures of the Queen City.--_Cincinnati, July, 1904_.

          * * *

     Though there's many a slip twixt the cup and the lip,
          Yet, while o'er the brim of life's breaker I dip,
     While there's life in the lip, while there's warmth in the wine,
          One deep health I'll pledge, and that health shall be thine.
               --_Owen Meredith_.


A HINT ON ENTERTAINING.

"The most successful social functions are those managed by a
host and hostess," says a society scribe, "not by either alone.
Leave a man to make up a party and he is sure to forget that
Mrs. B. was engaged to C. before she married D., and that Mrs.
C. is aware of the fact, and that the D.s and E.s have long been
at daggers drawn, and he will have no eyes to detect the designs
of Mrs. H. On the other hand, a woman gets nervous and fatigued
with the constant effort to keep the ball rolling, and fails
just where a man would succeed. What is wanted is a division
of labor, and if this were done oftener there would be less
disappointment on the part of entertainers and entertained."


LOOK AT YOUR CUP.

A cup of coffee, farmers assert, makes a pretty accurate
barometer:

"To make a barometer out of a cup of coffee," a farmer said,
"you must use loaf sugar. You drop a lump of this sugar exactly
into the middle of your cup, and then watch the bubbles rise. It
is by these bubbles that your prognostications are made.

"If the bubbles rise straight up in the middle, remaining there in
a cluster till they disappear, the weather is to be fair; if they rise
at the sides of the cup, adhering to the china, the weather will be
rainy. If they rise all over the coffee's surface, and move here
and there erratically, changeable conditions are to be looked
for."


ENTERTAINMENT SUGGESTION.

Here are some ideas for an entertainment, which is said to be
both amusing and instructive, as it makes one think, and the
time put into anything that makes men or women think is never
lost. Have an art gallery and invite your friends to it. Each
person is supplied with a catalogue and must pay a forfeit for
every piece of art he fails to find. Here is a sample of the
catalogue:

1. The Bell of the Season. (A dinner bell.)
2. Saved. (A bank containing a few pennies.)
3. An Absorbing Subject. (A sponge.)
4. A Drawing Subject. (A crayon.)
5. The Skipper's Home. (Cheese.)
6. A Young Man's Horror. (The mitten.)
7. The Light of Other Days. (A candle.)
8. Tears, Idle Tears. (An onion.)
9. Can't be Beat. (A turnip.)
10. The Four Seasons. (Salt, pepper, vinegar and mustard.)
11. A Regular Bore. (A gimlet.)
12. Family Jars. (Mason's fruit jars in three sizes.)
13. True to the Core. (An apple.)
14. A Prison Scene. (A mouse in a trap.)
15. A Switchtender. (A hairpin.)
16. A Bunch of Dates. (A calendar.)

Of course, no one speaks in the art room.

Every guest fills in what names he can, hoping that his friends
will miss many more than he does. Have ten or more "pieces of
art" than are on the catalogue. This is to mystify a little.


HAVE A PEANUT?

An original young woman of Lamar has invented a new kind of
social diversion. It is the "progressive peanut party." Four
guests are seated about each table, and on the table is placed a
crock full of peanuts. Each guest is provided with a hatpin, and
when the word is given all begin jabbing for peanuts. The
quartet that empties its crock first wins the game, and then the
sets of players change. It is needless to say that the peanut party
is strictly a "hen" function. A man couldn't jab a crockful of
peanuts with a hatpin in a week, but the young women of Lamar
played thirty games in a single afternoon.--_Kansas City Journal_.


WHAT THE EYES TELL.

The color of the eyes has hitherto chiefly concerned the novelist
and the poet, but lately the cold-blooded statistician has been
looking into them. It is announced that, taking the average of
Europe and America, 44.6 per cent of men have light eyes,
including blue and gray. The proportion of women having blue
or gray eyes is 32.2 per cent. In other words, blue eyes are
decidedly rarer among women than among men, says the _London Express_.

Men have light eyes oftener than women, but in the intermediate
shades between light and dark the percentage of the two sexes
is very nearly the same.

In this intermediate category are brown and hazel eyes. The
percentage of these among men is 43.1, and among women 45.1.

The percentage of black eyes is larger among women than
among men, being 20.7 per cent for the women, while among
men it is 12.3.

Blue eyes are considered to possess great attractions. This was
the case among the Greeks and Romans of classic times. Upon
the Goddess of Minerva was bestowed a surname to signify the
blueness of her eyes.

Gray eyes have ever been the ideal of all great novelists; among
the number Charlotte Bronte, George Eliot, Wilkie Collins and
Charles Reade. Most of the heroines in up-to-date fiction are
gray-eyed maidens.

Of the living great, as well as the famous dead, most have eyes
of gray blue.

Shakespeare had eyes of gray; so had nearly all the English
poets. Coleridge's eyes were large, light gray, prominent and of
liquid brilliancy. Byron's eyes were gray, fringed with long
black lashes.

Charles Lamb's glittering eyes were strangely dissimilar in
color, one being hazel, the other having specks of gray in the
iris. Chatterton's brilliant gray eyes were his most remarkable
features. Under strong excitement one appeared brighter and
larger than the other.

As to green eyes they are for glory. The Empress Catherine of
Russia had eyes of this hue. In Don Quixote green eyes are thus
referred to:

"But, now I think on it, Sancho, thy description of her beauty
was a little absurd in that particular of comparing her eyes to
pearls. Sure, such eyes are more like those of a whiting or a
seabeam than those of a fair lady, and in my opinion, Dulcinea's
eyes are rather like two celestial emeralds, railed in with two
celestial arches, which signify her eyebrows. Therefore, Sancho,
you had better take your pearls from her eyes and apply them to
her teeth." Green eyes are not popular, however. Cervantes
spoke of them as "verdant emeralds," that more usually they are
likened to the optics of the cat. Very few heroines have green
eyes. Jane Eyre and Rose, in Robert Elsmere, are the only two
we can think of at the moment.


REVEALED BY THE THUMB.

The thumb is a great tell-tale where character is concerned.
If nose, eyes and mouth decline to reveal the secrets or
temperament, you need not be at a loss. Notice the hands, and
especially the thumb of the person whom you are seeking to
read.

A broad and short thumb indicates lack of refinement. Taken in
conjunction with stubby finger tips and a thick wrist, it indicates
coarseness, even positive brutality.

A tapering thumb gives notice of extreme delicacy of perception
and refinement of character.

A thumb of medium breadth indicates balance between the
extremes mentioned, and denotes strength of character essential
to success in life.

If when in repose the thumb curls outward, its owner possesses
a sound constitution, much vitality and cheerfulness.

On the contrary, if the thumb naturally falls inward towards the
palm, a melancholy, despondent disposition is denoted, also
constitutional delicacy and lack of vitality.


CHARACTERS IN FINGER NAILS.

Broad nails denote a gentle natured person, inclined to be
modest and unassuming.

Narrow nails denote a studious but not very gentle nature, with
a desire for scientific knowledge.

White nails denote a fondness for society of opposite sex, not
overstrong in health and subject to fevers.

Round nails denote a desire for knowledge in general, apt to
take great pride in own accomplishments, rather hasty, yet fairly
good natured and forgiving.

Long nails denote caution, lacking confidence in human nature,
decided in opinion and strictly virtuous.

Eyes are cold, enticing, sympathetic or affectionate. The mouth
is kissable (as men say), cynical, cruel, sensuous or indifferent,
and so with all the features.


BEAUTY'S SEVEN NURSES.

Beauty, it is said, has seven nurses, which, if given full charge,
will make of the homeliest woman a picture of charm and
loveliness.

These magic seven are fresh air, sunshine, warmth, rest, sleep,
food and whatever stirs the blood, be it exercise or enthusiasm.

Be sure to get plenty of sleep. You can sleep yourself into good
looks. A long nap and a hot bath will make any woman more
attractive, and lift years from her shoulder.

Don't be afraid of sunshine and fresh air. They offer you bloom
and color. And deep breathing is surely the hand-maid of the
fresh-air nurse. Deep breathing gives a fine figure as well as
clear complexion.

Don't sit down to table as soon as you come in from work, or a
round of social duties. Lie down, or sit down, for ten minutes,
waiting until you can partake of your dinner with the physical
machinery rested and refreshed.

Don't bathe in hard water. Soften it with a little powdered
borax, or a handful of oatmeal.

Don't bathe the face while it is very warm, or very cold.

Don't wash the face when traveling, unless it is with a little
alcohol and water, or a little cold cream.

Don't attempt to remove dust with cold water. Give the face a
hot bath with soap, and then rinse thoroughly with clear tepid or
cold water.

Don't rub the face with too coarse a towel. Treat it as you would
the finest porcelain, tenderly and delicately.--_Philadelphia Telegraph_.


TO DISCOVER A WOMAN'S AGE.

Every man seems to be born with a desire to know the age of
the ladies with whom he comes in contact, and women also
appear to have an innate curiosity concerning the number of
"summers" which have passed over the heads of their female
friends. But there is nothing more difficult to discover than the
exact age of a lady who wishes to keep the fact a secret.

Now, here is a little scheme by which you can find out the age
of any person.

Having engaged that person in pleasant conversation, you
proceed something after the following manner--speaking very
innocently, of course:--

"There is a very simple problem in arithmetic which very few
people are able to see through, yet it is as easy as possible. I
wonder if you can do it?"

This sets the person on his dignity, and he or she wants to do it
at once.

Then you go on:

"Think of a number corresponding to the numerical order of the
month in which you were born. Oh, no, you need not tell me."

(To make the explanation clear, we will assume that the figure
is two--standing for February--and that the age is 30.)

"Now, multiply that figure by 2," you continue, "and add 5.
Done that? Well, multiply that by 50 and add your own age.--
From the total subtract 365, and to the total add 115. Now, what
figure have you got?"

"230," replies the person addressed, "Isn't that correct?"

"Exactly," you exclaim, "You are one of the very few persons
who have managed it."

And you turn away to hide your smile of satisfaction at having
discovered that your victim was born in February and that he is
thirty years of age. You have arrived at this result by separating
the figures 230 into 2 (February) and 30. And you can do this
with everybody's age. Try it on your sweetheart.--_Tit-Bit_.


HOW HE MAY BE WON.

Some men have been found courageous enough to express
themselves on the subject, "How to win a man." Here are the
requirements from a masculine point of view for winning a man
worth having. The summer girl should cut this out and paste it
on her mirror:

Be natural, be extremely fastidious in choosing friends, in
conversation, in manners, and in dress.

Be neat, for the well-groomed woman, though plain, is more
attractive than the slovenly beauty.

Be cheerful and fun-loving, be kind, unselfish, sympathetic and
affectionate.

Be interested in everything that will improve your mind and
broaden your views.

Be orderly, systematic, and industrious, but do not waste time
on non-essentials. Good reading is far better than useless fancy
work.

Be domestic and home-loving, secure as much knowledge as
possible concerning house-hold affairs, and do not be ashamed
to use it.

Be athletic enough to keep in fine physical condition and just
manly enough to be self-reliant and courageous, but not so
independent as to forget for one moment that you are a woman.

Cultivate a liking for children and old people, for you must
remember that you have been the one and will be the other if
you live long enough.

Do not appear to be superior, even if you know that you are, one
can easily be mistaken on this point.

Do not be conceited or vain, do not be silly or gushing, or too
eager.

Do not be late and yet do not waste time in being too early;
study repose of manner, it is so restful to tired nerves.

Do not nag either before or after he is won; the "I told you so"
has lost many a friend and lover.

Be frank, and truthful and forgiving, and remember that
forgetting must often go with forgiving. This, of course, is the
ideal woman, but the standard is not too high for any girl to
strive for.--_Philadelphia Telegraph_.


DEW DROPS.

Wisdom is the flower of experience.

Hope is good, but hustle is better.

Energy, however, usually follows encouragement.

A soft answer sootheth, but a wise one shameth.

The genius never regarded as a crank is yet to be born.

Do as I say, not as I do: Preaching love with a jealous heart.

To move through the world without the dissent of others: Be
temperate and pay your debts.

Happiness is not so difficult to obtain as to retain.

Who will not work without pay should also be consistent
enough to refuse pay without work.

Heart and head are two masters who may be served by one
hand.

Human deification, permitted or self implied, is an offense
against Deity.


BIRTH STONES FOR LUCK.

Do you want that mysterious thing that is called "good luck?"
Of course you do. Then in some form or another you must
always wear your birth stone. This is declared to be, by the
superstitious, a true talisman against all the ills that flesh is heir
to.

Upon her finger in a handsome ring the very modern girl wears
the stone that means good omen to her, and feels that she is
secure from harm. If it is not in a little golden circlet upon her
hand, then perchance she wears it at her throat, in one of the
little dingle dangles that are so fashionable. But about her neck,
in her fob, or bangle, the lass who wishes to cast a spell of good
fortune about herself, somewhere wears the stone that is
assigned to the month in which she first saw the light of day.

In what month were you born? Do you know what is your birth
stone? If you do not you better at once discover the stone and
begin to wear it. That is, if you wish good luck, and what
maiden ever lived who does not sigh for it.

Here is a list of the gems, and the months to which they are
assigned by those soothtellers who know all the signs for luck,
good or ill: For January, garnet; February, amethyst; March,
jasper; April, sapphire; May, chalcedony; June, emerald; July,
onyx; August, carnelian; September, chrysolite; October,
aquamarine; November, topaz; December, ruby.


KRUGER'S UNLUCKY DIAMOND.

When Kruger went to Europe he took with him a famous
diamond, which was said to have brought misfortune and death
to all its possessors. It had a strange history.

The diamond originally belonged to Meshhesh, a Basuto chief,
from whom it was extorted by T'Chaka, the Zulu King. T'Chaka's brother
killed him and stole the stone. The brother came to grief and the
gem passed into the possession of a Zulu chief, who soon afterward
was assassinated. The natives say that no less than sixteen of the
successive possessors of the diamond were either killed or driven
out of the country for the sake of the gem.

The diamond was then seen by white men who sought to possess it.
A party of whites attacked the natives who had the stone in their
possession, and a fierce fight ensued, in which 300 lives, mostly
natives, were lost.

Memela, a native chief, took the gem and concealed it in a
wound which he had received in the battle. Afterward Memela
was caught by the Boers and set to work as a slave. Kruger,
hearing his story, released him, and in gratitude Memela gave
the stone to his liberator. Some years passed, and then Kruger
met his misfortune.

Where the fatal diamond is now is not certain, though it is
certain that the ex-President of the Transvaal parted with it.
Some say that it is in the coffers of the Vatican, and some that it
was sold to the Emperor of Austria, and is now among the
crown jewels of Vienna.

The stone is said to be 200 carats in weight, but is not perfect.--
_Baltimore Sun_.


STRANGE WILLS.

There have not been many will makers more eccentric than Mr.
MacCraig, the Scotch banker, whose last testament will shortly
come under the consideration of the Edinburgh Court of Session.
Mr. MacCraig it may be remembered left instructions in his
will that gigantic statues of himself, his brothers and sisters,
a round dozen in all, should be placed on the summit of a great
tower he had commenced to build on Battery Hill, near Oban--each
statue to cost not less than $5,000.

          * * *

A much more whimsical testator was a Mr. Sanborn, of Boston,
who left $5,000 to Prof. Agassi, to have his skin converted into
drum-heads and two of his bones into drumsticks, and the
balance of his fortune to his friend, Mr. Simpson, on condition
that on every 17th of June he should repair to the foot of Bunker
Hill, and, as the sun rose, "beat on the drum the spirit stirring
strain of Yankee Doodle."

          * * *

A Mr. Stow left a sum of money to an eminent King's counsel,
"Wherewith to purchase a picture of a viper stinging his
benefactor," as a perpetual warning against the sin of ingratitude.

          * * *

It was a rich English brewer who bequeathed $150,000 to his
daughter on condition that on the birth of her first child she
should forfeit $10,000 to a specified hospital, $20,000 on the
birth of the second child, and so on by arithmetical progression
until the $150,000 was exhausted.

          * * *

Sydney Dickenson left $300,000 to his widow, who appears to
have given him a bad time during his life, on condition that she
should spend two hours a day at his graveside, "in company
with her sister, whom I know she hates worse than she does
myself."


LAUGHAGRAPHS.

It is related of George Clark, the celebrated negro minstrel, that,
being examined as a witness, he was severely interrogated by
the attorney, who wished to break down his evidence. "You are
in the negro minstrel business, I believe?" inquired the lawyer.
"Yes, sir," was the prompt reply. "Isn't that rather a low
calling?" demanded the lawyer. "I don't know but what it is,
sir," replied the minstrel, "but it is so much better than my
father's that I am rather proud of it." "What was your father's
calling?" "He was a lawyer," replied Clark, in a tone of regret
that put the audience in a roar. The lawyer let him alone.


     THE MAN WHO CAN MAKE US LAUGH.

     God bless the man who can make us laugh.
          Who can make us forget for a time,
     In the sparkling mirth of a paragraph,
          Or a bit of ridiculous rime,
     The burden of care that is carried each day,
          The thoughts that awaken a sigh,
     The sorrows that threaten to darken our way,
          God bless the dear man say I.


QUEER BLUNDERS.

Illegible copy has caused innumerable amusing and not a few
serious blunders in print. A speaker quoted these lines:

     O, come, thou goddess fair and free,
     In heaven yclept Euphrosyne.

They were printed as written:

     O, come, thou goddess fair and free,
     In heaven she crept and froze her knee.

The reporter was following sound. Here is another illustration:

     Those lovely eyes bedimmed,
     Those lovely eyes be dammed.

A Congressman advocated grants of public land to "actual
settlers." It got in the paper as "cattle stealers." A reporter tried
to write that "the jury disagreed and were discharged," but the
compositor set it up "the jury disappeared and were disgraced."
The last words in a poorly written sentence, "Alone and
isolated, man would become impotent and perish," were set up
as "impatient and peevish."


A MYSTERIOUS TELEGRAM.

A certain church society in Vermont resolved on a Christmas
festival, and determined to have a scripture motto, handsomely
illuminated, in a space back of the pulpit. One of the deacons,
who had business in Boston, took with him the proposed motto
and the measure of the space to be occupied by it, but unfortunately
lost the memorandum. He therefore sent this telegram to his wife
in Vermont. "Send motto and space." She promptly complied,
but the Boston telegraph girl fell off her chair in a faint
when she read off the message, "Unto us a child is born four
feet wide and eight feet long." The deacon, however, thought
it nothing uncommon.

          * * *

Mistress: Did the fisherman who stopped here this morning
have frog legs?

Nora: Sure, mum, I dinnaw. He wore pants.--_Cornell Widow_.

          * * *

"Goodness," exclaimed the nervous visitor "what vulgar little
hoodlums those noisy boy are out there in the street!"

"I can't see them," said the hostess, "I'm rather near-sighted, you
know."

"But surely you can hear how they're shouting and carrying on."

"Yes, but I can't tell whether they're my children or the
neighbors."--_Philadelphia Press_.


FORTUNE.

A divinity of fools, a helper to the wise.


DEAD EASY.

Funnicus--It's a queer thing, but all the men employed at the
cemetery are historical characters.

Dullwum--How do you make that out?

Fennicus--They're mound builders, aren't they?


A BAD SPELL OF WEATHER.

Dear Paw--I am having a luvly time, so do not expeck me home
ontill next week. All are well and send luv. The wethur is brite
and fare. Yure sun, WILL.


FOR AN EVENING GAME.

At a club social the hostess proposed a game of "sobriquets,"
offering a prize for the one who would identify the largest
number of the assumed names.

She gave to each one a slip of paper on which were typewritten
the assumed names of numerous persons, mostly writers, and at
a signal allowed them twenty minutes in which to write the
correct names opposite. A few illustrations are here given, but
others may be added:

1 Currer Bell -- Charlotte Bronte
2 Mark Twain -- Samuel Clemens
3 Uncle Remus -- Joel Chandler Harris
4 Boz -- Charles Dickens
5 Bard of Avon -- Shakespeare
6 Peasant Bard -- Robert Burns
7 Poet of Nature -- Wordsworth
8 Immortal Dreamer -- Bunyon
9 The Traitor -- Benedict Arnold
10 Little Corporal -- Napoleon Bonaparte
11 Mr. Dooley -- Peter Dunne
12 Oliver Optic -- William T. Adams
13 Gail Hamilton -- Mary A. Dodge
14 Grand Old Man -- Gladstone
15 Poor Richard -- Benjamin Franklin
16 Swedish Nightingale -- Jennie Lind
17 Brother Jonathan -- Jonathan Trumbull
18 Father Endeavor -- Francis Clark
19 Tippecanoe -- General Harrison
20 George Sand -- Mme. Dudevant
21 Ian Maclaren -- John Watson
22 Timothy Titcomb -- J. G. Holland
23 Ik Marvel -- Donald G. Mitchell
24 Mrs. Partington -- B. P. Shillaber
25 The Learned Blacksmith -- Elihu Burritt
26 Peter Parley -- Samuel G. Goodrich
27 Autocrat of the Breakfast Table -- Dr. Oliver Wendell Holmes
28 Uncle Sam -- United States


SOMETHING TO REMEMBER.
RULERS, PRESIDENTS AND MINISTERS WHO HAVE BEEN SLAIN OR ATTACKED
WITHIN THE CENTURY.

Napoleon I, attempted, December 24, 1800.
Paul, Czar of Russia, March 24, 1801.
Spencer Perceval, Premier of England, May 11, 1812.
George IV, attempted, January 28, 1817.
Andrew Jackson, President United States, attempted January 30, 1835.
Louis Philippe, of France, many attempts, from 1835 to 1846.
Frederick William, of Prussia, attempt, May 22, 1850.
Francis Joseph, of Austria, February 18, 1853.
Ferdinand, Charles III, Duke of Parma, March 27, 1854.
Isabella II, of Spain, three attempts, from 1847 to 1856.
Napoleon III, three attempts, from 1855 to 1858.
Daniel, Prince of Montenegro, August 13, 1860.
Abraham Lincoln, President United States, April 14, 1865.
Michael, Prince of Servia, June 10, 1868.
Prim, Marshal of Spain, December 28, 1870.
Richard, Earl of Mayo, Governor-General of India, February 8, 1872.
Abdul Aziz, Sultan of Turkey, June 4, 1876.
William I, of Prussia, three attempts, from 1861 to 1876.
Alexander II, Czar of Russia, six attempts and finally killed by
     explosion of bomb, March 13, 1881.
Mohammed Ali, Pasha, September 7, 1878.
Humbert I, King of Italy, attempt, November 17, 1878.
Lord Lytton, Viceroy of India, attempt, December 12, 1878.
Alfonso XII, of Spain, two attempts, 1878-79.
Brattiano, Premier of Roumania, attempt, December 14, 1880.
James A. Garfield, President United States, July 2, 1881.
Carter H. Harrison, Mayor of Chicago, October 28, 1893.
Marie Francois Carnot, President of France, June 24, 1894.
Nasr-ed-Din, Shah of Persia, May 1, 1896.
Stanislaus Stambouloff, Premier of Bulgaria, July 25, 1895.
Canovas del Castillo, Prime Minister of Spain, August 8, 1897.
Juan Idarte Borda, President of Uruguay, August 25, 1897.
Jose Maria Reyna Barrios, President of Guatemala, February 18, 1898.
Empress Elizabeth, of Austria, September 10, 1898.
Edward VII, of England, attempt, April 4, 1900.
Humbert, King of Italy, July 29, 1900.
William McKinley, President United States, September 6, 1901.
Alexander, King of Servia, June 11, 1903.
Draga, Queen of Servia, June 11, 1903.
Governor General Bobrikoff, of Finland, June 16, 1904.
Von Plehve, Minister of the Interior, Russia, July 28, 1904.


     THE FOUR LEAVED SHAMROCK.

     "I'll seek the four leaved shamrock
          In all its fairy dells,
     And if I find its charmed leaves,
          Oh how I'll weave my spells.
     I would not waste my magic might
          On diamonds, pearls or gold,
     Such treasures tire the weary heart,
          Their triumphs are but cold.

     But I would play the enchanter's part
          In casting bliss around,
     And not a tear or aching heart
          Should in the world be found."

          * * * * *

     "To wealth I would give honor,
          I'd dry the mourner's tears,
     And to the pallid cheeks restore
          The bloom of happier years;
     And friends that had been long estranged,
          And hearts that had grown cold,
     Should meet again like parted streams
          And mingle as of old.

     And thus I'd play the enchanter's part
          In casting bliss around,
     And not a tear or aching heart
          Should in the world be found."







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Cupology, by Clara

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CUPOLOGY ***

***** This file should be named 26339.txt or 26339.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/3/3/26339/

Produced by Ruth Hart

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
