The Project Gutenberg EBook of Chronicles of Strathearn, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Chronicles of Strathearn

Author: Various

Illustrator: W. B. Macdougall

Release Date: August 18, 2008 [EBook #26342]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLES OF STRATHEARN ***




Produced by Al Haines










[Illustration: Title page]





CHRONICLES of STRATHEARN



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS

BY

W.B. MACDOUGALL




COVER DESIGNED BY

A. L. RANKIN






CRIEFF

PUBLISHED BY DAVID PHILIPS

1896




[Transcriber's note: the errata below has been applied to this etext.]



ERRATA

The arched stone (Forteviot) does not appear, p. 77 having, through
inadvertence, been printed off without allowing space for it.

In note at the foot of p. 89, "scallop-shel" should be scallop-shell."

In note at the foot of page 90, "1896" should be "1890."




CONTENTS



INTRODUCTION
  By Rev. JOHN HUNTER, M.A., Crieff.

CELTIC SAINTS AND ANCIENT CHURCHES OF STRATHEARN
  By Rev. JAMES RANKIN, D.D., Muthill.

NEAR THE PICTISH CAPITAL
  By Rev. P. THOMSON, B.D., Dunning.

THE HISTORIC PRESBYTERY OF AUCHTERARDER
  By Rev. G. D. MACNAUGHTAN, B.D., Ardoch.

MEMORIES OF GASK
  By Rev. JAMES MARTIN, Gask.

AT THE HEAD OF STRATHEARN
  By Rev. JOHN MACPHERSON, Comrie.

ON THE BANKS OF THE DEVON
  By Rev. E. B. SPEIRS, B.D., Glendevon.

BY THE WELL OF ST. FILLAN
  By Rev. THOMAS ARMSTRONG, Dundurn.

THE PLAIN OF THE BARDS
  By Rev. A. GORDON, M.A., Monzievaird.

BETWEEN STRATHALLAN AND STRATHEARN
  By Rev. J. MACGIBBON, B.D., Blackford.

THE ABBEY OF INCHAFFRAY
  By Rev. JAMES BROWN, M.A., Maderty.

A SOUTHERN OUTPOST ON THE EDGE OF THE HIGHLANDS
  By Rev. HUGH M. JAMIESON, Monzie.

THE CASTLE, BARONY, AND SHERIFFDOM OF AUCHTERARDER
  By A. G. REID, F.S.A., Scot., Auchterarder.

AT THE GATE OF THE HIGHLANDS
  By Rev. JOHN HUNTER, M.A., Crieff.




ILLUSTRATIONS


INCHAFFRAY

GATEWAY, FOULIS CHURCH





[Transcriber's note: The illustration captions below were those in the
source book.  The captions above match the actual illustrations.]

AULD HOUSE OF GASK

CHURCH GATE AT FOULIS




PREFACE

This book has been written in connection with a Bazaar held in Crieff
in the month of August, 1896, for the better endowment of the Parishes
of ARDOCH, CRIEFF WEST, GLENDEVON, and MONZIE.  The Editorial Committee
venture to hope that the contents will be of some interest to the
dwellers in Strathearn, especially those within the bounds of the
Presbytery of Auchterarder.  The warm thanks of the promoters of the
Bazaar are due to the ladies and gentlemen who composed the various
Committees.  To them, as representing many hearty sympathisers and
willing workers, the "CHRONICLES OF STRATHEARN" is respectfully
dedicated.

In name of the Editorial Committee,

  JOHN HUNTER, M.A., CRIEFF.
  HUGH M. JAMIESON, MONZIE.




INTRODUCTION


THE OPENING UP OF STRATHEARN

By Rev. JOHN HUNTER, M.A., Crieff

Quite recently it was said to me by a man who had been holiday-making in
Switzerland, that he greatly missed the Alps in every home landscape.
The remark was made on the Knock of Crieff, one beautiful afternoon in
the late autumn, when the sun was setting and the after-glow lay like a
purple semi-transparent mist all along Glenartney from Ben Ledi to
Comrie.  I felt rich enough in the enjoyment of the surpassing loveliness
of our own Strath to say "Laich in"--(I would not hurt any person's
feelings for the world)--"Plague take your Alps, with their sky-scraping
ridges and peaks and winding sheets of snow,--we don't want them here;
they would simply spoil a scene like that before us."   I don't know, and
may never know, the meaning my companion read into my silence.  Having
shortly before made the frank confession that I had never seen the Alps,
he may have intended to excite envious feelings within me, and imagined
he had succeeded.  But I can deny the fact with a good conscience, and
until some benevolent person shall give me the opportunity of making a
comparison between home and foreign landscapes, I shall continue to
assert--happy in my ignorance, it may be, but still happy--that there is
no fairer prospect upon earth than the Strath of Earn from the Knock of
Crieff.  "Where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise."

Let me adventure to describe it.  Right opposite to the south-west is
Turleum--rising to the height of 1300 feet--the highest hill in Scotland
wooded to the top, as our local boast was--shorn of its beauty somewhat
in recent years, but, although bare, still picturesque enough with its
comb of sturdy fir-trees, survivors from the destructive gale of
November, 1893.  To the right of it, and running due west, is the pass
into the misty hill country by Comrie and St Fillans--the glen of Bonnie
Kilmeny and Dunira.  Midway between us and the mouth of the pass is a
miniature Turleum--Tomachastel to wit, the site of the old Castle of the
Earn, famous in the days when the Celtic Earls of Strathearn were a power
in the land.  Lovers of the old ways were these proud and wily
Earls--fiercely impatient of the incoming Saxon customs which found
favour at the Court of Malcolm Canmore and his sons--genuinely pious men,
too, in some instances--(did not Earl Gilbert found or endow Inchaffray,
so that masses might be said for his soul?)--of a keen courage as with
Earl Malise, who at the Battle of the Standard dared his mail-clad
fellows--the barons of King David--to show themselves a single foot in
advance of his naked breast.  Right worthy and most noble men they were
in their noblest--they were not all so--cherishers of the national spirit
in the dreary times that followed upon the death of Alexander III. at
Kinghorn, like the one who gave a fair daughter of the house and land in
tocher to the son of Sir Andrew Moray, patriot and friend of Wallace, in
whom the Morays of Abercairny find their origin.  Such were the men; and
over there on Tomachastel was their home--a place famous then, and very
noticeable still, with its gleaming memorial obelisk to "oor Davie" of
Ferntower, the hardy soldier who overcame the fierce Tippoo Sahib at
Seringapatam.  Beyond lie the Aberuchill Hills, with the flat pyramidal
face of Ben Voirlich filling up a gap, and sending its roots, on one
side, down into "lone Glenartney's hazel shade," and, on the other, into
Loch Earn--sixteen miles away.  Further off, and only to be seen on rare
days, when the sun's rays are dancing to be dry after rain, are sturdy,
broad-shouldered Benmore, and slender, graceful Binnein, the twin
guardians of the enchanted region beyond, where Beauty lies in the lap of
Terror, and the Atlantic surf sings lullaby.  There are the Monzievaird
hills to the right, rising in Benchonzie to the height of 3048 feet, and
to something under this figure in the Cairngorm or Blue Craig, upon which
you see the stone-heap of Cainnechin--memorial, as it is said, of a
battle fought within what are now the policies of Ochtertyre, and as the
result of which Malcolm II. came to the throne of Scotia, having defeated
and slain his rival Kenneth Duff or Don--Kenneth, the swarthy--"at a
place where two valleys meet."  Many battles have been fought out in the
Strath, for it must always have been a rich prize; but this one has a
special historical interest, inasmuch as it connects us with one of the
great tragedies in our annals, in which the genius of Shakespeare found
material for one of his masterly delineations of the strange workings of
human passion.  It is said that Fraoch, wife of Macbeth Maormor of Moray,
had a good claim to the throne as the grand-daughter of this Kenneth
Duff, and, prompted by ambition and revenge, instigated her husband to
the murder of his Sovereign and guest--the gracious Duncan, grandson of
Malcolm II., at Bothgowan, near Elgin.  Loch Turret lies in the gorge
that separates Benchonrie from the Blue Craig.  It is likely enough that
the descendants of the wild fowl that Robert Burns scared on the occasion
of his visit to Ochtertyre still nest and pair in the solitude.

To the left of Turleum is a wider expanse, that carries the eye to the
Moor of Orchill, which overlooks the plain of Ardoch--the Lindum of the
Romans--traditional scene of the battle of Mons Grampus.  Some miles away
Stirling finds shelter under its rock,--not visible to us, however, where
we stand, and only audible across the intervening twenty-two miles when
birthday and other honours are paid to Royalty.

The Ochil range--memorial of fierce volcanic action when the lower old
red sandstone was being deposited in the inland lake which stretched from
east to west across the Lowlands of Scotland, and away southward without
a break to the southern uplands, close to the border of England;--this
Ochil range, which means high ground, as Glenogle means high glen, bounds
our view to the south-east.  It has no towering peaks, but Bencleuch and
its neighbour, King Seat, command magnificent panoramic views to north
and south from an elevation of 2000 feet.  The gap before us is
Gleneagles,--Glen-eccles--Kirk glen--one of the passes into the Lowlands
of Fife and Kinross, by which, it may be, Agricola found his way into
Strathearn after the conquest of Fife.  In the very heart of the Ochils
its name changes from Gleneagles to Glendevon.  Here again we are upon
classic ground--in the vale of the clear winding Devon, which more than
any other stream recalls Yarrow with its hills green to the top and its
pastoral melancholy.  And let me note the fact that here, too, is the
tiniest and daintiest parish church in Scotland--the outpost of the
Presbytery of Auchterarder in this direction.

Between us and the gap, but much nearer the gap, is a bit of rising
ground, running eastward almost parallel with the Ochils, with a downward
slope from west to east, upon which may be seen, if the atmosphere is
clear, smoking chimneys and a faint ruddy hue, as if with the memory of
tiles now discarded for the prosaic if more permanent roofing slate.
That is the "lang toon" of Auchterarder, climbing up the slope somewhat
after the fashion of the Canongate and High Street of Edinburgh, not so
conspicuously or hurriedly, however, as if aware that there was no Castle
Rock from which to view the fertile Strath below.  An ancient place,
truly, pedigreed, but by no means penniless, the Presbytery seat, famous
in ecclesiastical annals for its creed, crotchets, and conflicts;
resonant, too, in profane history for its fifty drawbridges--the gift of
the imagination and pawky Scotch humour of George Buchanan, Latinist,
publicist, and tutor to that high and mighty Prince, the British Solomon,
James I. of England and VI. of Scotland.  The drawbridges are no more,
for the "lang toon" is a burgh now, with a douce Provost of its own, and
Bailies, and such like novel things and persons.  But this we cannot tell
from our present standpoint, and we might easily persuade ourselves this
afternoon that Auchterarder has suffered no sea change, were it not that
every now and again the columns of our local newspaper foam under the
rage of its municipal contendings.

In the far east, the Strath seems to be shut off by the Moncrieffe
Hill--wooded still, as in the days when it was first named.  But the Earn
slips between this seeming obstacle and the spurs of the Ochils, making
such haste as it can through carse-like land to join the lordly Tay hard
by Abernethy--the ancient capital of the Southern Picts--the centre of
missionary enterprise, when darkness was thick upon the land after Ninian
had died at Whithorn, on the Solway, and before Columba had set foot upon
Iona.  The valley at our feet, the limits of which I have attempted to
mark off, is Strathearn--a right noble expanse of fertile soil, richly
wooded, abundantly watered, dotted over with villages and guardian Parish
Churches, like that of Muthill; bright with Castles that have left their
names in history, and with mansion-houses of hardly less fame, that gleam
from among their ancestral trees--a Strath that may be fitly
characterised as the Scottish Esdraelon, in which many things have
happened, and many men have been well worthy of being held in remembrance.

I had intended in this paper to give an account of some early inroads
into Strathearn, but the exigencies of space have determined for me that
I can deal with only one--the earliest of all--the Roman invasion.  I
should have liked to have told the story of the invasion by Egfrid of
Northumbria, which ended so disastrously for him at Nechtansmere--most
likely Dunnichen, in Forfarshire, in the year 685 A.D., and of which it
may well be that we have a solitary trace in the name Abercairny--plainly
identical with Abercornig--Abercorn in the Lothians--where the Angles
founded a monastery under Abbot Trumuini, who, being engaged in
Strathearn advocating the adoption of the Roman in opposition to the
prevalent Columban cult, had to beat a hasty retreat beyond the Forth
when disaster came to Egfrid.  The larger subject would have included
also the invasion by Siward, Earl of Northumberland, in support of the
claims of Prince Malcolm, afterwards Malcolm Canmore, in opposition to
Macbeth, the usurper, as he is commonly, perhaps unfairly, called.  The
first stage of the inroad ended with an encounter at Tula Amon--at the
junction of the Tay and the Almond, near Perth.  The result was not
decisive, for it would seem that for a little while Macbeth kept
possession of the country north of the Forth, being especially strong in
Fife, where he had powerful family connections and friends in the Culdee
brotherhood at Lochleven, while Malcolm reigned in the Lothians.  And a
little later, in connection with the complications into which Malcolm was
forced through his fortunate marriage with Margaret, sister of the
Atheling, we have traces--somewhat indistinct, truly, but still
historical--of an inroad by the grim conqueror of England--William, and
of a meeting between him and Malcolm at Forteviot.  All this might have
proved instructive in detailed exposition, but I must content myself with
this condensed reference.  My subject is, therefore, the earliest
historical inroad into Strathearn--the Roman inroad, which I have called,
in the heading of this paper, the Opening Up of Strathearn.

Everybody knows that Julius Caesar set foot in Britain and conducted a
campaign against the native tribes in 55-54 B.C.  He made no permanent
impression.  But successive expeditions were sent out, and the tide of
conquest flowed further and further east and west and north till it
reached the Solway.  The details of the conflict do not concern us here.
But it would be unpardonable to omit mentioning Boadicea, Queen of the
Iceni, in the East, and of Caractacus, leader of the Silures, in the
West, both of whom offered strenuous opposition to the Roman advance.
The powerful tribe of the Brigantes, who possessed the country between
the Humber and the Solway, made a stout defence in the North, but by the
year 70 A.D. the Roman province was coterminous with the present southern
boundary of Scotland.  It was now that the Romans heard the name of a new
tribe--the Caledonian Britons, who, according to report, lived upon fish
and milk, clearly indicating a less advanced stage of civilisation than
that of the tribes they had encountered hitherto.  The unexplored
territory in which they dwelt was vaguely called Thule.  Tacitus, the
historian, and son-in-law of Julius Agricola--the discoverer of
Strathearn--imagined it to be an island formed by the meeting of the
Firths of Forth and Clyde.  But the time was now come when more accurate
information was to be obtained concerning Caledonia and its inhabitants.
Some external characteristics had been noted.  The Caledonians were
described as Caerulei, from the green colour with which they stained
their bodies.  It was also said that they fought with chariots like the
Britons of the interior, whom Caesar heard of 125 years before.

Julius Agricola was the man who first brought the Caledonians within the
ken of distinct history.  He came to Britain in 78 A.D.  His first
campaign was on the Welsh border, his second in the territory of some
outlying Brigantian tribes along the northern shores of the Solway.
These were the Selgovae, who occupied what is now the county of Dumfries,
and the Novantes further to the west in the modern counties of
Kirkcudbright and Wigton.  To the north of these lay the great nation of
the Damnonii--of the same stock as those who occupied Devonshire in the
south of England.  They held extensive territories in the centre of
Scotland, including the counties of Ayr, Lanark, Renfrew, south of the
Firths of Forth and Clyde, and, north of these estuaries, the counties of
Dumbarton and Stirling and the districts of Menteith, Stratherne, and
Forthreve, or the western half of the peninsula of Fife.  They were the
"novae gentes," or new nations, whose territories Agricola ravaged as far
as the "Tavaus," or Tay, in his third campaign.  They were somewhat
civilised, having towns, of which we know the names of six--three lying
south of and three north of the Firths.  The chief of the southern towns
was Coria--Carstairs, near Lanark, on the Clyde.  North of the Forth
there were Alauna, where the Allan joins the Forth; Lindum--that is
Ardoch, at our own doors; and Victoria, in Fife, situated on a small
lake.  The lake has disappeared, but the name Lochore remains, and is
otherwise famous than as a town of the Damnonii.  The natural division
line between the Selgovae, Novantes, and Damnonii was the hilly country
which separates the waters that flow north from those that find their way
into the Solway--the Ituna Aestuarium, as its name then was.  Crossing
this mountain barrier, Agricola struck into the valley of the Clyde,
passed with his legions through Lanarkshire and Stirlingshire, then by
the fords of the Forth and the Vale of the Allan into Strathearn, thence
onward to the Tay.  There was an alternative route.  A fleet accompanied
his movements.  He might have crossed the Firth of Forth--the Bodotria
Aestuarium--and penetrated through Fife to the Tay.  But Tacitus usually
mentions the crossing of estuaries, and he omits it in this case.
Besides, he states that the natives on the north shore of the Forth were
new to him in the fifth campaign.

It was, therefore, in the year 80 A.D., during his third campaign, that
Agricola entered Strathearn by way of Alauna.  He did not effect a
permanent conquest.  His operations rather resembled a reconnaisance in
force.  But he meant serious business.  He planted forts in commanding
situations, choosing so wisely, from a strategic point of view, that not
one of them was ever taken or surrendered.  They were placed so as to
command the principal passes into the Highlands.  They form a ring-fence
round the territory hastily overrun by Agricola in this third campaign.
Beginning in the west with Bochastle, at the Pass of Leny, near
Callander, we come successively to Dalginross, at Comrie; Fendoch, at the
mouth of the Sma' Glen; the camp at the junction of the Almond and the
Tay; and, Ardargie, in the parish of Forgandenny, on the River May,
commanding an extensive prospect of the Ochils, and along the course of
the road from the Tay to the great camp at Ardoch.  Here was evidently
the base of operations, with accommodation, if need arose, for the entire
Roman army in Scotland.

Having thus viewed the land and pegged out his claim by means of forts,
Agricola returned to winter quarters.  In the following summer--the
summer of 81 A.D., he made no forward movement.  But he was meditating a
great enterprise--no less an enterprise than to penetrate beyond the Tay
and break the power of the Caledonians in their remote fastnesses.  It
behoved him to be cautious, so he constructed the chain of forts which
afterwards became the Wall of Antonine--from Borrowstonness, on the
Forth, to Old Kilpatrick, on the Clyde.  Meantime he was laying his plans
with admirable foresight.  He entrusted the forts in Strathearn to the
courage of their slender garrisons, and the issue proved that he could do
so safely.  But there was unexplored territory westward and eastward.
Nobody knew what dangers might be lurking there, ready to assail him in
rear the moment he left the security of his fortified place.  So we find
him in the summer of 82 A.D., in Argyll and Kintyre, with a small force,
not fighting so much, as simply exploring, at one point feasting his
Roman eyes, greedy for conquest, upon the coast of Ireland, seen dimly in
the distance, and perhaps scheming in his heart and head to add it also
at a fitting time to the Roman domains.

Returning from the west country, Agricola entered upon the campaign of
three years' duration, which issued in the Battle of Mons Grampus, the
crowning glory of his arms in Scotland, and the immediate occasion of his
recall.  He chose the alternative route this time.  From his chain of
forts he could see the broad expanse of the Firth of Forth, the coast of
Fife, the central Lomonds, and the distant hill-country, whose
acquaintance he had already made.  That distant point was the goal of his
endeavour, and the shortest way to it was across the Firth of Forth,
through the western division of Fife, and on by one of the Ochil
passes--Glendevon, or some other further east into Strathearn.  There was
no time to lose.  For, while he was engaged in the subjugation of Fife,
the fleet, after exploring the harbours, had doubled the East Neuk,
passed safely through St Andrews Bay, and entered the Firth of Tay.  Its
unexpected appearance caused the greatest consternation among the
Caledonians.  The immediate result was to greatly increase the peril in
which the devoted garrisons in Strathearn stood.  So great was their
danger, and so well was it known, that there were those with Agricola who
advised a retreat to the chain of forts between the Firths.  But Agricola
was not to be shaken in his resolve, which was to finally break the power
of the tribes who dwelt to the north and east of the Grampians, and who,
so long as they remained free and unchastised, were a standing menace to
the Strath of the Earn and to the garrisons who held it at the hazard of
their lives.  He formed a camp to winter in at a place called Grassy
Walls, on the east side of the Tay, near to Perth.  But there was still
time, before the winter set in, for a little exploration and a brush with
the enemy to revive the courage of his soldiers, which had begun to droop
a little.  Advancing northward on the left bank of the river, Agricola
reached the Isla, and not caring to cross it so late in the year, in the
face of the enemy who were massed upon the Hill and Muir of Blair beyond,
he diverged to the right, following the course of the Isla until he came
to the place where Coupar Angus stands now.  Here he paused.  He had
marched from Perth in three divisions to prevent surprise, and in this
neighbourhood there are three positions marked by Roman remains that
correspond with these divisions.  The main force was stationed at Coupar
Angus; the Ninth Legion at Lintrose, two miles south-east; a third small
body at a place two miles south-west, overlooking the Tay, and guarding
the passage.  These details are important, as helping to determine the
true site of the Battle of Mons Grampus.  It may be taken for granted
that the Roman General made good use of his opportunity to survey the
ground upon which the decisive battle was fought.  Before retiring to
winter quarters at Grassy Walls, the Roman soldiers had a chance given
them of testing the strength and valour of the Caledonians.  The Ninth
Legion was stationed at Lintrose, and here the enemy delivered their
attack under cover of night.  They had penetrated into the camp ere they
were discovered, and it might have gone hard with the Legion if help had
not been at hand.  But the alarm quickly spread to where Agricola was
stationed with the main body.  On his arrival the Caledonians took to
flight.  With the first touch of winter the march southward was begun,
and when the summer came the legionaries and the auxiliaries clamoured
impatiently to be led northward to the final encounter.

The theory maintained in this paper regarding the last campaign of
Agricola, and the site of the Battle of Mons Grampus was first broached
in the Statistical Account of the parish of Bendochy, published in 1797.
It has been since adopted by Skene in his classical work on Celtic
Scotland, to which I desire in this place to acknowledge my great
indebtedness.  Other sites have been fixed upon, but there are none that
can fairly be put in comparison with the neck of land at the junction of
the Isla with the Tay.  What may be called the traditional view of the
site of the battle locates it at Ardoch, in the vicinity of the great
camp.  No doubt, good authorities can be quoted in favour of the
correctness of the traditional view.  But there are several reasons which
render it highly improbable that the great battle was fought at Ardoch.
The very name Mons Grampus implies the existence of some conspicuous
eminence in the near neighbourhood.  There is no such eminence near
Ardoch.  Further, we know that Agricola's scheme of operation embraced
joint action on the part of the fleet and land forces.  There could have
been no such co-operation if the movement of the legions had been west of
the Tay.  And it is a fatal objection to the Ardoch site that there are
not three stations corresponding to those which we have seen the three
divisions of Agricola's force occupied on the night of the surprise.
General Roy, indeed, has tried to turn the edge of this objection by
placing the Ninth Legion at Dalginross, the main body under Agricola at
Ardoch, and the other division at Strageath, overlooking and guarding the
Earn.  But it has been retorted upon him that Agricola could have made no
worse disposition of his forces, from a strategic point of view, than to
have stationed his weakest division at Comrie, nine miles distant from
the main body, in the very heart of the enemy's country, close to the
hills, from which they could rush down upon any favourable opportunity,
and to which they could retreat in the event of a repulse.

Besides, help came from the main body in the course of a few
hours--between night and morning.  It would be a difficult task even now
for a body of men to cover the ground between Ardoch and Comrie in the
dead of night; and we must remember that in the time of Agricola the
country was a pathless wild, rough with woods in the higher parts, and
covered with treacherous morasses in the valleys.  The Damnonii--within
whose territories Ardoch, Comrie, and Strageath lay--were more highly
civilised than the Caledonians beyond the Tay and the Grampian range.
They had towns, as we have seen; they probably engaged to some extent in
agriculture; their food did not altogether consist of fish, milk, and the
produce of the chase.  But their towns were few and far between, and the
means of communication very imperfect.  The native tribes were not
road-makers, and the Romans had not been long enough in possession, nor
had leisure been granted them to form the solid and straight lines of
communication upon which, everywhere, their power was based.  We have
Roman roads in Strathearn, and I daresay a careful student of the
district could walk every foot of the way from Ardoch to Perth along
these roads--street-roads, they are called locally, as I discovered one
night to my surprise on making inquiries as to the shortest route between
the manses of Gask and Trinity-Gask.  But these roads were not in
existence when the Battle of Mons Grampus was fought.  Much rough
pioneering work had to be gone through ere it was possible to lay them
down.  Meantime, the respective positions of the Romans and Caledonians
had changed somewhat.  The tide of conquest did not remain at the
high-water mark of Agricola's advance.  The Roman garrisons were
withdrawn from Strathearn and from Ardoch.  The Wall of Hadrian, between
the Solway and the Tyne, was substituted for the frontier chain of forts
between the Forth and Clyde, and, in consequence, the native tribes kept
pressing ever southward.  Hadrian's Wall checked their progress, but
their presence in ever-increasing numbers was a danger to the province.
They had now come to be known as the Caledonii and the Meatae--the men of
the hills and the men of the plains.  At length the spirit of Rome
revived in the Emperor Severus, who determined to revisit the scene of
Agricola's early conquests.  He came to Britain in 208 A.D., fully one
hundred and twenty years after the Battle of Mons Grampus had been fought
and won.  He moved slowly, but did his work effectively.  It was a costly
process both in treasure and human life; but, from the point of view of
permanent conquest, it was well done.  Roads were formed, bridges built,
and the habits of civilisation introduced into the wilds of Strathearn,
and far away in the North.  For, marching by way of Forfar, Kincardine,
and Aberdeen, Severus reached the Moray Firth, and got from the
Caledonians a cession of land to the north of the Tay.  It has been
conjectured that he returned south by way of Fortingall and Fendoch and
Ardoch, where are Roman remains of a peculiar kind, of which no more
satisfactory explanation can be given than that they mark the sites of
his stations.  Severus was borne on a litter in his northward march,
frail and aged.  He accomplished his purpose, but the undertaking was
greater than his strength had warranted.  He died at York in 211 A.D.

But to return to Agricola--to whom the honour belongs of opening up
Strathearn.  He had gone into winter quarters near Perth, after his
autumn expedition to the Isla.  All hesitation had vanished from the
minds of his soldiers.  They were impatient to try conclusions with the
barbarian Caledonians; and so soon as the season permitted, the camp was
broken up.  They retraced their steps to the Isla, and found the enemy
occupying the old position on the lower slopes of the Hill of
Blair--battle-hill; probably so called in memory of the big fight now
impending.  It was a well-chosen position, showing no little military
skill on the part of Galgacus, the Caledonian chief.  From the foot of
the hill a plain extended southward to the junction of the rivers.  The
Isla bounded the plain on the east, while a series of morasses, moors,
and small lochs stretched to the west, in the direction of the Grampian
range.  Upon their defeat, the Caledonians made their escape this way.
The Roman army boldly crossed the Isla this time, and began to throw up
entrenchments.  Traces of a rampart are to be seen extending from
Meikleour on the Tay across country to the Isla.  In connection with this
a fort was constructed and a triangular bit of ground enclosed, capable
of containing the whole force.  The local name of the rampart is Cleaven
Dykes, and all the while the Caledonians were gathering from all
parts--from the distant Highlands and from the siege of the Strathearn
forts.  The Buzzard Dykes, on the lower slopes of the Hill of Blair,
marks their position.  At length they thought themselves strong enough to
begin the attack.  A defensive policy would have been wiser.  But the
concentrated power of a trained army--the very regularity of its motions
always draws the attack of a less highly disciplined force.  Probably the
Caledonians deceived themselves into thinking that fear was the cause of
the inaction of their opponents.  It was not so.  Agricola had come so
far in order to fight, and his soldiers were impatient to be led against
the enemy.  They had gained confidence from the experience of the year
before--they were hungry as wolves for the honour of victory.  They knew
that upon their valour depended the lives of their fellow-soldiers, who
had been fighting for well nigh four years against tremendous odds away
west in Strathearn.  And when the Caledonians came on, Agricola promptly
advanced to meet them, having 8000 auxiliaries in his first line,
protected on the wings by 3000 cavalry.  The legionaries were stationed
behind these--veteran Roman soldiers, upon whose steadiness he could rely
if there should come repulse and panic.  The rampart at Meikleour was in
the rear of the reserve force--to serve as a last defence if the worst
happened.  Agricola himself went to the front with the colours.  As
usual, the battle began with a discharge of missiles from a distance.
The darts and stones flew thick, and all the while the Caledonians were
edging away to right and left in the hope of surrounding the Romans.
Agricola strained his thin line almost to breaking point, but his
opponents had the advantage of numbers, and still pressed him.  The
danger of a gaping centre grew imminent.  The crisis of the conflict
came.  Three Batavian and two Tungrian cohorts charged sword in hand.
The issue was not long in doubt.  The small shields and long swords of
the Caledonians were ill-fitted to encounter the straight home-thrust of
the finely-tempered blade, 19 inches in length, with which the Roman
soldiers were armed.  They wavered, and then the end came quickly.  The
whole line of the auxiliaries charged uphill and carried everything
before them, and although the war chariots, armed with scythe-blades,
were brought into action, they did more harm than good.  The ground was
rough, and unsuitable for the effective use of these murderous weapons of
warfare.  Their own men, now in hopeless confusion, were the chief
sufferers from them.  And although the Caledonian reserve succeeded in
getting behind the Roman first line, they were promptly checked by a
cavalry attack.  It was never necessary to bring the Roman reserves of
legionary soldiers into action.  The fight was over, and the Caledonians
sought safety in headlong flight among the morasses which stretched
westward in the direction of the Grampian range.

Agricola did not push his advantage further.  He was content with the
victory he had gained, He could now hope that there would be peace in
Strathearn, bringing with it the opportunity of extending the boundary of
the Roman province to the Tay.  His eager Roman spirit was planning other
enterprises.  He had seen the coast of Ireland from Kintyre, and
doubtless courted the distinction of annexing it to the Empire.  One
can't help thinking what a pity it was that the opportunity of doing so
was not given him.  Had the distressful country got the benefit of the
firm and civilising Roman rule, a happier history might have been hers.
From his winter quarters behind the Firths of Forth and Clyde, Agricola
sent his fleet to explore the distant northern parts.  His sailors
visited and took possession of the Orkney Islands--sighted a distant
peak, which became the "Ultima Thule" of history; noted the peculiar
feature of the West Coast of Scotland--the sea-lochs now so well known to
the tourists of every land; circumnavigated the island till they reached
the Trutulensian harbour--Dover, as we call it now; and then returned to
their station in the Firth of Forth.  It was not permitted to Agricola to
turn the information thus acquired to practical use.  His brilliant
success in Scotland had excited the jealousy of the Emperor Domitian, and
he was recalled under the pretence of appointing him to a higher command.
The traces of him in Strathearn and elsewhere were speedily obliterated.
The Roman province shrank to the wall of Hadrian between Tyne and
Sol-way; civilisation was beaten back, and kept back for four generations.




CELTIC SAINTS AND

ANCIENT CHURCHES OF STRATHEARN


  S. FILLAN, DUNDURN
  S. RONAN, STROWAN
  S. BEAN, KINKELL AND FOULIS
  S. SERF, DUNNING AND MONZIEVAIRD
  S. KESSOG, COMRIE AND AUCHTERARDER
  S. PATRICK, STROGEATH
  S. FERGUS, MUTHILL
  S. CATTAN, ABERUTHVEN
  S. BRIDE, ABERNETHY


CELTIC SAINTS AND ANCIENT CHURCHES OF STRATHEARN

By Rev. JAMES RANKIN, D.D., Muthill

The vale or strath of the Earn may best and simplest be said to extend
from the head of Loch Earn along the course of the River Earn to its
junction with the Tay, two and a quarter miles above Newburgh.  The
distance from top to bottom as the crow flies is about thirty-six miles,
and the direction is very nearly due west and east.  The valley may be
sub-divided into four portions.  The uppermost is Loch Earn itself, which
is six and a half miles long and 306 feet above sea-level, so that the
descent of the river in its thirty miles of course is not much.  The
surface of Loch Earn, James' Square in Crieff, and the Manse of Muthill,
across the valley, are as nearly as possible on the same level.  The Earn
may be sectioned as follows:--From Loch Earn to the Bridge of Comrie;
thence to the Bridge of Crieff; thence to the Bridge of Kinkell; thence
to Bridge of Earn; thence to junction of Earn with Tay.  For our present
purpose we may stop near Forteviot, at the Earn boundary of the
Presbytery of Auchterarder.

Before we can rightly appreciate the more or most ancient Christian
history of the Strath, we require to lay aside, and partly reverse,
certain modern associations as to lines of travel.  We think of
Strathearn as running westward from Auchterarder, which lies on both the
turnpike and railway route from Stirling to Perth.  But in the days of
our early Christianity it was mainly the sea on each coast that joined
north and south of Scotland; whereas the more frequented routes were
across country from west to east, because the west was then the seat of
government and source of culture.  Our early Christianity came from
Ireland, and the route was by the Firth of Clyde, where Kintyre, Arran,
Cumbrae, Bute, Kilmun, Dumbarton, Luss, and Balquhidder were all already
provided with places of worship.  The Vale of Leven and Loch Lomond were
the natural approaches from the west to the upper end of Loch Earn and
Strathearn.  Another route connecting Perthshire with Iona was by Loch
Etive, Dalmally, Tyndrum, and Glendochart.  But the Leven and Loch Lomond
route, judging by the saints to whom the oldest churches were dedicated,
was the actual one usually traversed in reaching the valley of the Earn.

The oldest settlement is that of S. Fillan, at Dundurn.  His day in the
Kalendar is June 22, and he died about 520 A.D.  Dundurn=Dun d'Earn.  In
the martyrology of Donegal (for he was a pure Irish Celt) he is called of
Rath Erann--_i.e._, the fort on the Earn.  Besides the old chapel and
burial-ground, a memorial of the Saint is in Dunfillan, where are his
chair and well.  A fine eye for the picturesque the good man must have
had to select a hill of so striking aspect and commanding so charming a
landscape as Dunfillan.  A little later Dunfillan became a king's seat or
fort.  S. Fillan is called _an lobar_, leper, or perhaps stammerer, to
distinguish him from S. Fillan the abbot, connected with Strathfillan and
Killin, whose day is January 9, and who died about 703, nearly 200 years
after his namesake the leper.  He of Dundurn was of the race of AEngus,
King of Munster, and was trained under S. Ailbe of Emly.  Dr. Marshall,
in his "Historic Scenes in Perthshire," in company with several other
writers, mixes up the two S. Fillans.  Bishop Forbes, in his "Kalendars
of Scottish Saints," gives a clear account of each, mentioning that
Aberdour, in Fife, is dedicated to him of Dundurn, as was also Cill or
Kil-Faelin, in Leinster.

Tullichettle and Comrie may be taken together, the distance between them
being only one mile; the former meaning "The Vale of Sleep," now known
mainly by its little kirkyard, having once been the more important of the
two.  The proof of this is seen in an extract from the Register of
Ministers and Readers in the Miscellany of the Wodrow Society.  In 1574,
where our Presbytery has now sixteen parishes, there were only four
ministers and sixteen readers, thus grouped:--Auchterarder--Stipend,
L100, and kirk-lands--had readers at Auchterardour, Kinkell, Abirruthven,
and Dunnyng.  Strogeith--L60, and kirk-lands--had readers at Strogeith,
Muthill, and Strowane.  Foulis--L80, and kirklands--had readers at
Foulis, Madertie, Trinite-Gask, and Findo-Gask.  Tullichettil--L100, and
kirk-lands--had readers at Tullichettil, Cumrie, Monivaird, Monzie, and
Crieff.  The system of readers was a beggarly makeshift for the Christian
ministry, and shows the sore straits to which the Reformed Church was
reduced after what was supposed to be the grand victory of 1560.  Then
Tullichettle was more than Comrie, as Strageath was more than Muthill.
The dedication of Tullichettle does not appear in any record that I have
seen, but that of Comrie is evident from its fair, which bears the name
of S. Kessog.  There is also a Tom-na-chessaig, just behind the old Free
Church, now a public hall.  The old name has a modern recognition in a
local Freemasons' Lodge of S. Kessack.  What is known of the Saint is
given further on under Auchterarder.

Downwards on Earn the next ancient riverside church is Strowan, which,
being a small parish, was united to Monzievaird before 1662.  The site is
one of remarkable beauty and quiet, almost ideal as a place of worship
and burial.  Ronan or Rowan was a bishop and confessor under King
Maldwin, Feb. 7, 737, according to Adam King's Kalendar.  He was of
Kilmaronen or Kilmaronoc, in Lennox.  Other dedications to him are
Kilroaronag, in Muckairn; Teampull Ronan of Ness, in Lewis; Port Ronan,
in Iona.  At his death in 737 A.D., S. Ronan was abbot of Kingarth, in
Bute.  Connected with the church of Strowan is a Ronan pool on the Earn,
and a bell remains from the old days.  An adjacent farm is called Carse
of Trowan.

The old church of Monzievaird on the east avenue to Ochtertyre, and now
the private burial-place of the Murrays, is dedicated to S. Serf.  But
his legend may be reserved till we reach Dunning, at the end of our
narrative.

The next in order of the old Celtic Churches on the Earn is that at
Strogeit, or usually Strageath.  This church and churchyard are close on
the Earn, at a very picturesque spot, where are two very old mills--one
on each side of the river--and a mill-dam between, and serving for both.
The church is dedicated to S. Patrick, of Ireland, and was planted by an
Irish missionary called S. Fergus.

Patricius was bishop and confessor--his day of death and commemoration,
March 17, 493.  He was the son of Calphurnius, a Roman decurio or
magistrate at Dumbarton, his mother being Conkessa, sister or niece of
the great S. Martin of Tours.  He was born at Kilpatrick, on the Clyde,
and called Succat=Succoth, the name of a neighbouring estate.  At
sixteen, Patrick was carried off to Ireland by pirates, and sold to a
chief, Michul of Antrim, where he served six years, when he escaped to
Scotland.  He then went to S. Germanus of Auxerre for forty (more
probably four) years' study.  After becoming monk with his uncle S.
Martin, he visited Rome, and was sent to Ireland, where he laboured sixty
years, consecrating 365 churches and bishops, and ordaining 300--some say
3000--presbyters.  Writings of S. Patrick are his "Confessions"--"Hymn
before Tara," called "Breastplate," in eleven verses, and "Letter to
Caroticus, Caradoc, or Ceretic Guledig," from whom the kings of Alcluith,
Patrick's birthland, were descended.  (See Christian Classics--The
Writings of Patrick, the Apostle of Ireland.  Religious Tract Society,
London.) S. Patrick's churches in Scotland are sixteen, of which three
are in Muthill--viz., Strogeit, on the Earn; S. Patrick's, at
Blairinroar; and S. Patrick's, at Struthill; each of the two latter
having a S. Patrick's Well, anciently used in baptism.  At Blairinroar,
five miles west from Muthill, two or three cot-houses still bear the name
S. Patrick's, but I don't know that the site of the original chapel is
identifiable.  At Struthill, two miles south of Muthill, both chapel
walls and ancient burial-ground remained till about 50 years ago, when
they were shamefully turned--the one into dyke material, and the
consecrated soil and remains into top-dressing for corn land.  The sacred
well was also run off into a drain, and the site marked by a modern
cattle trough.  The burial-ground at Strageath is still in use, but the
corner stones of the old church have been brutally abstracted for use in
neighbouring buildings.  These desecrations ill agree with what is truly
stated by my predecessor in the New Statistical Account, that "the
inhabitants of Muthill, until very lately (_i.e._, about 1835), held S.
Patrick's name in so high veneration that on his day (March 17) neither
the clap of the mill was heard nor the plough seen to move in the
furrow."  Across the Earn from Strageath is a farm called Dalpatrick, and
a ford known as Dalpatrick Ford.

This well-deserved honour to the patron saint of Ireland is traceable
here to the presence of one of his disciples and countrymen, S. Fergus,
whose work, however, must have been about 150 years after S. Patrick's
death.  After his work of chapel building in Muthill, S. Fergus quitted
his hermitage at Strageath and went northward to Caithness and Buchan, on
the same gospel errand, where, after good work again, he moved southwards
to Glamis, the scene of his death and burial.  The churches dedicated to
him are six--viz., Wick, Halkirk, S. Fergus or Lungley, Inverugy, S.
Fergus, at Banff; Dyce.  Glamis has S. Fergus' cave and well.  There was
a S. Fergus chapel in the church of Inchbrayock, at Montrose, and a
chapel and well at Usan, three miles south-east of Montrose.  His head
was preserved at Scone in a silver casket, his arm in a silver casket at
Aberdeen, and his staff, baculus or bachul, at S. Fergus, in Buchan.  In
721, _Fergustus Epis. Scotiae Pictus_ signed at Rome canons as to
irregular marriages.  He belonged to the party that conformed to Rome as
distinguished from the strict adherents of the old Celtic ritual.

About one mile below Strageath is the old Collegiate Church of
Innerpeffray, dedicated to S. Mary, mentioned in 1342, and made
collegiate in 1508 by the first Lord Drummond.  But as this belongs to a
later ecclesiastical system (1200-1560) it may be passed over for the
present.

About two miles lower than Innerpeffray is Kinkell Church, dedicated to
S. Bean.  Here we come on a group of three, the next being Aberythven,
three miles east of Kinkell, dedicated to S. Cathan; and Auchterarder,
one mile south of Aberuthven, dedicated to S. Makessock.  These three
churches, along with Strageath and Madderty, have this in common at a
later date--viz., 1200 A.D., that they were granted by Earl Gilbert of
Strathearn and his Countess Matildis, as endowment to the newly-founded
Abbey of Inchaffray.  A few years later the Church of S. Bean of Foulis
and the Church of the Holy Trinity of Gasc were added to the same
endowment.  Although now desolate, and appearing as a pendicle to an
adjacent farm-steading, the old Kirk of Kinkell occupies a beautiful site
in the valley, on a knoll, close by the river, and the kirkyard is still
occasionally used.  S. Bean, who was bishop and confessor, died about
920, and his day in the Kalendar is 26th October.  He was uncle of S.
Cadroe, who was taught at Armagh, and whose mission in Scotland marks the
origin of the Culdees, strictly so-called, as is traced in Skene's Celtic
Scotland, II., 346, in connection with Kinkell and Abernethy.

Particularly interesting is the Church of Aberuthven, now in the parish
of Auchterarder.  The eastern end of the building is evidently of extreme
antiquity, with two narrow windows, between which would stand the altar,
probably of stone.  The dedication was to S. Cathan or Cattanus, bishop,
May 17, 710.  Cathan was uncle of S. Blain, of Bute, whom he ordained and
consecrated bishop.  Cathan is most closely associated with Bute, his
original chapel having been on the south side of Kilchattan Bay.  Cattan,
the Pict, planted a church in Gigha, then went to Colonsay, which has
another S. Cattan's, and to Iona, and settled at Scarinche, in Lewis,
where his remains were preserved, and where, after Bannockburn (1314), a
church was built and dedicated to S. Cattan, and affiliated to
Inchaffray.  There was also a Clan Chattan.  (See Hewison's Bute, I.,
136-8.)

Kessog, Kessogus, or Makessock, was born at Cashel, the capital of
Munster, of the line of the Kings of Ireland, and miracles are attributed
to his early years.  He is depicted with bow and arrow as patron of the
warriors of Leven and patron saint of Cumbrae.  He lived as hermit in the
island of Inch-ta-vanach, in Loch Lomond, and was martyred at Luss, where
a cairn, Cam Machaisog, remained till 1796.  (Anderson's Early Christian
Times, I., 212).  His day is 10th March, and the date of martyrdom, 520.
Coming between the times of S. Patrick and S. Columba, S. Kessog and
several saintly contemporaries are the fruits of the fervour of the
former and the pioneers of the latter.  The doctrines and rites of these
earlier missionaries are described in Hewison's Bute, I., 118-131.  S.
Kessog's bell was preserved and honoured in Lennox in the 17th century.
Besides Auchterarder, the Churches of Comrie, Callander, Luss, and
Cumbrae were dedicated to S. Kessog.  Callander has a fair on the 21st
March=10th March (old style), called Fel-ma-chessaig, and the site of the
old kirk, on a conical hill, is called Tom-na-chessaig.  Cumbrae has a
Kessog's Fair on the third Wednesday in March.  Kessog Ferry, at
Inverness, is another memorial of the Saint; so is the Strathearn name of
M'Isaac, Makisaig, and Kessack.  The old Kirk of S. Makessok lies in a
hollow to the north of modern Auchterarder, whose church dates only from
about 1660, and was enlarged in 1811.  Makessock's Well still exists on
the farm of East Kirkton, beside the old glebe and manse, which are now
part of that farm, having been "excambed" about 1800.

There is a dedication to S. Mungo connected with Auchterarder, but as it
seems not to have been a distinct building, we may consider it to have
been only an altar, or side chapel, in the Church of S. Makessog.  (The
evidence for the S. Mungo dedication is "Historians of Scotland, Vol. V.,
p. xc."; also New Statistical Account, Perth, 290.)  Craigrossy paid dues
to S. Mungo's altar in Glasgow.  (Historians of Scotland, V., 357, and
Orig. Par., I., 2.) The name Mungo has a marked currency in Strathearn.
I have known six examples.

Before passing to Dunning, allusion may be made to Gask and Trinity-Gask,
both of which are bounded by the Earn, the latter especially to a great
extent.  Gask was anciently known as Findo-Gask, the dedication being to
S. Findoka, Fincana, or S. Fink, one of the nine daughters of S. Donevald
or Donaldus, who led a religious life in the Glen of Ogilvie, in
Forfarshire.  S. Donevald's day is 12th July, and he died in 712.  The
Churches of Bendochy and Innishail (in Glenorchy) were also dedicated to
S. Fink; while Finhaven, Strathmartin, and Touch were dedicated to S.
Donevaldus.  Trinity-Gask is mentioned under this name in a charter of
Inchaffray shortly after 1200.  To the Holy Trinity was a favourite
dedication of the Culdees, who held firmly by the Apostles' Creed.  The
Cathedral of Brechin was dedicated by King Kenneth (971-995) to the Holy
Trinity, and Culdee abbots continued in Brechin till 1219, although the
See was founded in 1150 by David I., and re-dedicated to the Trinity.
Thus the very name carries back the Church of Trinity-Gask to the times
of the Culdees, if not to the Celtic Church directly.

The patron saint of Dunning is S. Servanus or Serf, who appears in the
Kalendar as bishop and confessor, his day being July 1.  He is said to be
the son of Alma, daughter of a Pictish King; was ordained by Palladius,
and dwelt at Culross in a monastery, where his most famous scholar was
Kentigern, of Glasgow.  Palladius died in 432, and Kentigern in 603, so
that the same man in an ordinary life-time could not be _ordained_ by
Palladius and teach Kentigern.  To escape this difficulty, the Aberdeen
Breviary makes two S. Serfs.  The legend runs--"In a place called Dunnyne
the inhabitants were harassed by a dreadful dragon, which devoured both
men and cattle and kept the district in continual terror.  S. Serf, armed
with a breastplate of faith, attacked the monster in his lair, and slew
him by a blow of his pastoral staff."  In proof of this legend, and in
memory of this event, the scene to this day is called the Dragon's Den.
The oldest part of the Church of Dunning, which dates between 1200 and
1219, would be the successor of the humbler Celtic building of the
original dedication.  If there were two S. Serfs, he of Dunning is the
later, and is the same who is associated with Airthrey, Tillicoultry,
Alva, Culross, and especially Pitmook, or Portmoak, and S. Serf's Isle,
in Loch Leven.  Other dedications are Monzievaird, Creich, Dysart,
Redgorton.  A S. Serf--probably the earlier, if there were two--was
associated with Orkney.  In the west of France, near St. Malo, is a town
of St. Servan.  The neatest of all the S. Serf legends, probably invented
to suit some prehistoric soiree at the foot of the Ochils, tells of a
robber who had stolen and eaten a pet lamb of the Saint, and who, having
cleared himself by an oath taken over the Saint's staff, was immediately
contradicted from within by a ba, ba, in response to the Saint's voice
and the false oath.  In Glasgow on the Thursday of the Fair week is a
horse market known as Scairs, Skeers, or Sair's Thursday, Sair being one
of the forms of Serf.  There is a S. Sares Fair in Aberdeenshire, at
Monkedge or Keith Hall, which has been removed to Culsalmond.

Although lying beyond our Presbytery limits, allusion may be made to the
very ancient religious house at Abernethy, one mile south of the Earn,
and near its junction with the Tay.  The dedication of Abernethy is to S.
Brigid or Bride.  About 590, when Abernethy was the seat of the Pictish
rule, Columban monks were planted here under King Lartnaidh.  In 717 they
were expelled by Nectan III. for non-conformity to Rome; but in 865 the
old order was re-established by Abbot Kellach, of Iona.  This continued
to 908, when the See was transferred to St. Andrews.  Culdees appear at
Abernethy in the reign of Edgar (1097-1107), and they still held the old
nunnery associated with S. Brigid in 1189-1198; and in 1272 the Culdees
were changed into a priory of Augustinian monks.  The famous Round Tower
is assigned by Dr Petrie to 712-727, under Nectan III.; by Dr Skene to
865, the year of Kellach's visit; Dr Muir makes it later than Brechin,
_i.e._, 950; while Mr Anderson makes it one or two decades later still.
For our purpose here the most important fact relative to Abernethy is the
original dedication to S. Brigid.  She was Abbess of Kildare, and died
Feb. 11, 523 (Feb. 1 in Irish Kalendars).  She received the veil from S.
Mel, nephew of S. Patrick; wore a leathern belt over a white kirtle, and
had a veil over her shoulders.  Her cell was under a large oak, Kildara =
cell of the oak, and she founded communities of women; died at the age of
70.  Many miracles are ascribed to her, one of which reveals a very
ancient ecclesiastical usage, parallel to the buns and ale associated
with Scottish communions of three generations ago, as described in "The
Holy Fair."  From one barrel, S. Bride supplied beer to eighteen
churches, the beer lasting from noonday, Thursday, in Holy Week, till
after Easter.

Reviewing these primitive local churches and churchmen, we see that the
general Christianisation of our Strath began about 500 A.D., and has
continued and grown ever since.  The three earliest dates above, given
are S. Fillan, +520; S. Kessog, +520; and S. Brigid, +523.  The three
latest are S. Cattan, +710; S. Rowan, +737; and S. Bean, +920; all these
being dates of death.  This Celtic form of church began earlier in
Scotland, and especially in Ireland, but in this district we see it in
considerable strength from 500 onwards, and we know that it continued in
vigour till about the year 1200, when it was superseded by a better
organised and more developed form of Christianity, with direct
recognition of Rome as the seat of authority.

The difference between the Roman and the Celtic or Culdee Church
consisted in such matters as these:--The Celtic Church, while
acknowledging many of the saints common to Christendom--especially those
of the East--had in addition a very extensive local calendar, deeply
venerated, which outnumbered the Roman element.  It had also
peculiarities in a frontal instead of a coronal tonsure for monks; in a
shorter Lenten fast, which made up the forty days by including Sundays,
and began on Monday instead of Wednesday; in a different time for Easter,
dependent on a more ancient method of reckoning; in the absence of
special or obligatory Easter communion; in the regular celebration of the
Holy Supper with what were by Romanists called "barbarous rites."

The most marked features of the Celtic Church were its government and
orders, where monasteries took the place of dioceses, where abbots were
above bishops, where bishops were without dioceses, where ordination was
conferred occasionally, if not habitually, by one single bishop instead
of three, where bishops were too numerous to be diocesan, and where
(latterly at least) abbots were frequently married, making church lands
hereditary in their families.

A further characteristic of the Celtic Church was the rudeness and
smallness of its buildings, which were of three styles--wattle and daub,
timber beams, and unhewn stones.  No examples of the two former survive,
but the third and more solid style is still visible in Teampull
Bennachad, in Lewis; Tempull Ronan, in North Rona; and the Beehive Cells,
in Eilan na Naoimh (Nun's Island.)  These old Strathearn churches would
seldom be larger than 12 feet wide by 20 long, built of undressed land
stones (like a field dyke), and thatched with heather, bracken, or sedge.
The great storehouse of reliable material with minimum of controversy
relative to the early Christianity of Scotland is Warren's Liturgy and
Ritual of the Celtic Church.  (Clarendon Press, 1881.)

The view given by Mr Hewison in "Bute in the Olden Time" (Vol. I., p.
119) of the doctrine and ritual of the Celtic Church in Ireland in the
days of S. Patrick may safely be accepted as generally applicable to the
Celtic Church in Scotland from 500 to 1000 A.D.:--


"We are dependent upon the 'Tripartite Life of S. Patrick' for definite
information regarding the teaching and modes of worship in the Church in
his day.  It is clear the early teachers faithfully maintained the Holy
Scriptures as the rule of faith, and used the version of the Bible
prepared by S. Jerome.  There are substantial reasons for believing that
they also possessed a vernacular version, if not of all, of some of the
books of the Bible, the Greek portions of which were studied by the more
famous evangelists, like S. Brendan.  A liturgy was also used, and, from
surviving fragments, it appears to have been related to the 'Ephesine,'
rather than to the 'Petrine' family of liturgies--that is to say, it was
different from the Roman, and if not identical with the Gallican liturgy,
was similar to it.  Of the co-equality of the Trinity they had no doubt.
In the 'Tripartite Life,' Baptism and Eucharist are mentioned as
sacraments, but penance, marriage, holy orders, and extreme unction are
not referred to as sacraments; while confirmation, if not accepted as of
divine institution, was esteemed to have an imperative importance.  There
is only a slight trace of the honours paid to the Virgin Mary in the same
work.  According to the editor, 'The Blessed Virgin Mary is never
mentioned either by Patrick, or Secundinus, Muirchu, or Tirechan.'
Communion was partaken of in both kinds, the wine being mixed with water
in the chalice, and sucked through a fistula.  Prayers and fasting on
behalf of the dead were indulged in, and much virtue was attached to
severe fastings and ascetic mortifications of body and soul.  Every day
was consecrated to unremitting labours in the Gospel.  Sunday was,
indeed, a day of worship, divided into eight watches, like the other days
of the week, and was fully observed in the saying of mass, the chanting
of the 150 psalms, and preaching to the people.  The clergy--deacons,
presbyters, and bishops--were married.  A notable feature of consecration
of bishops was the practice of consecration by a single bishop, sometimes
at a leap, without the candidate having received orders as a deacon or
priest.  Priests and virgins had a 'roving commission' to 'sing and say'
over the land.  It is interesting to find that the catacombs in Rome have
preserved the monuments of 'virgines peregrinae,' like those of the
Celtic Church.  The size, importance, and influence of a complete
ecclesiastical establishment (_muintir_), such as that presided over by
S. Patrick, may be inferred from the functions of the 24 persons who were
in office along with him--viz., bishop, priest, judge, bishop-champion
(polemic), psalmist, chamberlain, bell-ringer, cook, brewer, two waiters,
charioteer, fire-wood man, cow-herd, three smiths, three artizans, and
three embroideresses."



II.--RELATION OF AUCHTERARDER PRESBYTERY
     TO THE DIOCESE OF DUNBLANE.

Of the thirteen dioceses in Scotland, that of Dunblane was the
smallest.  In its Parochiale, or list of parishes, were 43 entries; but
3 of these were not parishes at all, but prebends, representing
respectively the Abbots of Cambuskenneth, Arbroath, and Inchaffray.  Of
the churches and parishes proper that constituted the diocese, no fewer
than 18 are now included in the Presbytery of Auchterarder; while 12
constitute the Presbytery of Dunblane, and 6 are in the Presbytery of
Perth.  Thus quite one half of the old diocese finds its corporate
representative in Auchterarder, while the other half is subdivided
between Perth and Dunblane.

Dunblane was formed into a bishopric by David I. out of the old Pictish
Bishopric of Abernethy, which in the division was allotted as a parish
to Dunblane.  The date of erection was previous to 1150--some say 1140.
Dunblane was already a Columban, and (notwithstanding Dr. Skene's
argument to the contrary[1]) also a Culdee settlement.  The church
dates back to the seventh century, and was an offshoot of the Church of
Kingarth, in Bute, for its founder was St. Blane.  He was of the race
of the Irish Picts, and nephew of that Bishop Cathan who founded
Kingarth; he was himself bishop of that church, and his mother was a
daughter of King Aidan of Dalriada.  Dunblane and its church were burnt
under Kenneth MacAlpin (844-860) by the Britons of Strathclyde, and in
912 were ravaged by Danish pirates, headed by Rognwald.

"At Dunblane," says Goodall,[2] "the Culdees continued near a hundred
years longer than at Dunkeld.  Cormac Malpol, their prior, with
Michael, parson of Mothil, and Macbeath, his chaplain, are witnesses to
a confirmation by William, bishop of Dunblane (1210 ----), of a gift of
the Church of Kincardine to the monks of Cambuskenneth, to be seen in
their chartulary, fol. 80; and Malpol, the prior, and Michael and
Malcolm, Culdees, are witnesses to a charter by Simon, bishop of
Dunblane (1170 ----), one of William's predecessors.[3]

"At last, in the year 1240, the election of the bishop of that See was
devolved upon canons-regular, by a mandate of Pope Gregory IX., which
was obtained in this manner: Clement, bishop of Dunblane, went to Rome,
and represented to that Pope, how of old time his bishopric had been
vacant upwards of a hundred years, during which period almost all the
revenues were seized by the seculars; and although in process of time
there had been several bishops instituted, yet, by their simplicity or
negligence, the former dilapidations were not recovered, but, on the
contrary, the remainder was almost quite alienated; so that, for near
ten years, a proper person could not be found to accept of the charge;
that the case having been laid before the Pope, he had committed the
trust of supplying that vacancy to the bishops of St. Andrews, Dunkeld,
and Brechin, who made choice of this Clement; but he found his church
so desolate that he had not where to lay his head in his cathedral:
there was no college there, only a rural chaplain performed divine
service in the church that had its roof uncovered; and the revenues of
the See were so small that they could hardly afford him maintenance for
one half of the year.

"To remedy these evils, the Pope appointed William and Geoffry, the
bishops of Glasgow and Dunkeld, to visit the Church of Dunblane; and if
they should find these things to be as represented, he authorised them
to cause the fourth part of the tithes of all the parish churches
within that diocy to be assigned to the bishop thereof; who, after
reserving out of these tithes so much as should be proper for his own
sustenance, was, by the advice of these two bishops and other expert
persons, to assign the rest to a dean and canons, whom the Pope
enjoined to be settled there, if these matters could be brought about
without great offence; or, if otherwise, he ordered that the fourth of
the tithes of all such churches of the diocy as were in the hands of
seculars should be assigned to the bishop, and that the bishop's seat
should be translated to St. John's monastery of canons-regular (_i.e._,
Inchaffray) within that diocy, and appointed that these canons should
have the election of the bishop when a vacancy should happen
thereafter."

As the bishop's seat was not transferred from Dunblane to Inchaffray,
we may infer that the _former_ part of the alternative was carried
out--viz., that dean and canons were found for Dunblane, and the bishop
also provided for out of the fourth of the tithes of all churches in
the diocese.  The decay of clerics at Dunblane in Bishop Clement's time
(1233-1258) may as well have applied to _Keledei_ declining there, and
does not imply that they never were there, but existed only at Muthill
(13 miles to the north), and that the Culdees of Muthill, being in the
diocese of Dunblane, were called Culdees of Dunblane.  "We find," says
Skene,[4] "the _Keledei_ with their prior at Muthill from 1178 to
1214,[5] when they disappear from the records, and Muthill becomes the
seat of the dean of Dunblane, who had already taken precedence of the
prior of the _Keledei_.  It is probable that, under the growing
importance of Dunblane as a cathedral establishment, the possessions of
the _Keledei_ had fallen into secular hands."  This would be the more
easy, as the monastery of the Culdees was a distinct institution about
a mile south of the church and village of Muthill.

The foundation of the present cathedral is attributed to Bishop
Clement, originally a monk, who received the tonsure from St. Dominic
himself.  The cathedral which he has left has since his day been
extended both to east and westward; and what he built he joined on to
the more ancient square and perpendicular tower.  The cathedral
consists of an aisled, eight-bayed nave (130 by 58 feet, and 50 feet
high), an aisleless choir (80 by 30 feet), with a chapter-house,
sacristy, or lady chapel, to the north.  The nave is almost entirely
pure first-pointed.  In the clerestory the windows are of two lights,
with a foiled circle set over them, plainly treated outside, but
elaborated by a range of shafted arches running continuously in front
of the windows within, so much apart from them as to leave a narrow
passage round the building in the thickness of the wall.  The east
window is a peculiar triplicate, with the centre light much taller and
wider than the others.  The west front has over the doorway and its
blind arch on either side three very long and narrow two-light windows
of equal height, with a cinquefoil in the head of the central window
and a quatrefoil in the head of the side windows; whilst above is a
vesica, set within a bevelled fringe of bay-leaves, arranged
zigzag-wise, with their points in contact--the last the subject of a
well-known rhapsody by Ruskin.  The root of the cathedral history in
this case lies in the tower.  It stands awkwardly a little out of line
in the south aisle of the nave, an evident remnant of an older church,
exactly like the similar tower in Muthill, of the eleventh century,
retained in a church built c. 1430.  A tower, almost exactly similar,
but more ornate, probably twenty or thirty years later in date, exists
at Dunning, in the same diocese, and also a Celtic Church settlement
associated with St. Serf.  The old Culdee Church of Markinch has a
tower of the same peculiar style, originally with a square, upright,
saddle-backed roof, and crow-stepped gables.  Some vestiges remain of
the bishop's palace, overlooking the Allan on the south-west of the
cathedral; and the triangular space in front of the south side of the
cathedral, and forming the end of the High Street, has some old houses
which are believed to have been canons' manses.

The chapter consisted of--Dean (Muthill), praecentor, chancellor,
treasurer, archdeacon; _Prebendaries_--Abbot of Cambuskenneth in 1298,
Abbot of Arbroath for Abernethy from 1240; Crieff _primo_ (probably
parish of), Crieff _secundo_ (probably St. Thomas at Milnab), Logie,
Fordishall, Kinkell, Kippen, Monzie, Comrie.  Eighteen finely carved
oak stalls of the dignitaries and canons belonging to the sixteenth
century still survive.  Other carved work was destroyed in 1559 by the
Prior of St. Andrews and the Earl of Argyll.  The line of bishops ended
with three of the neighbouring family of Chisholm of Cromlix.  Bishop
James Chisholm was eldest son of Edmund Chisholm, and was a good
administrator.  Bishop William Chisholm, his half-brother, was an
ecclesiastic of the worst possible type for fornication, church
robbery, and persecution of so-called heretics.  Bishop William
Chisholm, nephew of the robber-bishop, became, after the Reformation, a
Carthusian monk at Lyons.  He is supposed to have taken with him the
writs of the See, which have been lost.  Marshall[6] gives an account
of this branch of Chisholms.  The same writer says[7]: "Among the
sepulchral monuments in the cathedral is that of Malise, eighth Earl of
Strathearn, and his countess.  It is in the vestry of the choir, and is
a flat block of gritstone, having on it full-sized figures of the Earl
and Countess.  When discovered in the choir, the block was above a
coffin of lead with date 1271.  In the centre of the choir is the dust
of Lady Margaret Drummond, mistress (but probably privately married) of
James IV., and her sisters the Ladies Euphemia and Sybilla, daughters
of Lord Drummond, who were poisoned (apparently to clear the way for
the King's marriage to the Princess Mary of England in 1503).  Their
remains were deposited here by permission of their uncle, Sir William
Drummond, then Dean of Dunblane.  Three blue slabs covered and marked
their resting-place.  The recumbent figure attired in pontifical
vestments and mitre, and which is in a niche of the wall under a window
of the choir, on the right of the pulpit, is supposed to represent
Bishop Finlay Dermock, and to be his sepulchral monument.  The other
recumbent figure under one of the windows of the nave represents Bishop
Michael Ochiltree, who greatly added to the rich adornments of the
cathedral."


BISHOPS OF DUNBLANE.

Laurence, attests a charter of Malcolm IV., 1160.

Simon, 1170.

Jonathan, archdeacon, buried at Inchaffray.  Great endowment of the See
by Gilbert, earl of Stratherne, c. 1195-1210.

William de Bosco, chancellor, 1210.

Abraham, 1220 to c. 1223.

Osbert, abbot of Cambuskenneth, +1231.

Clement, a Dominican friar, consecrated by Bishop William of St.
Andrews at the Stow Church of Wedale; founded cathedral; made
exaggerated wail of poverty to the Pope, who in 1238 appointed a
commission of inquiry, 1233-1258.

Robert de Prebenda, dean, ambassador in 1277 to Edward I.: in 1265 was
Conservator of Council at Perth, 1258-1283.

William, one of the arbiters between John Baliol and Bruce, 1290 to c.
1292.

Nicholas de Balmyle, monk of Arbroath, parson of Calder, lord
chancellor, 1307-1320.

Maurice, abbot of Inchaffray, Bruce's chaplain at Bannockburn with
crosier of St. Fillan; a brave patriot priest, with the old piety that
reverenced relics, yet was true and fervent, 1320-1347.

William, 1347-1361.

Walter de Cambuslang or Conentre, 1362-1370.

Andrew, seals Act for succession of crown at Scone, 1st April, 1373.

Dougal, c. 1380-1399.

Finlay Dermoch, built bridge over Allan Water, tomb in cathedral on
north side of nave, 1400-1419.

William Stephen, divinity-reader in 1411 at St. Andrews, Conservator of
Council at Perth, 1420, 1420-1429.

Michael Ochiltree, dean in 1425, built Knaik Bridge at Ardoch, Bishop's
Bridge at Culdees, rebuilt Culdee Church at Muthill; crowned James II.
in 1437 at Holyrood, 1429-1447.

Robert Lauder, sent on several embassies, founder of several prebends,
1448-1458.

Thomas, 1459.

John Hepburn, a lord of session, 1467 to c. 1479.

James Chisholm, son of Edward Chisholm of Cromlix, chaplain to James
III., 1534; a careful administrator and good bishop, 1489-1527.

William Chisholm, half-brother of the preceding, who resigned in his
favour; a shameless wretch, who wasted the See by fraudulent tacks to
his three bastards and his nephew, and who burned men for heresy,
1527-1564.

William Chisholm, nephew of the robber bishop, appointed by Papal brief
of 2nd June, 1561, and nominated by Queen Mary in 1564; was in exile
Bishop of Vaison in France, became a Carthusian of Grenoble, and died
at Rome, 1564-1593.


PAROCHIALE DUNBLANENSE

Dunblane, St. Blain.  Chapelry of Kilbride at Kilbride Castle.

Aberfoyle in Menteith.  Dependent on _Inchmahome_.  Has five lakes.

Abernethy, St. Brigid.  _Arbroath_.  Prebend, 1240.  In See of Dunkeld
in 1446.  For four vicars.  Probable date of round tower, 854.  At
first had Dron, Dunbulg, and Erole as chapels.

Auchterarder, St. Mungo.  _Inchaffray_.  Old church in a valley, one
mile westward.  Mackessock in charter of Innerpeffray.

Aberuthven, St. Cathan.  _Inchaffray_, 1200.  Later to Arbroath.  Now
joined to Auchterarder.  Very ancient church survives.

Tullibardine.  A collegiate church.  Now in parish of Blackford.

Bondington or Boddington.  _Arbroath_.  In 1369 the lands of Boddington
belonged to Peter de Innerpeffry.  Bonnyton, near Montrose.  (Jervise,
93.)

Blackford, St. Patrick.  Original church was Strogeith, now in Muthill.

Dundurn, or St. Fillans.  St. Fillan the Leper.  Church here since c.
550.  Associated with a fortress on Dunfillan.  Now in Comrie.

Comrie, St. Kessog, R.[8]  _Paisley Abbey_.  Prebend.  Chapel at
Tullikettle.  Had St. Kessog's Fair, third Wednesday of March.

Dron.  Once chapel under Abernethy.  Now includes Pottie, at the mouth
of Glenfarg (see deanery of Gowrie, St Andrews), and Ecclesia Macgirdle
("Exmagirdle") at Glenearn.

Dunning, St. Serf, c. 1200.

Dupplin.  Family chapel of castle.  In 1618 joined to Aberdalgie.

Foulis, St. Methven and St. Bean (Foulis-Wester.) _Inchaffray_.  Chapel
of St. Methven at Buchanty Bridge.  Also chapel at Gorthy, 1266.
Renewed in 1454 by agreement between Abbot of Inchaffray and Tristam of
Gorthy.

Fordishall or Ferdshaw.  Prebend.  Again under Dunkeld.

Gask, Holy Trinity (Trinity-Gask).  _Inchaffray_.

Innerpeffray, St Mary.  Mentioned 1342.  Collegiate, 1508, by first
Lord Drummond.  In Monzie, _quoad sacra_ to Muthill.  Had Lady Fair on
25th March.

Kilmadoc, St. Madocus or Aidus (Doune.)  _Inchmahome_ Priory.

Kincardine, St. Latan or Lolan.  Mentioned c. 1190 (Kincardine in
Menteith).  _Cambuskenneth_.  Old parish of Lany in Kincardine, and
chapelry of Balquhapple.

Kinkell, St. Bean.  Prebend.  _Inchaffray_.  Now in Trinity-Gask.
Minister of Kinkell hanged at Crieff, 1682.

Logie, St. Woloc (Logie, Stirling).  Prebend.

Kippen, St. Davius or Movean.  In Menteith.  Prebend.

Lecroft or Leckraw, St Moroc or Maworrock (Lecropt, Bridge of Allan).
_Cambuskenneth_.

Monzie in Stratherne.  Prebend.  St. Laurence Fair, 22d August.
Included Logiealmond.  Chapel at Tomenbowie, and Stuck Chapel with
burial-grounds.

Monedie.  Included Logiealmond, detached from Monzie.

Monyvaird, St. Serf, with Strowan (St. Rowan or Ronan).  United before
1662.

Madertie, St. Ethernan (Maderty).  An old abthane.  Has Abbey of
_Inchaffray_.

Capeth Moothill (Muthill).  The Dean.  Chapels and wells of St Patrick
at Struthill and at Blairinroar; also, Dalpatrick across the Earn, from
St. Patrick's of Strageath; Easter and Wester Feddal and Bennie (now in
Ardoch), belonged to _Lindores Abbey_ from 1198.

Port [of Monteith].  Included old parish of Lany or Leny.

St. Madocus or Aidus (St. Madoes, Perth), R.  Also Samadoss.

Tullicultrie, St. Serf.  _Cambuskenneth_.  Colvilles of Tillicoultry,
1483-1634.

Crieff, St. Michael, R.  Prebend.  Religious house--St. Thomas at
Milnab (= Abbot's Mill), belonging to Inchaffray.  Besides Crieff
_primo_ and Crieff _secundo_ in Strathearn, there was also a Crieff
_tertio_ in Perthshire, probably the outlying portion of the parish in
Glenalmond round Corrymuckloch.

Logie-Airthray, St. Serf (Airthrey, Bridge of Allan).  _Nuns of North
Berwick_.

Strogeyt or Strageith, St Patrick.  Once church of Blackford, now in
parish of Muthill.  _Inchaffray_.  Planted by St. Fergus c. 700.

Callender, St. Kessaig.  Chapel of Kilmahog or St. Chug.

Fyndogask, St. Findoca (Gask).  _Inchaffray_.

Tuelliallan (Tulliallan), R.  Seat of the Blackaders, who gave an
archbishop to Glasgow.

Glendovan (Glendevon), R.  Old church in Gleneagles (= Glen Eglise).
_Cambuskenneth_.

Fossowy (Fossoway).  _Cupar Angus_, c. 1310.  Included Tullibole,
_Culross Abbey_.  United in 1614.

Buffuder, St. Angus (Balquhidder).  Has Strathyre and Glenogle.

Prebendary, 1298, Abbot of Cambuskenneth _ex officio_.

Prebendary, 1240, for parish of Abernethy, Abbot of Arbroath _ex
officio_.

Preceptor or Provost of Dunblane, Abbot of Inchaffray _ex officio_.



[1] II. 403.

[2] Preliminary Dissertation in Keith's "Bishops," iv.

[3] See Crawford's "Officers of State," vi.

[4] II. 404.

[5] Reeves' "British Culdees," Evidences, S., 141.

[6] "Hist. Scenes in Perthshire," 346.

[7] Ibid., 343.

[8] R=Rectory.




NEAR THE PICTISH CAPITAL

By Rev. P. THOMSON, B.D., Dunning

The title is retained as it was given.  But it would be more correct to
say, "Near a Pictish Capital," for, as is well known, of such capitals
there were more than one.  Nobody, however, who keeps in mind the origin
and range of the present volume will need to be told that "The Pictish
Capital" here meant is Forteviot--or, as it is often otherwise spelt in
legends, and chronicles, and charters--_Fertebeith, Ferteuioth,
Fertenyoth, Ferthevioth, Fetherthauethn, Fethirthant, Fothuirtabaicht,
Fortewyot, Fetherteviot_.

When Forteviot attained the dignity of being a royal abode cannot be
definitely ascertained.  Dr Stuart gives it as his opinion that the royal
residence is to be identified with the "Dun Fothir" mentioned in the
Irish annals, which is recorded to have been twice besieged--in 681 and
694 A.D.; and it has been suggested by the same authority that probably
the name means "the dun of the district, or of the men, or of the King of
Fortren," which term latterly meant the kingdom of the Southern Picts.

Whatever probability there may be in the above suggestion, when we refer
to the Legend of S. Andrew, we find what appears to be corroborative
evidence that Forteviot was the residence of Pictish kings from a very
early period.  According to this legend, it was to Forteviot, in the hope
of seeing the King there, that S. Regulus and certain of his followers
made their way with the relics of the most holy Apostle Andrew, after
their landing at Muckros or Kylrimont (now Saint Andrews).  It so
happened that the King (Hungus, or Ungus, or Angus, who died A.D. 761)
was not at home, having gone on an expedition into Argyle (Argathelia).
But they found his three sons[1] residing at Forteviot, and these princes
gave the tenth part of the town[2] to God and S. Andrew, the holy men
blessing the place and the royal family who abode there.  They then went
in further search of the King himself, and having met him at Kindrochet,
in Braemar, and subsequently at Monichi (Monikie), they returned in
company with him to Forteviot, where he built a church ("basilica"[3]) to
God and S. Andrew.

But these are not the only references that we have.  According to one of
the Pictish chronicles, it was at Fothuir-tabaicht that Drust (Filius
Ferat), the last King of the Picts, was killed.[4] It was here--"in
palacio suo de Fothuir-tabaicht"--where Kenneth MacAlpin, the first of
the Scotic dynasty (formed by the union of the lines of the Picts and the
Dalriadic Scots), died in 860.  It was here, in Fothuir-tabaicht, where
Donald I., Kenneth's brother and successor, established with his council
the mode of succession to the throne, confirming "the rights and laws of
the kingdom of Aodh, son of Eocha."

According to Skene, Forteviot continued to be a royal residence until the
reign of Donald II., the son of Constantine, when the capital was
transferred to Scone.  But it would appear that the ancient "palace" at
Forteviot was subsequently restored by Malcolm Canmore, and that his
successors at least occasionally came to live in it.  Malcolm the Maiden
(1153-1165) is found to have granted at Fetherteviot a charter conveying
certain lands--the names of Ada, the King's mother, and of William, his
brother, appearing as witnesses.  And even so late as 1306, during the
English invasion, there is mention of a letter, dated from Forteviot by
Edward, Prince of Wales.

The traditional site of the "palace," which would, no doubt, correspond
also with the site of the early church dedicated to S. Andrew, as before
mentioned, is still pointed out a little to the west of the village, and
is known as the Halyhill or Holyhill.  Whether this first church was
built of stone is not known.  But that there was a stone church at
Forteviot at an early date is made comparatively certain by the
discovery, in 1830 or thereby, of a large semi-circular and arched stone
lying in the bed of the River May, and directly under the Halyhill.  How
long this most interesting arch had been hid away no one can tell; but it
was a fortunate "spate" that washed it bare and exposed it to the light
of day.  It is now in the Antiquarian Museum in Edinburgh, where the
writer recently made an inspection of it.  An excellent engraving of it
is contained in J. Romilly Allen's _Christian Symbolism in Great Britain
and Ireland_, and with the kind permission of that gentleman it is here
reproduced.[5]

The arch is 4 feet in span and 21 inches high.  Carved in relief in the
centre of the stone is a cross, on one side of which is an animal--very
probably intended for the Agnus Dei; while, on the same side, a little
below the Agnus Dei, there are three figures with helmets on their heads
and swords in their right hands.  On the other side of the cross there is
a robed figure in a sitting posture, with a sword across his knees, and
with one foot resting on the back of a horned animal.

It has been erroneously supposed by some that this arch must have formed
part of the principal doorway of the "palace," but from the fact of its
bearing such symbols as the Cross and the Agnus Dei, there is no doubt
that it belonged to an early church.[6]  Bearing in mind the legend of
the founding of a church to S. Andrew in the time of Hungus, perhaps the
suggestion of Dr Joseph Anderson has great probability--viz., that the
four figures are "not contemporary, but early representations of King
Hungus and his three sons."[7]

All lovers of antiquarian lore will be interested in knowing that, a few
years ago, there was brought to light at Forteviot, and through the
kindness of the parish minister, Dr Anderson, exhibited to the Society of
Antiquaries a fine specimen of a bronze bell of Celtic type (the fifth of
the kind known in Scotland), whose date is believed to belong to about
the middle of the 10th century.

NEAR THE PICTISH CAPITAL would be found, as a matter of course, the royal
hunting-grounds.  Very probably these were on both sides of the
Earn--stretching westward into the neighbouring parish of Dunning, the
northmost part of which is still called Dalreoch or Dailrigh, a word
which, in Gaelic, means the King's haugh or field.

To DUNNING, or rather to some of the objects in it, that are of the
greatest archaeological or antiquarian interest, the remainder of this
chapter will be devoted.

In many ways that we can readily conceive, traces of the proximity of
Dunning to a royal residence must have existed from an early period.  The
existence of hill forts, as at Rossie-Law, and the discovery, from time
to time, of arms and stone coffins, indicate that the parish must have
been often the theatre of strife and bloodshed.  Duncrub,[8] or, as it is
called in a Pictish chronicle, "Dorsum Crup," is said to have been the
scene of a battle, which is thus referred to by Robertson in his _Early
Kings_--"The reign of Duff, the eldest son of Malcolm the First, and
representative of the senior branch of the Royal family, appears to have
been passed in a continued struggle against the pretensions raised by the
now rival line of Aodh in the person of Indulf's son Colin, and, though
at first successful, defeating Colin at the Battle of Duncrub (A.D. 965),
in which the Mormaor[9] of Atholl and the Abbot of Dunkeld, partizans
apparently of the defeated prince, were numbered amongst the slain, he
was subsequently less fortunate, and was driven by his rival from the
throne, losing his life on a later occasion at Forres ... where his body
is said to have been hidden under the bridge of Kinloss, tradition adding
that the sun refused to shine until the dishonoured remains of the
murdered monarch received the burial of a king."[10]  Part of the ground
which is believed to have been the site of the Battle of Duncrub now
forms the village tennis-ground and the village bowling-green, and yearly
are witnessed on it fightings still--though of a very different kind.
The traditional spot where the Abbot (by name Doncha) was slain is marked
by the "Standing-Stone," on "the acres," a little to the east of the
tennis-ground, while a similar "standing-stone," on the farm of "The
Knowes," is said to mark the place where the Mormaor met his doom.

The spelling of the name Dunning, at various times, and in various
records and charters, is rather interesting--_Donyng, Dunnyne, Dunyne,
Dinnin, Dunin_, or (as _e.g._, in the inscription on the Communion cups
presently in use, of date 1702) _Duning_.  The word is generally thought
to be derived from the Gaelic term dun (already referred to), which means
a hill, or a hill with a fort.[11]

On first appearing on the page of tolerably trustworthy history, Dunning
formed part of the Stewartry or Earldom of Strathearn, which dates back
to a remote period.  Among the ancient Earls of Strathearn there were
some very notable figures.  Particularly so was Malise, the Earl of
Strathearn, who figured prominently in the Battle of the Standard.  But,
more particularly notable still, was his grandson, Gilbert, who held the
Earldom in the reign of David I.  Like his King--proverbially known as
the "sair sanct for the crown"--Gilbert was most lordly in gifts to the
Church, which was then fast rising into power.  Dr Wilson[12] quotes an
old writer to the effect that, at this time, the Earldom of Strathearn
included "the haill lands lying betwixt the Cross of MacDuff, at
Newburgh, and the west end of Balquhidder, in length, and the Ochil Hills
and the hills called Montes Grampii, or the Grampians, in breadth."  Even
though we make some reduction as to all this, and regard as somewhat
legendary what Fordun tells us--viz., that Gilbert divided all his huge
territory into three equal parts, giving two to the Church, and keeping
only one to himself, still there cannot be a doubt but that he was one of
the most liberal and extensive church-endowers on record.  It was by him
that the Bishopric of Dunblane was founded; it was by him that the Abbey
of Canons-regular, at Inchaffray, was richly endowed through his
attaching to it the tithes of many of the neighbouring parishes.  The
foundation charter of the Abbey, dated 1200 A.D., in the thirty-fifth
year of the reign of William, records the giving and making over to the
Abbey of the Church of S. Kattan, at Aberuthven; the Church of S.
Ethirnin, at Madderty; the Church of S. Patrick, at Strageath; the Church
of S. Mockhessoc, at Auchterarder; and the Church of S. Bean, at Kynkell.
It will be seen that Dunning is not in this list.  But it appears along
with some other parishes in a second charter granted by the same Gilbert
in 1217, which charter confirmed the grant of previously gifted parishes,
and adds "the Church of S. Serf at Monzievaird, S. Bean at Foulis, S.
Bridget at Kilbryde, the Holy Trinity at Gask, Tullichettel at Comrie,
and S. Serf at Dunnyne."

It is highly probable that between 1200 and 1219--say, about 1210--the
Church of S. Serf at Dunning was built.  And that we have a considerable
portion of the original building still remaining is rendered almost
certain from what is known of the style of architecture of the period
referred to--viz., the Norman in transition--the Norman entering on a
First Pointed.  The grey Tower, with its quaintly-mullioned windows and
saddle-back roof; the wall adjoining the Tower on the north, and
containing a fine Norman doorway and an interesting line of corbels; the
handsome arch rising from massive pillars, and showing beautifully
scolloped mouldings, all afford corroborative proof of the date above
assigned.[13]

If Dunning Church was built about the time we have mentioned, it would,
no doubt, be about the same time when the lands around it were erected
into a parish.  We have one or two very early references.  In a charter
of date 1247, Malise, Earl of Strathearn, granted 20 merks annually "de
Thanagio de Dunnyne et Pitcairn."  In 1283 we find that there was made to
the Church of S. Serf a grant of "20 merks from our ferme[14] at Dunin,
to be paid half-yeirlie, at the Feast of Pentecost and the Feast of S.
Martin; and 10 merks of silver from our holding of Pitcairn, to be paid
in the same manner."  And in 1358 there is ratified a grant, previously
made, of "42 merks yearly from the Thanage of Dunnyne"; also "the tithe
of all the rents, cane, corn, cheese, flesh, fish, fowl, and game, and of
all the food used in the Earl's Court, and 20 merks from our ferme at
Dunnyne."

It may interest lovers of archaeological studies to know that when the
Church of S. Serf at Dunning--originated and endowed as above
described--was being re-floored some thirty-five years ago, there was dug
up, from among earth and bones in the nave, a good specimen of a Celtic
cross, which is now erected in a fitting place underneath the Tower.  Mr
A. Hutchison, F.S.A., Scot., Dundee (a reliable authority), has examined
it, and has pronounced it "of the true Celtic type."  He adds the opinion
that "the fact that no mention is made in contemporary documents of an
earlier church (_i.e._, earlier than 1210) does not prove that such a
church did not exist....  It is a fair inference from the existence of
this early cross that an earlier ecclesiastical settlement existed at
Dunning, and that the present church superseded a pre-Norman, or Celtic
Church, in all probability on the same site."

At the risk of its being regarded as an unpardonably wide digression,
reference may here be made, not to another cross, but to a monumental
stone of another kind and of a much later date (although no date is
inscribed upon it.)  It is what is known as the "Ebenezer" stone of the
parish.  Though at one time lying flat and covered with crop-bearing
soil, it now stands erect, and on what is believed to have been its first
site.  It is placed on a field on the farm of Easter Gatherleys, and
about three-quarters of a mile west of the farm-house.  Its origin is
said to have been this:--The farmer of Gatherleys of the time--who was
also "laird" of the place--had for long been in doubt and spiritual
darkness--to all appearance hopelessly perplexed.  Sitting down, here,
one day, he found comfort, peace, and light.  Showing a most laudable
example, he not selfishly received the blessing, but most gratefully
acknowledged it, raising on the spot his "Ebenezer" of indebtedness to
Him from whom our blessings flow.  On the surface of the stone facing the
east are inscribed in English the words of Is. l., 10; while on that
facing the west we have the following:--

       EBENEZER
       ========
         Hic
     EX TENEBRIS
      LUX LUXIT
        ERGO
  PATER, FILIUS, ET
  SPIRITUS SANCTUS
     MEUS DEUS,
      ET NOMEN
     HUJUS LOCI
       LUX[15]

Both as to size and shape the stone is similar to the quaint early 17th
century "head-stones" in the older portion of the graveyard around
Dunning Church.

Something must be written of the bells which have been connected, at one
time or another, with the Church of Dunning.  One bell, no longer in the
Tower, came to sudden grief when discharging its duty on a certain happy
occasion.  The Master of Rollo of the time, who was living at
Masterfield, having been blessed with four daughters, but no son and
heir, was met one evening by a messenger bringing the welcome news that a
son had just been born to him.  "Go," he said, "and make the bell ring
till it crack."  The order was literally obeyed--a broken bell being the
result.  Its fragments having been taken to Duncrub, were, many years
after, re-cast into a bell, now used in connection with the private
chapel there.  The inscription on the cracked bell, for a copy of which
the writer is indebted to the present Lord Rollo, was of a very
interesting and suggestive nature.  Round the top were the words--"Soli
Deo Gloria.  Joannes Oaderogge me fecit.  Roterodami, 1681"; and on the
body of the bell, the following words placed thus:--

  "HAEC AD EVANGELIUM
  HOC AD CHRISTUM
  HIC AD CAELUM
  VOCAT PBCCATORES."[16]


His Lordship adds--"The bell, I believe, was in a vessel that was
captured in the American War, and it was brought here by my predecessor,
Andrew, fifth Lord Rollo....  It was broken in April, 1773, and I had it
re-cast by Mears in 1860, with the original inscription replaced."

Of much interest, also, are the two bells still in the Tower of Dunning
Church.  The older and smaller bears the Dutch inscription:--"IC BEN
GHEGOTEN INE IAER ONS HEEREN MCCCCCXXVI."[17] But in addition to this,
the bell shows a two-fold representation that seems to give it a value
quite unique.  What we have is--(1) a scallop-shell,[18] on which are
three figures--a central-seated figure, and two smaller figures kneeling
alongside.  The central figure seems to hold something, which may be a
book, in the left hand close to the breast.  The right hand is extended,
and seems to hold a staff and a garland.  The figure has a _nimbus_, and
a curious triangular head-dress.  (2) On the side opposite the shell and
figures is what appears to be a representation of the Virgin and Child,
alongside of which is a figure of the Crucifixion.[19] This old bell is
used to announce the half-hour as measured on the Steeple Clock,[20] as
also to tell the living that the mortal remains of some brother or sister
are about to be laid beneath the turf.

The large bell--used to announce the services of the church, and, through
the kindness of Lady Rollo, to ring at "matins" and at "even-song"--is of
very full tone.  It was a gift to the church by a highly-respected
heritor of the parish, and bears this inscription:--

"T. Mears of London fecit.

"This Bell was presented to the Parish Church of Dunning by Mark Howard
Drummond, Esq. of Kelty, Major of the 72nd Regiment of Albany
Highlanders, in token of his attachment to his native parish, and of his
zeal to promote religious, industrious, and early habits among the
parishioners.--August 3d, 1825."


Mention has already been made of the fact that the patron Saint of
Dunning was S. SERF.  The same Saint had churches dedicated to him at
Monivaird (Monzievaird), at Creich, and at Dysart.  But, inasmuch as he
seems to have lived for some considerable time at Dunning, and also to
have died there, perhaps this is the most fitting place for a page or two
as to his history.

That he was a real historic personage does not admit of doubt; but the
exact time at which he acted his part on the world's stage is involved in
great obscurity.  The legends of him are very conflicting, so much so,
that it has been supposed by some that there were two S. Serfs.  It is
the legends, however, that are two-fold, and not the Saint.  According to
the Aberdeen Breviary, and writers who follow its guidance, S. Servanus,
or S. Serf, or S. Serb, or (in Aberdeenshire) S. Sair, belonged to the
5th century, and was the disciple of S. Palladius; others putting him a
little further on, and making him out to have been the instructor of S.
Kentigern at Culross.  But most people who carefully read the pages of
Skene[21] will be satisfied that S. Servanus belongs to a later period
still.  It so happens that there is preserved in the Marsh M.S., Dublin,
and printed in Skene's _Chronicles of the Picts and Scots_ (p. 412, ff.),
a Life of the Saint, which, notwithstanding some excessively wild and
incredible-looking stories mixed up with it, is the only life of his that
is consistent with itself and with otherwise-ascertained contemporary
facts.  This life makes the Saint contemporary with Adamnan, Abbot of
Iona, who belonged to the 7th century, and with Brude, son of Dargart,
King of the Picts.  According to Skene,[22] this Brude, son of Dargart,
may be identified with Brude, son of Derile, who reigned from 697 to 706,
and preceded that Nectan, son of Derile, who expelled the Columban monks
from his kingdom.  And confirmatory proof of this identification being
correct is furnished by Gray's _Scalacronica_, which has under this Brude
that we have been referring to--"En quel temps veint Servanus en
Fine."[23]  Moreover, in the Chartulary of S. Andrews there is reference
to an early charter of the Celtic period, by which "Brude, son of
Dergard, gives the Isle of Lochlevine to the Omnipotent God, and to Saint
Servanus, and to the Keledei hermits dwelling there, who are serving, and
shall serve God in that island."

According, then, to the life in the Marsh Library M.S.--the life which,
its many wild accounts notwithstanding, seems most free from
anachronisms--the Saint is the son of Obeth, King of Canaan, and Alpia,
daughter of the King of Arabia.  His father dying, he gives up his right
to the throne in favour of his twin brother Generatius, takes orders, and
is appointed Bishop of the Cananeans.  After twenty years as Bishop in
that region, admonished by an angel, he comes to Jerusalem, where he is
Patriarch for seven years.  He then goes to Constantinople, and thence to
Rome, where, for seven years, he reigns as Pope.  Quitting Rome, and
accompanied by a band of pilgrims, he makes his way into regions remote
and crosses the Mare Icteum (Straits of Dover) dryshod, and, after
travelling from place to place, arrives at the Forth.  Adamnan, who, at
the time, was an abbot in Scotland, receives him with great honours on
the island of Inchkeith, and afterwards gave him, as his field of labour,
Fife, and from the Mons Britannicus to the Mons Okhel (from the mount of
the Britons to the Ochils.)  He is next found at Kinel, then at Culenros,
where he met King Brude and founded a church; then at an island, in Loch
Leven, where he meets Adamnan and has the island presented to him.  After
constructing churches throughout the whole region of Fife, and labouring
for years in the province assigned to him, and at many other places, he
died at Dunning, and was buried at Culross.  The deeds ascribed to S.
Serf are certainly astounding, and the stories associated with him
extraordinarily "wild"; still, as the scenes of not a few of them are
laid at places in the Ochils district, and, accordingly, "Near the
Pictish Capital," it may not be inappropriate if a few of them are
rehearsed here.[24]

At Tuligbotuan (Tullybody) the Devil, having entered into a poor man,
filled him with an insatiable appetite.  He ate and ate, and still the
wolf within craved for more.  Though he consumed a cow and a calf, a
sheep and a lamb, all was of no avail.  At length, when the family were
eaten "out of house and hall," his relatives take him to S. Serf, who
clapped his thumb[25] into the man's mouth, which immediately satisfied
him--the Devil flying out of him with a howl.

At Alveth (Alvah) Servanus and his company lodged, on one occasion, at
the house of a very poor man, who had nothing to put before them but his
one pig.  It was forthwith cut up and eaten, the bones, however, being
carefully preserved from being broken.  Next morning, to the great
delight and surprise of the poor man, the pig came grunting to the door,
restored to flesh, and life by the Saint.

At Atheren (Airthrey) a robber, one night, broke into S. Serf's cell,
and, finding a sheep roasted in his larder, comfortably sat down and
entirely consumed it.  Next day Servanus met the fellow and charged him
with the robbery.  The man swore innocence, but it was of no use; he was
instantly convicted, for the wether bleated in his bowels.

At Dunning, S. Serf is said to have healed three blind, three lame, and
three deaf men.  But his great feat here was killing the dragon.  (Had no
princes or knights come to Forteviot as yet, that such work was left to
the priest?) The story, as given in the Marsh M.S., is as follows:--"At
that time the Saint was in his cell at Dunning (_in cella Dunenensi_),
and news was brought to him that a dragon, great and terrible, and very
loathsome (_deterrimus_), was coming into his township (_civitatem
suam_), whose aspect no mortal could suffer.  Saint Servanus, however,
coming out to meet it, and taking his staff in his right hand, fought
with the dragon in a certain valley, and killed it.  From that day,
moreover, that valley was called the Valley of the Dragon."[26]

The circumstances connected with the Saint's death and burial are
touchingly described.  The holy man, after many miracles, after divers
works, after founding many churches in Christ, when his peace had been
given to his brethren in his cell at Dunning, gave up and commended his
spirit to the most High Creator on the first day of the Kalends of July.
After his death his disciples and the people of nearly the whole province
carried his body to Culenross (Culross), and there, with psalms and hymns
(ymnis) and chantings (canticis), honourably buried him, where flourish
his merits, and the virtues of his merits unto this day--to the glory and
honour of the Omnipotent God, who in the Perfect Trinity liveth and
reigneth through endless ages of ages.

Only the limits of space forbid allusion to additional features of
considerable importance near the Pictish Capital, and connected with the
parish of Dunning.  Room, however, must be found for stating that, as is
to be expected, Dunning, like other places in Strathearn, is not without
interesting traces of the "Rising" of 1715.  In the Session records,
under date 18th September, 1715, there is the following entry:--"There
was no sermon this day, and for several Sabbaths following, on account of
the commotions that were in the county by reason of Mar's unnatural
rebellion."  When Mar quitted the field of Sheriffmuir, he, on the 12th
November, 1715, withdrew his army into Angus, and in order to hinder the
progress of the Royalist forces, he burned down all the villages on the
line of march as far as Perth.  The villagers of Dunning, actuated by the
same feelings as led the citizens of London to erect the "Monument" after
the great fire of 1666, planted a thorn tree to commemorate the
destruction of their village.  This ancient tree, standing in the square
opposite the east approach to the manse, is well protected, and is likely
to be spared to tell its memorable story to generations to come.



[1] _Hwonam et Nechtan et Phinguineghert_.--(See Skene's _Chronicles of
the Picts and Scots_, p. 185).

[2] _Decimam partem de urbe Fortevieth_.--(See Skene's _Chronicles of the
Picts and Scots_, p. 185).

[3] This word, originally, was the name applied by the Romans to their
public halls, either of justice or of exchange.  Inasmuch as the early
Christian Churches generally followed the ground plan of these buildings,
such churches long retained the same appellation.

[4] Other chronicles give the place as Scone.--(See Skene's _Chronicles
of the Picts and Scots_, p. 174).

[5] Both palace and church would be within the King's Rath or circular
fortification.

[6] "The custom of placing a cross over the doorway of a Christian
building may be traced back to the sixth century in Palestine, where the
Chi-Rho monogram occurs on the lintels of the doorways of the houses.
The meaning of the symbolism is explained by the blood of the lamb, which
was struck upon the lintels of the doors of the houses of the Israelites
in Egypt at the Passover (Gen. xii., 21-23), and our Lord's words--'I am
the door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved,' (John x.,
9)."--(J. Romilly Allen's _Christian Symbolism_, p. 238).

A good example of such a cross is on the lintel of the doorway of a 7th
century church at Fore, Co. West Meath; and another, equally good, is on
the doorway of one of the oldest churches in Ireland, on High Island, off
the coast of Connemara.  In connection with the Round Towers at Antrim
and at Brechin there are similar crosses.

[7] See _Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland_ (Vol.
xxvi., p. 438.)  Dr Wilson, in his _Dunning: its Parochial History_,
states that the large figure with the sword "is said to be a
representation of Alexander the First, who died in the year 1124" (p. 3.)

[8] Sir Herbert Maxwell, in his _Scottish Land-Names: their Origin and
Meaning_, gives as the derivation of Duncrub, the old Gaelic dun
craeb=hill of the trees.

[9] Otherwise spelt _Mormaer_.  Except that the constituent elements are
inverted, it is the same word as _Maormor_ (Gael. _maer, maor_, a
steward, and _mor_, great), and was the ancient name for a royal steward
of high dignity, placed by a Scottish king over a province, and acting as
a royal deputy.

[10] Robertson's _Early Kings_ (Vol. I., p. 77).

[11] Sir Herbert Maxwell states that dun in its original and restricted
sense means "Enclosure or fortress, being closely related to A.S. tun,
Eng. town....  The diminutive, or noun plural, yields innumerable names,
like _Dinnans_ and _Dinnance_, in Ayrshire and Galloway; _Duning_ and
_Dinnings_ in Dumfriesshire; and _Downan_, near Ballantrae."  Ought not
Sir Herbert to have added _Dunnin_ or _Dunning_, in Perthshire?

[12] See _Dunning: its Parochial History_, p. 4.

[13] The marks of a gable of a former nave with a very highly-pitched
roof are still distinctly seen on the Tower.

[14] The word here used, occasionally spelt _ferm_, sometimes means not
so much a piece of land turned to agricultural use and cultivated by
owner or tenant, as _an account, a reckoning_: It is akin to _farm_ from
the A.S. fearm or feorm=food, a meal.  A trustworthy authority says that
the meaning of farm "arose from the original practice of letting lands,
on condition that the tenant should supply his lord's household with so
many nights' entertainment."  Hence "Reddet firmam trium noctium."  (He
will supply three nights' entertainment).--_Doomsday Book_.

[15] Here, out of darkness Light shone.  Therefore the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost [shall be] my God, and the name of this place Light.

[16] This [bell] calls sinners to the Gospel, it to Christ, He to Heaven.

[17] I was born in the year of our Lord, 1526.

[18] In heraldry a scallop-shell is the badge of a pilgrim.  It is the
symbol of S. James the Greater, who is generally represented in pilgrim's
garb.  In this sense it is sometimes written _Escallop_.

[19] The writer is indebted to Dr Joseph Anderson for kindly examining
two casts of these figures, carefully prepared by Mr James Henderson,
F.S.A., Scot., Dunning.

[20] Erected by public subscription, and inaugurated 3rd November, 1890.
(For architectural correctness, its four dials are omitted in Mr Ross's
drawing of the Tower).

[21] See his _Celtic Scotland_, p. 31, ff.

[22] See _Celtic Scotland_, p. 259.

[23] See _Chronicles of the Picts and Scots_, p. 201.

[24]In telling one or two of these stories, we have tried to combine with
the Marsh M.S. version the somewhat fuller details of the Aberdeen
Breviary.

[25] Baring Gould (_Lives of the Saints_.  London, 1874), using probably
a version of the legend reading _pulicem_, instead of _pollicem suum_,
has _clapped a flea into the man's mouth_.

[26] The Dragon is the name still given to that part of the parish in
which is situated the Village of Newtown of Pitcairns.




THE HISTORIC PRESBYTERY OF AUCHTERARDER

By Rev. G. D. MACNAUGHTAN, B.D., Ardoch,
  _Clerk of Presbytery_

The district embraced within the bounds of the Presbytery of
Auchterarder belonged for the most part to the ancient Diocese of
Dunblane.  Within it lay the famous Abbey of Inchaffray, and the
minister of Muthill was usually Dean of Dunblane.  As originally
erected, the Presbytery was, indeed, the Presbytery of Dunblane, but in
1593 the General Assembly ordained the Presbytery of Dunblane "to be
transportit to Auchterardour, with liberty to the brethren of Dunblane
appealing to resort either to Auchterardour or Striviling as they
please."  When at last it got into shape it consisted of the following
fifteen parishes, viz.:--Auchterarder, Blackford, Comrie, Crieff,
Dunning, Fossoway, Foulis-Wester, Gask, Glendevon, Madderty, Monzie,
Monzievaird, Muckhart, Muthill, and Trinity-Gask.  Beginning on the
shores of Loch Earn, it followed on both banks the river of that name
for more than twenty miles, stretching upwards on either side to the
surrounding hills.  Northwards it reached even the banks of the Almond,
while southwards it found its way into the uplands of Strathallan, and,
breaking by the pass of Gleneagles into the Ochils, it went right
through them to the level ground beyond, following the windings of the
Devon.  As a background, rose the mighty peaks of the Grampians; in the
foreground lay the gentler, greener, rounded heights of the Ochil
range.  The seat of the Presbytery was Auchterarder, a long, straggling
village, built along the crest of a rising ground; a mile or two
distant from the south bank of the Earn, and at the same time not far
from the top of Strathallan.  Towards the close of the sixteenth
century we have to think of the various parishes above named as being
duly supplied with Protestant pastors, who met regularly in
Auchterardour for the "weekly exercise," and to dispose of any church
business that came before them.  Most of these first members of the
Presbytery seem to have been cadets of the leading families of the
district, and, amongst them, Drummond, Graeme, Murray or Moray were
common names.  The Presbytery of Auchterarder first begins to take a
prominent part in public affairs during the religious troubles of
Charles I.  The Jenny Geddes riot in St Giles has just taken place, and
petitions are pouring in from all quarters against the ill-fated
service-book.  The Privy Council is at its wits' end as between a king
resolved on innovations and a nation that will have none of them.  It
sends up to London specimens of the petitions received--one from the
nobility, one from the gentry, one from the burghs, and a fourth from
the clergy.  The clerical petition thus honoured was that from the
"Presbytrie of Auchtererdoch."  The petition of this Presbytery was
probably selected not on account of the zealous character of the
opposition of its members, but on account of their known loyalty.  The
impression to be produced on the King's mind was that, if even
Auchterarder opposed his designs, his projects were hopeless.  The
Covenant was sworn, but Auchterarder was not zealous for the Covenant.
In the divisions of opinion, which led eventually to the rising of
Montrose, Auchterarder sympathised with the minority.  A Warning and
Declaration with reference to these divisions was ordered by the
General Assembly to be read from every pulpit, and "the brethren of
Auchtererdoch" took it upon them to disobey.  It was the first
illustration of that independence of judgment for which they have more
than once been famous.  It was resolved to make an example of this
disobedient Presbytery, and they were cited before the Assembly of
1643.  "The Presbytery of Auchtererdoch was under the rod," writes
Baillie, "to be made an example to all who would be turbulent."  "After
long examination of their business," he continues, "at last they were
laureat.  Some two or three of that Presbytery (when many of the gentry
who were not elders were permitted to sit among them and reason against
the Warning and Declaration, and when Ardoch presented reasons in write
against these pieces, yet they were proven to have been forward for the
present reading) were commended.  Others who, notwithstanding of the
Presbytery's conclusion of not reading, yet did read, were, for voicing
the continuation, gently rebuked.  Others who at last caused read parts
of them, and Mr James Rowe, who caused read them before himself came
in, were sharply rebuked, and their names delete from among the members
of this Assembly.  Ardoch, ane old reverend gentleman, for his former
known zeal was spared, only, was urged upon oath to reveal the persons
from whom he had the reasons contrary to the Warning."  This is a
curious picture of the internal condition of the Presbytery, and
exhibits in strong relief the friendly relations existing betwixt its
members and the gentry of the district.  The James Rowe referred to was
minister of Muthill, and was married to Margaret Stirling, a daughter
of the laird of Ardoch, the "old reverend gentleman" above named.

When, after the Restoration, Episcopacy was re-established,
Auchterarder once again formed part of the Diocese of Dunblane, and was
for a time under the mild sway of the Episcopate of Leighton.  The
Episcopacy was almost nominal.  There was no liturgy; the service
continued to be much what it had been before, though Leighton
encouraged the brethren to make their preaching "plain and useful for
all capacities, not entangled with useless questions and disputes, nor
continued to a wearisome length"; "to read larger portiones of the
Scriptures"; "to restore the Lord's Prayer to more frequent use,
likewyse the Doxologie and the Creed."  The Presbytery continued to
meet as usual, and virtually elected its own Moderator.  The chief
difference was that at the Synod the Bishop as of right occupied the
chair.  At this period we have another interesting glimpse of the
internal condition of the Presbytery.  It was complained to one Synod
that "some young men, ministers within the Presbytrie of Ochterarder,
had behaved themselves somewhat irreverendlie and undeutifullie towards
some of the brethren who were older than themselves both for age and
work of the ministrie.  The Bishop having taken the samyne to
consideration, desired the Moderator of the Presbytrie of Ochterarder,
that at their first Presbyterial meeting, to admonish such brethren,
that in time coming they should absteine from such unbeseeming
misbehaviour, otherwyse to shew them that he would advert to it
hereafter."  The young lions of Auchterarder had evidently {107} begun
to roar, catching something of the independent spirit of their seniors.

In this district there was but little of the Covenanting feeling that
was rampant in the West.  An Abdiel, however, was found among the
faithless in the person of William Spence, minister of Glendevon.  In
1678 he laid a paper on the table of Presbytery in which he testified
against the errors of the times.  He was dealt with with great leniency
and patience, but in the end he proved incorrigible.  After long delay
he was at last, in the beginning of 1681, deposed and excommunicated by
the Bishop and Synod.  From that time onwards he became a political
agent, and was mixed up in the plots which filled the closing years of
the reign of Charles II.  In 1684 he was arrested and questioned.
Though made to undergo the torture of the boot, he refused to disclose
anything.  He was then handed over to the tender mercies of General
Dalziel, the "Muscovy beast who would roast men," and was kept from
sleeping for eight or nine days till his enemies themselves were weary.
He had to be thumbscrewed, and told that they would screw every joint
of his body, one after another, before his courage began to fail.  "Yet
{108} such was the firmness and fidelity of this poor man," writes
Bishop Burnet, "that even in that extremity he capitulated, that no new
questions should be put to him, but those already agreed on; and that
he should not be obliged to be a witness against any person, and that
he himself should be pardoned."  After the Revolution he came back to
Glendevon; in 1691 was translated to Fossoway, and, having outlived all
his troubles, died there in peace in 1715 at the age of eighty.  The
policy, with which he had associated himself as a minority of one, had
triumphed.

The Revolution fell upon the Presbytery of Auchterarder like the very
crack of doom.  All its members, with two exceptions, were ousted.
These were the Rev. James Roy, minister of Trinity-Gask, and the Rev.
Robert Sharp, M.A., minister of Muckhart.  Unfortunately, at this
interesting period the Presbytery records are a blank.  The last minute
before the Revolution is that of September 7, 1687; the next is that of
November 9, 1703.  When the curtain thus rises again at the beginning
of the eighteenth century the _personnel_ of the Presbytery has
completely changed.  Elsewhere the transformation seems to have been
accomplished with little difficulty; but it was different in the
Episcopal stronghold of Muthill.  That parish, we find, has not yet
submitted to the authority of the Presbytery, and is still vacant.  It
was not till August 3rd, 1704, that Mr William Haly was ordained as
minister of Muthill.  On the day of his ordination there was a riot,
"several in the parish keeping the doors of the kirk and kirkyard with
swords and staves"; and not until the following year (March 20, 1705)
were the keys of the church of Muthill finally laid upon the table of
the Presbytery.  The new members of the Presbytery were very different
from the old.  They were now strongly Presbyterian in feeling, and
ultra-evangelical in theology.  In 1711, when threatened with the Queen
Anne Act restoring Patronage, we find them instructing their
commissioners to the Assembly "to take all care that Patronages be not
again restored," and in the following year "to give a testimony against
the encroachments made on this church by the tolleration and
patronages."  They were earnest in prayer on behalf of the Protestant
Succession of the House of Hanover.  On account of the Jacobite rising
of 1715 there was no meeting of Presbytery from August 30, 1715, till
February 9, 1716.  At this meeting reference is made to "the Popish and
Jacobite rebells who had infested the bounds, threatening ministers not
to pray against them and their pretended king, by reason whereof
ministers were forced to flee; and spoiling the goods of the people,
and robbing and burning their houses and corns; and now that they were
driven out of their bounds by the good providence of God accompanying
the king's forces with success against them."

The Presbytery of Auchterarder had now to deal with a matter, small in
itself, which, nevertheless, created considerable stir in the Church
Courts, and ultimately led to secession.  On December 11, 1716, Mr
William Craig, student of divinity, appeared before them for license.
The Presbytery being deeply impressed with "the errors of the times,"
examined him strictly as to his soundness of faith.  Further
consideration of the matter having been delayed for about a month, Mr
Craig was again (January 15, 1717) before the Presbytery; was asked by
them to sign the answers formerly given by him, and though he "seemed
to scruple a little at something of the wording" of some of them, he
finally did so, and was licensed.  His signature still stands at that
date in the Presbytery's copy of the Confession of Faith.  The most
famous statement signed by him was to the following effect:--"And
further, I believe that it is not sound and orthodox to teach that we
must forsake sin in order to our coming to Christ and instating us in
covenant with God"--language capable of bearing an Antinomian meaning,
and soon to be known as the "Auchterarder Creed."  At next meeting of
Presbytery (February 12, 1717) Mr Craig came back, representing that he
was troubled with scruples anent the paper he had subscribed, that he
had done so hastily, and that he now wished to explain his explanation.
The Presbytery, after hearing him, resolved to declare his license null
and void, and in the end he had to appeal to the Assembly.  The
Assembly of 1717 was somewhat startled at the theological language of
Auchterarder, ordered the Presbytery to restore Mr Craig's license,
declared the chief article of the new creed to be "unsound and most
detestable," and asked them to explain its meaning to a meeting of the
Commission.  The Presbytery was of course able to show that their
meaning was both pious and orthodox, and that they had been only a
little over-zealous for the purity of the faith.  In the old
Auchterarder fashion, they had been thinking for themselves, instead of
taking ready-made opinions from other people.  One good result of the
commotion was that Presbyteries were henceforth prohibited from putting
queries of their own, preliminary to license, but "those and no other"
which had received the authority of the Church.  Yet it had other
results which were evil.  The discussion over the "Auchterarder Creed"
led to the re-publication of the "Marrow of Modern Divinity," and the
"Marrow Controversy" led directly to the secession of the Erskines.
The _origo mali_ was in Auchterarder.

The "Rising" of 1745 did not interfere so much with the business of the
Presbytery as that of 1715 had done.  During that eventful year it
continued to hold its meetings as usual.  The only reference is that on
May 1, 1746, a fortnight after Culloden, the Presbytery appoints that
if His Royal Highness the Duke of Cumberland shall come this way in his
return from the North, certain members should wait upon him to
congratulate him upon the victory obtained by him over the rebels.

On December 14, 1756, the celebrated tragedy of _Douglas_, written by
John Home, minister of Athelstaneford, in East Lothian, was acted in
Edinburgh.  This atrocious fact caused much searching of heart in all
ultra-evangelical circles.  The awful news reached Auchterarder.
Meeting in Glendevon Church on May 12, 1757, for the ordination of Mr
David M'Gibbon, the Presbytery came to the following resolution:--"The
Presbytery, taking into their serious consideration the general fame
that a minister of this Church has composed the tragedy of _Douglas_,
and has been at great pains to get it represented on the stage both at
London and at Edinburgh, to the scandal of very many; and the
Presbytery further considering how hurtful stage plays are to the
interest of religion, and to the morals of the people, and always were
held to be so in every well-regulated government, heathen as well as
Christian, therefore did and hereby do instruct their representatives
in the ensuing General Assembly humbly to insist with the venerable
Assembly that they would be pleased to make effectual enquiry, without
loss of time, into the ground of the above flame; and if it shall be
found to be indeed true {114} that ministers of the Gospel, members of
this Church, have done and behaved as above alledged, that the General
Assembly would be pleased to enquire if such adequate censure has been
inflicted on these brethren as their crime deserves; and if it has not,
that the venerable Assembly would order it to be done, and that they
would be further pleased to give some publick testimony of their
abhorrence of such practices, that the world may see the just
resentment of this Church against so uncommon and unprecedented a
behaviour in some of her undutiful sons, and that they would do this in
such a manner as shall appear to the venerable Assembly to be most
effectual for preventing the like in any of their members of whatever
degree in time coming."   The zeal of Auchterarder was burning with a
holy fire.

In the course of the eighteenth century the best known members of the
Presbytery were the dynasty of Moncrieffs at Blackford, and Dr. John
Kemp, of Trinity-Gask.  Of the former, three generations succeeded each
other from 1697 to 1775, in which year Sir Henry Moncrieff left
Blackford to become minister of the West Kirk, Edinburgh.  Of Dr. Kemp,
who left Trinity-Gask {115} in 1776, to become minister of New
Greyfriars, Edinburgh, a full account will be found in Kay's _Edinburgh
Portraits_.  He was three times married, his second and third wives
being Earls' daughters.

The century was now drawing to a close.  Since the Reformation there
had been no church extension within the bounds of the Presbytery.  At
last, however, there was to be an awakening from this long sleep.  The
district of Ardoch formed the southern portion of the parish of
Muthill.  In the centre of it lay the famous Roman Camp, one of the
most ancient historic spots in Scotland, whose earthen trenches had
been thrown up by the soldiers of Agricola.  It was the traditional
site of the Battle of Mons Grampius, where Galgacus and his Caledonians
fought for liberty, and, after all that has been written on the
subject, is as probably the real site as any other.  There, in 1780, a
chapel of ease was built, and opened for worship on March 25, 1781.
The bounds of the chapel also included a small portion of the parish of
Blackford, and a larger portion of that of Dunblane, the Presbytery
thus extending its jurisdiction down the banks of the Allan to within a
few miles of the cathedral city.  The Chapel at Ardoch was the
Presbytery's first-born child.  In later years, in connection with the
Church Extension movement, promoted by Dr. Chalmers, the West Church
was built in Crieff in 1838, and the Chapel of Blairingone, in the
parish of Fossoway, in 1840.  Thus equipped, the Presbytery of
Auchterarder was to meet the storm of 1843.

In the earlier years of the nineteenth century there were even to
observant eyes no signs of the coming blast.  The Act of Queen Anne,
restoring Patronage, though long protested against, had been sullenly
acquiesced in by the Church.  Moderates and Evangelicals, though
contending together in the several Church Courts, kept themselves
carefully within the limits of the Church's constitution.  But a new
era was about to dawn.  The struggle for political liberty which found
expression in the great Reform Act of 1832, had its counterpart also in
the ecclesiastical world.  Patronage was again felt to be an
intolerable burden, and the rights of the Christian people to require
vindication.  In these changed circumstances it became a difficult and
delicate matter to "redd the marches" between the Church and State.
With level-headed common-sense upon both sides it might have been done.
Unfortunately, in the struggle our most prominent national
characteristics, instead of being combined, got opposed to one another.
The proverbial "canniness" of the Scottish nation was all upon the one
side; the equally proverbial _perfervidum ingenium_ was all upon the
other.  Led by the latter feeling, the Church resolved to fall back on
her own inherent rights and to get quit of Patronage by a side wind.
In 1834 she passed the Veto Act, giving power to "the major part of the
male heads of families, members of the vacant congregation," in any
parish to get quit of an unpopular presentee.  The Presbytery of
Auchterarder was doomed to be the cockpit in which this great fight was
to be fought out.  In the autumn of 1834 the Rev. Robert Young was
presented to the parish of Auchterarder by the Earl of Kinnoull.  At
the moderation of his call on 2nd December the Rev. John Clark,
Blackford, preached from Mark xii., 10-11, a text somewhat interesting
in the light of what afterwards took place--"And have ye not read this
scripture: The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of
the corner: This was the Lord's doing, and is marvellous in our eyes?"
Mr Young's call was signed by three persons, for the Earl of Kinnoull
as Patron, and by two members of the congregation.  He was vetoed by
287 male heads of families, and the Presbytery had no option under the
Act but to reject the call.  This decision was confirmed on appeal to
the Assembly, and Mr Young and the Earl of Kinnoull had to seek redress
in the Civil Courts.  The "Auchterarder Case" now attracted the
attention of the whole country.  It raised the question of the legality
of the Veto Act.  In November, 1837, it was heard before the whole
Court of Session, and the Judges by a majority found that, Mr Young
having been duly presented, the Presbytery was bound to take him upon
trials.  An appeal was ultimately taken to the House of Lords, and by
it, in 1839, the decision of the Court of Session was re-affirmed.  By
the highest legal authority the Veto Act was found to be worthless.
But the Church had gone too far to retrace her steps, and she now
raised the banner of Spiritual Independence.  Other questions had come
to the front which heightened and intensified the feeling that
prevailed.  By the equally illegal Chapel Act, also passed in 1834,
chapel districts were formed into parishes _quoad sacra_, and their
ministers found entitled to seats in the Church Courts.  The minister
of Ardoch Chapel at once took his seat in the Presbytery, and was
followed in due time by the ministers of the West Church, Crieff, and
the Chapel at Blairingone.  The Church had been led into an _impasse_
from which there was no outlet but by secession.  The secession came.
In defence of their somewhat mysterious principles no fewer than 451
ministers, on the 18th day of May, 1843, left the Church.  All the
world wondered.  It was said that in no country other than Scotland
could such a spectacle have been seen.  Yet one cannot help looking
back with sorrow upon the blundering that made it possible.  Like the
Charge of the Light Brigade at Balaclava, it was "magnificent, but not
war."

With the addition of the chapel ministers the membership of
Auchterarder Presbytery had risen to eighteen.  The parish of
Auchterarder was still vacant.  Of the remaining seventeen, eight were
found to have seceded.  Of these, five were legal members of
Presbytery--viz., James Carment, Comrie; Peter Brydie, Fossoway; John
Reid Omond, Monzie; John Ferguson, Monzievaird; and James Thomson,
Muckhart.  The three others were the chapel ministers--Samuel Grant,
Ardoch; Finlay Macalister, West Church, Crieff; and Andrew Noble,
Blairingone.  The case of Mr Brydie, of Fossoway, was somewhat
peculiar.  On October 13, 1843, he petitioned the Presbytery asking it
to annul its judgment with regard to him, and submitted a medical
certificate to the effect that at the time of his secession he was "in
a state of lunacy."  The Presbytery, having consulted the Synod,
reponed him, on the ground that at the time he separated himself from
the Church he had been in a state of unsound mind.

The Presbytery now once more consisted of fifteen parishes and three
chapels.  The vacancies in the parishes were easily supplied.  It was
different with the chapels.  A new minister was, indeed, ordained at
Ardoch in December, 1844, but it was 1848 before the West Church,
Crieff, and the Chapel of Blairingone were once more re-opened for
worship in connection with the Church of Scotland.  The decks had been
cleared after the storm, the rigging re-fitted, and the sails spread
once more to catch the favouring breeze.  In a few years the
Presbytery's organisation had become more efficient than ever.  In 1854
certain portions of the parishes of Monzie and Foulis were disjoined
from the Presbytery to form a part of the new parish of Logiealmond.
In 1855, Ardoch was erected into a parish _quoad omnia_.  In 1864, the
West Church, Crieff, became a parish _quoad sacra_.  The Chapel of
Blairingone was also by and by to become a parish; yet, when it did so,
it no longer formed a part of the Presbytery of Auchterarder.  In 1856
the General Assembly determined to create a new Presbytery of Kinross,
and for this purpose to disjoin the two parishes of Muckhart and
Fossoway (the latter including Blairingone) from the Presbytery with
which they had been associated for two hundred and fifty years.
Auchterarder refused her consent, and protested, but in vain.  She was
bereaved of her children.

This change somewhat altered the centre of gravity of the Presbytery.
Hitherto Auchterarder had been its natural centre, and its most
convenient place of meeting.  From this time onwards it began
occasionally to meet at Crieff.  In 1866 an Act of Assembly was passed
ordaining it to meet alternately in Auchterarder and Crieff.

After the Secession of 1843 a subtle change began to creep over the
opinions of the Presbytery.  It was no longer the ultra-evangelical
body which it had been for more than a century.  It began to take
broader views of culture and of human life.  Were another minister of
the Church of Scotland now to write a new tragedy of _Douglas_ he would
be likely to receive its congratulations rather than its denunciations.
Its theology became sweeter, and it is in no danger of framing a new
"Auchterarder Creed" upon the lines of the last.  When the new movement
began for the improvement of public worship there was, indeed, enough
of the old leaven left to lead to a vigorous resistance.  This struggle
centred round "The Crieff Organ Case" in 1866-67.  Ultimately, however,
the new views prevailed, and at the present moment (1896) the once
hated "kist of whistles" has found its way into no fewer than thirteen
out of the sixteen parishes which at present compose the Presbytery.
Since the days of that conflict, indeed, its spirit has broadened and
broadened.  The old independent tone, for which it had been conspicuous
even in the seventeenth century, has become more and more marked.  In
recent years the Presbytery has never been willing tamely to follow the
lead of Assembly leaders and Assembly Committees, but has insisted on
expressing a vigorous opinion of its own upon all the questions of the
day.

In the course of the present century several ministers, afterwards to
become better known, have begun their respective careers within the
bounds of the Presbytery.  Dr. William Robertson, latterly minister of
New Greyfriars, Edinburgh, was ordained as minister of Muckhart in
1831.  Dr. Robert Home Stevenson, minister of St. George's, Edinburgh,
Moderator of the General Assembly of 1871, was ordained in 1840 as
assistant and successor in the parish of Crieff.  Dr. John Cunningham,
minister of Crieff from 1845 to 1887, was Moderator of the General
Assembly of 1886, and was latterly Principal of St. Mary's College, St.
Andrews.  His successor in the Moderatorship of Assembly, Dr. George
Hutchison, Banchory-Ternan, was ordained as minister of Monzie in 1845.
Dr. Paton J. Gloag, then of Galashiels, Moderator of the Assembly of
1889, was ordained in 1848 as assistant and successor in the parish of
Dunning.  Dr. John Wilson, a genial man, much beloved by all his
brethren, was minister of Dunning from 1861 to 1878, Clerk of
Presbytery from 1864, and author of "Index to the Acts of Assembly."
Dr. William Mair, minister of Ardoch from 1865 to 1868, is now of
Earlston, and author of the well-known "Digest of Church Laws."

The loss of Muckhart and Fossoway, the addition of Ardoch and Crieff
West left the Presbytery still with its original number of fifteen
parishes.  There was yet another to be added.  In the extreme west of
the parish of Comrie, at the point where the River Earn leaves its
parent lake, was the district of Dundurn.  Next to Ardoch, it was
probably the oldest historic spot within the Presbytery.  There, first
of all places within the bounds, had the Gospel in the course of the
sixth century been preached by the saintly Fillan.  It was still
haunted by sacred memories.  It had been the site of a pre-Reformation
chapel.  It had long been a preaching-place for the minister of Comrie.
Latterly there had sprung up by the shores of the beautiful lake a
hamlet which called itself St. Fillans.  It became a favourite place of
summer resort.  In 1879 a new chapel was built, and in 1895 the
district of Dundurn was erected into a parish _quoad sacra_.

At the present moment (1896) the Presbytery thus consists of sixteen
parishes, all fully equipped; 94 elders and 5023 church members form
its effective strength as a part of the Church militant.  It has faced
many a serious crisis in the past; with a calm cheerfulness it faces
the future.




MEMORIES OF GASK

By Rev. JAMES MARTIN, Gask

The parish of Gask is a comparatively small one both in population and
in territorial extent.  The earliest historical record we have of it
goes back to the time of the invasion of Britain by the Romans.  The
road which passes along the ridge of high ground was originally made by
the Romans, and was designed to form a line of communication between
the camp at Ardoch and the camp at Bertha, near the junction of the
Almond with the Tay.  On the north side of it, in this parish, there
are still to be distinctly seen two small camps or stations, and on the
south side of it there is a larger one.  The Romans have left traces of
their presence here in the works they constructed, which the lapse of
eighteen centuries has not entirely obliterated.

Coming down the stream of time, we find that Wallace, that noble and
disinterested patriot, sought a hiding-place in time of danger amid its
dense woods.  During a visit to Perth in 1296, a plot was laid by the
English to capture him, but, having received timely warning, he made
his escape with his small band of followers to Gascon Ha'.  This is
generally supposed to have occupied a different site from the ruin near
the River Earn which now bears that name, and which is celebrated by
Lady Nairne in the song of "Bonnie Gascon Ha'."  The Gascon Ha' to
which Wallace repaired for safety from his treacherous and relentless
enemies is said to have stood a mile and a half to the north-east of
that ruin in the midst of the Gask woods.  Here they prepared to pass
the night, and having obtained two sheep from a neighbouring fold, they
kindled a fire and made ready their evening repast.  Greatly exhausted
with their long and fatiguing march, Wallace proposed that his
followers should rest while he would keep watch.  During the course of
the night he was startled by the "blowing of horns mingled with
frightful yells, proceeding apparently from a rising ground in the
immediate neighbourhood."  Scouts were sent out from time to time, but
all failing to return, the patriot was at last left alone.  He wandered
about till morning, killing two of the English whom he encountered, one
of whom was Sir John Butler, and then hastened with all speed to
Torwood, near Dunipace, where his uncle was parish priest.

At an early period the lands now comprehended in this parish belonged
to the Earl of Strathearn, the great landowner in this district at that
time.  It is said that he possessed all the lands lying between the
Cross of Macduff, near Newburgh, and the west end of Balquhidder in
length, and between the Ochils and the Grampians in breadth.  It was
out of his lands of Nether Gask that he granted liberty to quarry
stones for building the Abbey of Inchaffray, along with two acres of
ground on which to erect workshops.

The lands of Gask have now been in the possession of the Oliphant
family for nearly six hundred years.  The name was originally written
Olifard, then Olyfaunt, and now Oliphant.  Sir William Olyfaunt was the
first of that name on whom these lands were bestowed by King Robert the
Bruce.  Sir William occupied a prominent position in the early history
of our country.  He was Governor of Stirling Castle, and when summoned
in the name of Edward I. to surrender it, made the noble reply, "I have
never sworn fealty to Edward, but I have sworn to keep the Castle, and
must wait the order of my constituent."  And when the Castle was
besieged by Edward and his army he defended it for three months, and
only capitulated from the scarcity of provisions.  He was a member of
the Parliament held at Aberbrothock in 1320, and subscribed along with
some other Scottish Barons the famous letter to the Pope, which so
nobly asserted the independence of Scotland.  To that document were
affixed the seals of Sir William Olyfaunt and Malise, Earl of
Strathearn.  He died in 1329, and was buried in the Church of
Aberdalgie, where a monument of black marble was erected to his memory.
When the present Church of Aberdalgie was built in 1773 the site was
changed, and the monument to Sir William Olyfaunt was left in the open
churchyard.  In 1780, Mr Oliphant of Gask erected a stone covering over
it to protect it from injury by the weather.

Sir William was succeeded by his son, Walter Olyfaunt, who married a
daughter of King Robert the Bruce, and, "having resigned the lands of
Gask into the hands of his brother-in-law, David II., obtained, in
1364, a new charter confirming them to the said Walter and his spouse
Elizabeth, our beloved sister, on a peculiar tenure for the reddendum
of a chaplet of white roses at the feast of the nativity of St. John
the Baptist at the manor place of Gask."  This incident has been
happily expressed in a poem by Miss Ethel Blair Oliphant, now Mrs
Maxtone Graham, who inherits much of the poetic genius of her
great-grand-aunt, Lady Nairne.


THE TRIBUTE OF GASK

  Now ken ye the gift Gask has brought to the King?
    'Tis an off'ring sae royal, sae perfect, and fair,
    Than jewels o' siller more dainty and rare,
    A crown for a maid or a monarch to wear.
  The courtier's tribute is but a poor thing,
  For what can he offer and what can he bring,
  Than the crown of White Roses from Gask to the King?

  Now ken ye the service Gask does for the King?
    All for his sake, in the bloom of the year,
    In the gardens of Gask the white blossoms appear--
    The Royal White Roses to Scotland sae dear.
  Then far o'er Stralhearn let the praise of them ring,
  Let them live once again in the song that we sing,
  The crown of White Roses from Gask to the King.

  Now ken ye what Gask will yet do for the King?
    In the days that may come, when the roses are dead,
    When the pledge is forgotten, the vows left unsaid;
    What then shall lie found for an off'ring instead?
  Oh! then at his feet his heart he will fling.
  Truth, Honour, Devotion, as tribute will bring
  For the crown of White Roses from Gask to the King!

This charter, which has always been highly prized by the Gask family,
had a rather singular history during the last century.  In 1746 the
Duke of Cumberland sent out Sir Joseph York from Perth to search the
House of Gask, when he took away a box containing the charter, and it
was not till forty years after that it was traced to its hiding-place,
restored to its rightful owners, and safely deposited in the Gask
charter chest.  The Oliphants obtained large estates in different parts
of Scotland, and were raised to the Peerage by James II., in 1450, by
the title of Lord Oliphant.  The fifth Lord, styled in the Gask papers
"ane base and unworthy man," squandered away the large estates he
inherited not only in Perthshire, but also in Forfarshire, Kincardine,
Caithness, and Haddington.  One of the younger branches of the Oliphant
family purchased from his spendthrift cousin the lands of Gask, which
have ever since continued in the same family.

Laurence Oliphant was, in the year 1650, knighted by Charles II., when
that monarch was at Scone.  He for a capricious reason disinherited his
eldest son, Patrick, and gave the lands of Gask to his second son and
his heirs.  About fifty years thereafter the estate of Gask, from the
failure of heirs in the younger branch, came into the possession of
James, the eldest son of the disinherited Patrick.

While James Oliphant resided at Williamston, before he succeeded to
Gask, he devised and carried out a great practical improvement in that
locality.  He along with some others applied to the Scotch Parliament
in 1690 for an Act to compel all the adjoining proprietors to
contribute their share towards the expense of cutting a channel
sufficiently deep and broad to carry off the water, which at that time
must have frequently flooded the fields, and thus reclaimed much
valuable land.  About forty years ago a considerable sum was expended
in still further deepening and broadening the Pow, and that stream
never overflows its banks now unless in very rainy seasons.  As the
estate of Gask is bounded by the Pow on the north side, it shared in
the benefits resulting from that improvement.  Mr Oliphant succeeded to
Gask in 1705, and would doubtless display the same practical sagacity
in carrying out improvements on the estate which then came into his
possession.  He probably planted some of those noble trees which still
surround the mansion-house, and which are undoubtedly of great age.

At the Revolution in 1688, when James II.  was driven from the throne
of Britain, the Oliphants still retained their steadfast allegiance and
devoted loyalty to the exiled monarch, and regarded his successors as
usurpers.  Cherishing these sentiments, we can well imagine they would
hail every enterprise that had for its object the restoration of their
hereditary king.  An opportunity soon occurred.  In 1715, a "Rising"
took place to accomplish this end.  The laird of Gask, though strongly
favouring the movement, yet with great prudence remained at home, and
saved his estate from forfeiture.  But he sent his two elder sons to
join the standard which the Earl of Mar had reared for the restoration
of the Chevalier St. George, the only son of James II.  They both took
part in the battle which was fought at Sheriffmuir, on the 13th
November, between the Jacobite forces, led by the Earl of Mar, and the
Government forces under the command of the Duke of Argyle.  It was an
indecisive battle, both sides claiming the victory.  The Jacobites,
retreating through Strathearn, burned many of the villages, inflicting
great hardships on the peaceful inhabitants by rendering them houseless
during the rigour of winter.  The attempt to restore the Chevalier St.
George soon collapsed, but it does not seem to have been followed by
the thrilling scenes, the hairbreadth escapes, and the rigorous
treatment which marked the close of the subsequent rebellion.

James Oliphant died in 1732, and was succeeded by his eldest son
Laurence, who is styled the "Jacobite Laird, _par excellence_."  He had
been in hiding for some time after the "Rising" of 1715.  He, however,
soon returned home, freed from all Suspicion of disloyalty.  He
married, in 1719, a daughter of the second Lord Nairne, "who was as
staunch a Jacobite as himself."  At Gask House there is a wooden cup,
with a silver rim near the top and another near the bottom.  The upper
one has the inscription--"_Spumantem calicem paternum in regis legitimi
hoeredetarii salutem redditumque felicem loete haurimus_"; and a free
translation of this inscription is on the lower one--"Our grandsires'
flowing cup we drink, and sing God save; restore our true-born lawful
King.  Amen.  L.O.G.  June 10th, 1740."  This discloses the strong
Jacobite tendency which he cherished, and the ardent longing which he
felt for the happy return of his hereditary King.  He had not long to
wait till another opportunity occurred of making a second attempt to
accomplish the object so dear to him.  In 1745, Prince Charles landed
in the Western Isles, when the Highland Clans rallied to his standard
with many others favourable to his cause.  The laird and his son--both
Laurence--joined Prince Charles at Perth, and incurred the risk of loss
of life and property.  Gask was greatly annoyed that he could not
induce his tenants to enlist in the cause of the Prince, and he had
recourse to a very extreme measure to enforce compliance with his
wishes.  In connection with this we have a very interesting statement
in "The Jacobite Lairds of Gask," being a quotation from Dr. Chambers'
_History of the Rebellion_.  Perhaps no one experienced so much
difficulty in his levies as the good laird of Gask, though he was at
the same time, perhaps, the person of all others the most anxious to
provide men for the service of his beloved Prince.  This enthusiastic
Jacobite was, it seems, so extremely incensed at the resistance he
received from some of his tenants that he actually laid an arrestment
or inhibition upon their corn-fields, in order to see if their interest
would not oblige them to comply with his request.  The case was still
at issue when Charles, in marching from Perth, observed the corn
hanging dead ripe, and eagerly inquired the reason.  He was informed
that Gask had not only prohibited his tenants from cutting their grain,
but would not permit their cattle to be fed upon it, so that these
creatures were absolutely starving.  Shocked at what he heard, he
leaped from the saddle, exclaiming, "This will never do," and began to
gather a quantity of the corn.  Giving this to his horse, he said to
those that were by that he had thus broken Gask's inhibition, and the
farmers might now, upon his authority, proceed to put the produce of
their fields to its proper use.  It was on this occasion that the laird
of Gask had the high honour of receiving and entertaining the Prince at
his house.  The table on which he breakfasted is still in the House of
Gask, and in good preservation.  It bears the inscription--"Charles,
Prince of Wales, breakfasted at this table in the low drawing-room at
Gask on the 11th September, 1745."  The chair on which he then sat was
not allowed to be occupied by any other for many years thereafter.
There are still at Gask House several interesting relics of Prince
Charles, which are carefully preserved--viz., his bonnet, the Royal
brogues, crucifix, and ribbon of the Garter, his spurs, and a lock of
his hair, &c.  The high honour conferred on the Gask family by this
visit from their Prince would tend to inspire them with greater zeal
and ardour in advancing his cause.  They continued faithful and devoted
followers of the Prince in the romantic attempt he made to regain the
throne of his ancestors, and they took part in many of the battles that
were fought to secure that object.  They were both present on the field
of Culloden and fought with great bravery on the fatal day that proved
so disastrous to the Prince's cause, and which must have all but
extinguished the most sanguine hopes of the keenest Jacobite.  After
the Battle of Culloden the Oliphants endured great hardships for six
months while hiding among the hills of Buchan, and had many narrow
escapes, until at last they landed in Sweden on the 10th November, 1746.

But while they were involved in many troubles in those trying times,
there arose one from an unexpected quarter, which caused them great
annoyance.  In 1740, Mr Oliphant, as almost sole heritor, intruded the
Rev. John M'Leish into the parish, in opposition to the wishes of a
large majority of the people.  But he lived deeply to regret the step
he then took, for, on the outbreak of the Rebellion in 1745, the
minister became one of his most bitter enemies.  Some of the colours
taken at the Battle of Prestonpans "fell to Mr Oliphant, which he sent
to his own house at Gask."  Mr M'Leish, knowing this, searched for them
to deliver them to the Duke of Cumberland, but Emily Dewar, a faithful
servant at the house, hid them in the pump, so that the minister could
not find them.  He told the tenants not to pay their rents to a rebel
landlord.  When the Duke of Cumberland, at the request of Lady Gask,
sent out a guard from Perth to protect that lady in those troublous
times, the minister, on hearing this, was highly indignant, and
said--"What right had they to protect a rebel lady?"  He also said that
he would go to Perth next day and speak to the Duke of Cumberland about
this.  He said and did so many things calculated to annoy and irritate
the Gask family, that years after, when hiding on the Continent, Mr
Oliphant wrote saying--"That ingrate man's actings have tried my
patience more than all that has happened to me."  The conduct of the
minister to the laird during this trying period was surely most harsh
and unkind, even though he entertained different political views.  Mr
M'Leish would probably regard, as a national calamity, the restoration
of the Stuarts, knowing well the arbitrary and unconstitutional way
they often acted when in power.  He might also fear that there would be
great danger to the Protestant cause were a Roman Catholic to occupy
the throne of Britain.  But while we sympathise with these sentiments,
and think that Mr M'Leish was quite entitled to hold them, it was
surely ungrateful and unkind to act in the way he often did, not only
to Mr Oliphant, but also to his lady.  The Oliphants were thoroughly
conscientious in holding their principles, and they gave the strongest
proof of this in risking their life and the loss of all their worldly
substance in maintaining them.  At the same time, we are of opinion
that theirs was a mistaken loyalty, and it was well that they did not
succeed in accomplishing their object.  Had they done so, it is
probable that the civil and religious history of our country would have
been different, and Britain might not have attained to the high
position she now occupies among the nations.  But, while holding this
opinion, we cannot fail to admire the inflexible steadfastness with
which they adhered to their principles, and the noble sacrifices they
made in support of them.  It is supposed that, as Lady Nairne would
often hear from her father of the doings of Mr M'Leish, she has a hit
at him in one of her songs--

  "M'Leish's ae daughter o' Claverse-ha' Lee,"

In his latter days, Mr M'Leish was in a very infirm state, and unable
to discharge his ministerial duties.  During the two last years of his
life there was only public worship in Gask Church once a month.  The
days on which divine service was held, and the names of the ministers
who officiated, are still to be seen in our Session records.  During
his long illness it is interesting to read of the tender sympathy which
Mr Oliphant expressed for him, and the Christian spirit of forgiveness
which he manifested towards him.  He wrote from the Continent:--"I'm
sorry to hear that Mr M'Leish has been so much distressed in his
health.  It will perhaps be agreeable to him, and let him know that I
do heartyly forgive him all the injurys he has done me undeservidly....
I shall mention no other particulars of the way he has treated me, but
as I have sincerly forgiven, I pray our commune Father to forgive him,
which I hope he will be earnest to obtain."  There is no record that Mr
M'Leish ever felt or expressed regret at the unkind way in which he had
treated his benefactor.

The Oliphants, after making their escape from this country to the
Continent in 1746, continued to reside in different places there for
seventeen years.  And during that long period they sent home to their
friends in this country a great many letters giving a detailed account
of their movements, and of their meeting with other exiles suffering
with them in the same cause and for maintaining the same principles of
loyalty.  And these papers and letters, preserved in the Gask
charter-room, have been turned to excellent account by the present Mr
Oliphant in the very interesting volume he compiled entitled _The
Jacobite Lairds of Gask_.

As both father and son took part in the Rebellion, the estate of Gask
was forfeited.  But it was re-purchased from the Government in 1753 by
Mr Oliphant of Condie, who was understood to be acting for the Gask
family, at the sum of L17,800.  The estate was, however, larger then
than it is now, including both Cowgask and Williamston.  The two latter
were afterwards sold to pay part of the purchase money for Gask.  It
was at one time proposed to sell the Ross and Newmiln, but Mr Oliphant
objected to this, as he considered these two farms the most improvable
part of the estate.  We are told in _The Jacobite Lairds of Gask_ that
few lost more than the Oliphants by the "Rising" of 1745.  If we reckon
the seven years in which the estate was withheld from them, and the
large sum for which it was bought back from Government, these losses
would come to about L60,000 of our money.

The Oliphants returned to Gask after an absence of seventeen years, in
November, 1763.  As Mr M'Leish died on the 24th March of the same year,
the laird and the minister never met again.

After all the dangers to which they had been exposed on the field of
battle, and all the hardships they had to encounter during the long
period they were in hiding on the Continent, they were at last
permitted to return in safety to their native land, to spend the
evening of their days in their "Ain dear wee Auld House."

The elder Jacobite laird died in 1767, and was gathered to his fathers
in the old Kirk of Gask.  He was succeeded by his only son, the younger
Jacobite laird.  He continued to adhere with the most unshaken
steadfastness to the cause of the Prince, for whom he had done and
suffered so much, and brought up his family in the strictest principles
of loyalty to the King over the water.  When his family read the
newspapers to him after his eyesight became impaired, if the names King
or Queen occurred, they must only indicate this by employing the
initials K. or Q., otherwise he sharply reproved them.

When Prince Charles died in 1788, leaving an only brother, Cardinal
York, many of the Jacobites transferred their allegiance to George
III., and most of the Scotch Episcopalian clergy began to pray for the
reigning family, which they had not hitherto done.  Among these was Mr
Cruickshanks, Episcopal minister at Muthill, who occasionally
officiated at Gask.  When Mr Oliphant heard this, he at once wrote to
Mr Cruickshanks that, as he had now disqualified himself for
officiating at Gask, his services would be henceforth dispensed with.
He sent to him his official robes, and returned some books, the reading
of which he had got from Mr Cruickshanks.  It is said that George III.,
hearing of Gask's unswerving constancy, sent, by the member of
Parliament for Perthshire, his compliments--not the compliments of the
King of England, but of the Elector of Hanover--to Mr Oliphant.  He
died in 1792, and was succeeded by his eldest son Laurence, the third
of that name in succession.  It was this laird who pulled down the
"Auld House" in 1800, except a part of the front wall, which was
allowed to stand, as an interesting ruin, and around which now centre
so many tender and hallowed associations.  He also built the present
large and substantial mansion-house, which occupies a commanding
situation a few yards from the "Auld House."  With the concurrence of
the Presbytery, he removed the Parish Church and manse from the site on
which they had stood for several centuries to another about a mile to
the north.  This must have been in many respects a very desirable
change, both for the laird and the minister.  There were only a few
yards formerly between the mansion-house and the manse, and this
proximity must have at times been rather uncomfortable for both.  A
more eligible site, however, could easily have been got on which to
build the new church and manse, but it possesses the great advantage of
being central for the whole parish.

About the period at which we have now arrived in our narrative there
was emerging into fame a member of the Oliphant family, who was
destined to throw as bright a lustre around that name as any who had
ever borne it--who is styled "the brightest jewel in the Oliphant
crown."  I refer to Carolina Oliphant, who was the third daughter of
the younger Jacobite laird, and who was named after the King over the
water.  She was born in the "Auld House"--which she afterwards
celebrated in song--in the year 1766.  She gave early indication of
superior poetic genius and high musical accomplishments.  Her great aim
was to purify the national songs, and to render them more suitable for
the use of the people.  And she was led to attempt this from an
incident related in her memoirs.  "Driving, during the annual fair,
through a small hamlet in the neighbourhood, she remarked many persons
holding in their hands a small book with a yellow cover.  Desirous of
ascertaining what a publication so popular might contain, she
despatched her footman to purchase a copy.  It proved to be a
collection of songs and ballads, many of which were ill suited for the
hands of youth."  But she also composed a large number of original
songs of great excellence, two of which are of exquisite beauty and
tenderness--"The Land o' the Leal" and "The Auld House."  In early life
Miss C. Oliphant had an intimate friend and companion in Miss Erskine,
daughter of the Episcopal minister at Muthill.  Miss Erskine was
afterwards married to Campbell Colquhoun of Killermont.  Their first
child died when scarcely a year old.  This led Carolina Oliphant to
write "The Land o' the Leal," which she sent with a letter of
condolence to Mrs Colquhoun in her sad bereavement.  But the strictest
secrecy was enjoined as to the writer of it, and for many years
thereafter only a very few knew that this beautiful and touching song
was written by Carolina Oliphant.  At one time it was supposed to have
been written by Burns on his death-bed, and the first line then
was--"I'm wearin' awa', Jean"; but it never appeared in any collection
of his poems.  The songs of Lady Nairne have now become so well known
and so highly appreciated, that it is scarcely necessary to refer to
them at fuller detail here.  She was married to Major Nairne in 1806 in
an upper room of Gask House.  As Major Nairne then held an official
appointment in Edinburgh, they took up their abode in that city, in a
cottage built for them by the old Chief of Strowan, called Carolina
Cottage.  She there employed her pen in composing songs for the
_Scotish Minstrel_, while she enjoyed the intellectual society into
which she had been introduced, and in which she was so well fitted to
shine.  One of her songs, "The Attainted Scottish Nobles," had a great
influence in restoring them to their former titles.  When George IV.
visited Edinburgh in 1822, Major Nairne and other attainted Scottish
Peers were introduced to the King at Holyrood.  And when it came to the
knowledge of the King that Mrs Nairne had written that song it made him
favourable to the introduction of a measure which passed through both
Houses of Parliament, and received the Royal sanction in June, 1824,
for the reversal of the attainders.  Major Nairne was then restored to
his rank in the Peerage as Lord Nairne, and Mrs Nairne became Baroness
Nairne, by which she has ever since been known.

Lord Nairne died in 1830, and was succeeded in the title by his only
son, William, sixth Lord.  Lady Nairne felt deeply her bereavement, but
was sustained under it by the comforts and consolations of religion.
She henceforth devoted all her efforts to the mental culture and moral
and religious training of her only child.  She removed to different
parts of the country for the benefit of his health.  But with all her
maternal care he sickened and died at Brussels in 1837.  By the death
of her son the ties which bound her to the world were in a great
measure severed, and her thoughts and affections were raised to that
higher and holier state on which those who were nearest and dearest to
her had now entered.  She returned to Gask in 1845, and spent the last
two years of her life within a few yards of the spot where she was
born.  She had received early religious impressions when on a visit to
Murthly Castle, and these were greatly deepened by the successive
trials and bereavements wherewith she was visited.  She still continued
to take a great delight in doing good and in contributing to advance
the cause of religion in the world.  Having a sum of money at her
disposal, she consulted Dr. Chalmers as to the most useful and
charitable purposes to which it might be applied.  And it was at this
time that she contributed L300 to Dr. Chalmers' West Port Mission, on
the condition that he should never reveal the name of the donor.  She
was as careful to conceal her good deeds as she had been to conceal the
authorship of the beautiful songs she composed.  She gradually became
weaker and weaker, but as the "outward man decayed the inward man was
renewed day by day."  In her song of the "Auld House" she beautifully
describes how, at the evening of the day,

  "The setting sun, the setting sun,
  How glorious it gae'd doon."

So in the evening of the day of her life her sun went gloriously down
to rise and shine in a fairer land--"The Land o' the Leal."  She was
buried in Gask Chapel, which is erected on the site of the old Parish
Church, and to the building of which she contributed.  A few years ago
a granite cross of beautiful design and workmanship was erected to her
memory by Mr Oliphant in the grounds of Gask.  It bears the appropriate
inscription:--

  CARMINA MORTE CARENT
   CAROLINA OLIPHANT
    BARONESS NAIRNE
   BORN AT GASK, 1766
   DIED AT GASK, 1845

If superior poetical genius, great moral worth, and high Christian
character deserve to be held in remembrance, there are few more
entitled to this honour than Lady Nairne.  Nor could a more appropriate
spot have been chosen by Mr Oliphant on which to rear this tribute of
affectionate regard to the memory of his grand-aunt than in the midst
of that beautiful scenery which she loved so well, and which she has
immortalised in her songs.  Lady Nairne, however, has reared for
herself a monument far more durable than that of brass or granite, in
her beautiful songs, which, as the inscription truly says, will never
die.

I must here make a brief reference to a native of this parish, who,
although born and brought up in humble life, yet attained to great
eminence in his profession.  I refer to Laurence Macdonald, who for
some time wrought as a common mason, but who showed a strong genius for
sculpture.  The first piece of work of that kind that he did was the
family coat-of-arms of Garvock House.  Mrs Oliphant discerning his
rising genius in this direction, took him to the Continent when the
Gask family removed there in 1822, to afford him better opportunity for
the cultivation of this art.  He ultimately settled in Rome, and became
one of the first British sculptors in that city.  He was there known as
Lorenzo de Gasco, from his native parish.  In recognition of the
kindness he had received from the Gask family, he afterwards sent as a
gift to the laird one of his best works, which now occupies a prominent
position in the House of Gask.

James Blair Oliphant died in 1847, and was buried in the Gask Chapel.
"He was the eighteenth in unbroken male succession from the William
Oliphant upon whom Robert Bruce bestowed the lands of Gask."  After his
death the estate was under trustees for nearly twenty years.  And
during this period a litigation was carried on as to the right of
succession.  Mr Oliphant of Condie was confident that he could
establish his claim to be the nearest male heir.  But there was a link
wanting in the chain of evidence, and he failed to realise his sanguine
expectations.  The estate then came into the possession of the late
laird's sister's family, when the eldest son, Mr Kington Oliphant,
succeeded to it nearly thirty years ago.

We have briefly traced the history of the Oliphants during the long
period they have been in possession of Gask estate, and while many of
them have been distinguished in different walks of life, none of them
ever occupied the high position which the present Mr Oliphant does for
literary attainments and scholarly accomplishments.  He has unfolded
the history of his family with all that fulness of information by which
he is characterised in _The Oliphants in Scotland_ and The _Jacobite
Lairds of Gask_.  And I must express my great indebtedness to Mr
Oliphant for the information I have derived from these volumes in
writing this article.  But I am persuaded that Mr Oliphant's literary
fame will rest more on another work he produced some years ago,
entitled _The Old and Middle English_, in one volume, and _The New
English_, in two volumes, than on the other two, interesting as they
are.  In these volumes Mr Oliphant has traced the development of the
English language during the last 600 years.  The most competent
scholars and critics have spoken of these volumes in the highest terms
of commendation, and declared that Mr Oliphant has done, unaided, what
would have required a company of philologists to achieve.  Mr Oliphant,
however, is not only devoted to literary pursuits, but he also takes a
practical interest in the welfare of all in the parish; often visits
them in their dwellings, and has a great pleasure in promoting their
social enjoyments.  In these respects he is cordially supported by Mrs
Oliphant.  And I only express the best wishes of all on the estate that
they may be long spared together to dwell among their own people, and
to maintain the same friendly relations with them in the future as they
have done in the past.




AT THE HEAD OF STRATHEARN

By Rev. JOHN MACPHERSON, Comrie

The head of Strathearn may be said to be the parish of Comrie, because
it comprises some miles of the strath as well as the lake from which
the strath derives its name.  The name Comrie is taken from a Gaelic
word _Comhruith_, signifying confluence or running together of streams,
and is aptly applied in this case.  This one can easily see by standing
for a few moments upon the Bridge of Dalginross.  Looking westward, he
sees the River Ruchill joining the Earn behind the Parish Church; and,
turning to the east, at a distance of a few hundred yards he sees the
Lednock discharging its waters into the same river.  Hence the name
Comrie, probably in the first instance applied to the village built at
the junction of the three rivers, was afterwards given to the parish.
The parish of Comrie, as presently constituted, includes what was
formerly called the parishes of Comrie and Tullichettle.  Hence the
minister of Comrie owns two glebes--the Tullichettle glebe in the
vicinity of the manse, and the Comrie glebe situated on the south bank
of the Earn.  The date at which this union took place is not known, but
in the year 1702 the Commission of Teinds, at the request of the
General Assembly, made additions, _quoad sacra_, from the parishes of
Monzievaird, Strowan, and Muthill, and annexed a portion of the parish
of Comrie lying upon the north side of Loch Earn, also _quoad sacra_ to
the parish of Balquhidder.  This arrangement holds good at the present
day.  The parish _quoad civilia_ extends from the Bridge of Lednock to
Lochearnhead, a distance of thirteen miles, and is about nine miles in
breadth.  It contains some of the grandest mountains of the Grampian
range--Benchonzie, 3048 feet; and Ben Voirlich, 3224 feet above the
level of the sea.  The latter, it is said, can be seen from Perth,
Edinburgh, and Ayrshire.

The beauties of Strathearn have often been pictured by writers of
poetry and prose, but without reaching the head of Strathearn these
beauties can be only partially seen.  The drive from Crieff to
Lochearnhead in a summer day is universally regarded as one of the
finest in all Scotland.  To within a mile or so of St. Fillans the road
resembles one long avenue stretching along the base of the Grampians.
The scenery is unequalled for its mixture of grandeur and beauty.
There you have the rough, rugged hills of the Highlands combined with
the cultivated plains of the Lowlands, and waving woods, affording an
air of warmth and freshness to the landscape.  The great storm of 1893
has, indeed, laid low many of our finest plantations and marred the
beauty of our scenery.  Turleum Wood, which used to wave its shaggy
head so high, is now laid prostrate, and appears to the eye what its
Celtic name implies--_tor lom_, a bare hill.  And yet, as far as
appearance and scenery are concerned, there are few places which can as
well afford to part with some of its trees as the head of Strathearn.
Comrie is best known to the public generally by its earthquakes, and as
a quiet summer resort, with sequestered walks over hills and dales and
along the banks of flowing streams.  But to the botanist, the
geologist, the antiquarian, and the lover of ancient legend and
historic incident there is, besides all this, something to awaken
interest and engage attention.  The number and variety of plants is
very considerable.  Slate is the predominant rock, but there are also
limestone, whin, the old red sandstone, and granite.  At one time there
were two slate quarries wrought on the Aberuchill Hills, but for the
last twenty years they have been closed.  A lime quarry on Lochearnside
in former times supplied the whole district with material for lime, but
carriage, labour, and fuel have become so expensive, that both builders
and farmers find it more economical to get lime ready for use from the
south.  There is granite in Glenlednock, and as the railway has now
been extended to the village from Crieff, it is possible that some day
it may be a source of industry to the inhabitants.  In several places
in the district of which we write there are traces of what are supposed
to be Druidical remains.  One cannot help regretting that the old
Druids should have confined the knowledge of their religion to their
own order, and that they should have left so few traces of their
mystical rites to posterity, except what may be gathered from rude
stones scattered here and there throughout the country.  On the plain
of Tullybannocher, and near the east lodge of Dunira, there are several
standing-stones, which antiquarians believe to be the remains of
Druidical circles.  On the plain of Dalginross, also, near the junction
of the manse road with the public road, there are three large stones,
supposed to be the remains of a Druidical temple.  One of these, about
8 feet in length, stands, or rather leans, at an angle of 45 degrees;
the others are lying flat upon the ground.  One of them, a round, flat
boulder, bears upon its surface cup-marks arranged in irregular
concentric circles.  Was this the sacrificial stone of an ancient
Druid; or are these boulders relics of the glacial period, and were the
marks alluded to caused by the action of the weather?  When we come to
deal with Roman remains we stand upon firmer ground.  On the same plain
of Dalginross, and a short distance to the north of these boulders we
have referred to, is the site of the old Roman Camp, Victoria.  About
the end of last century the outlines of the fortifications seem to have
been quite distinct, but since that time the plough has obliterated
almost every trace of them.  There seem to have been two camps at
Dalginross--a larger and a smaller one, the former capable of holding
10,000 troops.  Here, it has been held by some writers, the great
Battle of Mons Grampius was fought between the Caledonians under
Galgacus and the Romans under Agricola.  This, however, is not
probable.  Seven cities of the ancient world laid claim to Homer's
birth-place.  About the same number of places are pointed to as the
scene of the Battle of Mons Grampius.  Gordon says it was at
Dalginross, Chalmers says it was the Moor of Ardoch, some say it was in
Fife, others at Urie, in Kincardineshire.  Skene, in his _Celtic
Scotland_, places it on or near the Muir of Blair, about the junction
of the River Tay with the Isla.  Mr Hill Burton abandons the task of
determining the site as hopeless.  If we accept the description given
by Tacitus, in so far as it says the battle was fought "_in conspectu
classis_"--that is, "in sight of the fleet," the place could not have
been Dalginross, and for this one reason, that unless the Earn was very
different in the days of Agricola from what it is in our day, the Roman
fleet could not possibly have sailed to a point within sight of
Dalginross.  Judging, however, from some place-names in the
neighbourhood, there is little doubt that Dalginross has been the scene
of some bloody conflict or conflicts during the period of the Roman
occupation of Britain.  The name of the farm adjoining the old Roman
Camp, for example, is Blardhearg, which in Celtic means "the red
battle-field."  To the west, and beyond the River Ruchill, is
Dalrannaich, in Celtic, _Dailranaich_--"the field of mourning or
lamentation"; and a little to the north is Dalchonzie, in Celtic,
_Dailachaonaidh_--"the field of weeping."  To the south of the plain of
Dalginross, and upon the road to Ardoch, there are still traces of the
Roman occupation of Strathearn.  At Blairinroar there must have been a
bloody conflict between the Romans and the Caledonians.  The very name
of the place implies it, for Blairinroar in Celtic is the "field of
violent onset."  There are still to be seen in this neighbourhood huge
slabs of standing-stones, some of them 20 feet in height.  Those upon
the level ground probably mark the graves of distinguished Romans or
Caledonians who fell upon the field of battle; but others, which run in
a line extending north and south, were probably landmarks to guide
messengers on their way from Lindum, the camp at Ardoch, to Victoria,
the camp at Dalginross.

At the west side of the new cemetery, close to the public road, there
is a curious round knoll, which at one time must have been used as a
place for the burial of the dead.  The attention of the writer of this
was drawn to it about twenty years ago.  There were three large slabs
of stone lying upon the ground, which apparently had been at some
former period placed erect by some loving hands to mark the last
resting-place of some departed friend or hero.  By the aid of some of
the Comrie masons the stones were placed in a standing position.
Curious to know what lay beneath the surface, we dug up the earth in
front of the largest slab, and came upon a stone cist placed north and
south, 7 inches long, 1 foot 8 inches broad, and 1 foot 3 inches deep.
The only remains discovered was a thigh-bone, but whether it at one
time formed a part of the leg of a Celt, a Roman, or a Saxon we could
not tell.  An old man who then lived in the village of Comrie told us
that in his young days the same mound was dug up, when an urn filled
with ashes was discovered.  This, perhaps, would indicate that it
formed a place of burial for Romans rather than for Caledonians.  The
spot is called Dunmoid, or "hill of judgment."  Besides the parish
churchyard, there are three old burying-grounds in the parish--Leckin,
on Lochearnside; Dundurn, and Tullichettle.  From an antiquarian point
of view, the most interesting, perhaps, is Tullichettle.  It is
situated in a sequestered spot on a rising ground on the right bank of
the River Ruchill, near the farm-house of Cultabraggan.  The name,
which is Celtic, _Tulachchadail_--"hill of sleep"--well describes the
place, for a more solitary spot could hardly be selected for the repose
of the dead.  Judging from the inscriptions upon the tomb-stones it has
been for long the burying-place of the Macnivens, the Macgreuthers, the
Maccullochs, and other clans.  There is a curious slab over the grave
of the Riddochs.  The following description of it, extracted from the
proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries, has been kindly sent by the
Secretary, Dr. Anderson:--

"It measures 5 feet 6 inches in length and 18 inches in breadth,
tapering slightly towards the lower end.  It bears a sword with
straight guard in the centre of the stone, and the name James Ridoch on
the blade.  In the spaces on either side are a number of trade
emblems--a square, an axe, an adze, a mallet and chisel, a millrind, an
axe-pick of the kind used by millers for dressing the mill-stone, the
coulter of a plough, a hammer and anvil (?), and an auger, indicating
probably the various mechanical aptitudes of the deceased.  The
connection of the family of Reidheuchs or Ridochs with Strathearn began
in 1502, when King James IV.  granted a charter of confirmation of the
lands of Tullychedile, Culturagane, &c., to his familiar servitor and
steward, James Redeheuche, burgess of Stirling.  In 1573, these and
other lands acquired by him were erected into the Barony of
Tullichiddil.  In 1542, James Reidheuch of Tullichiddil is mentioned as
dead, and it is not till 1610 that another James appears in the line of
the Reidheuchs of Tullichiddil.  The probability is that the stone here
figured belongs to the seventeenth century, as it was only then that
the name Reidheuche began to be spelt Ridoche.  Of course, it is
impossible to say whether this is the tomb-stone of the James Ridoche
of 1610, or of a successor; but there seems to be nothing against the
idea of the stone being as old at least as the date thus indicated."


Tullichettle must have been an old parish.  Shortly after the
Reformation, in the year 1572, it was served by John Edmeston,
exhorter, and in 1574 by William Drummond, who had also under his
charge Comrie, Monivaird, Monzie, and Crieff.  The ruins of the church
are still to be seen within the wall of the churchyard, but of the old
manse there is no trace left now.  We have often been asked the
derivation of the word Ruchill, the name of the river, which, rising at
the head of Glenartney, passes the graveyard of Tullichettle and falls
into the Earn at the village of Comrie.  It is compounded of two Gaelic
words--_ruadh_ (red), and _tuill_ (flood).  _Ruadhthuill_, therefore,
is the red flood, and any one who has seen the red turgid waters of the
Ruchill in time of flood will see that the name is significant of the
thing itself.  The word occurs in a shorter form--Ruel, a river in
Argyllshire, which gives its name to the valley through which it
flows--viz., Glendaruel.  In the good old days when our Highland glens
and straths were thickly populated, every hill and dale and crag and
knoll had its name, and every strath and valley had its traditions.
From many of our Highland glens the people are gone, and their
traditions along with them.  Sir Walter Scott, however, has rendered
famous at least one of the glens at the head of Strathearn and
preserved a few of its traditions.  Who ever read that beautiful poem,
"The Lady of the Lake," but knows something of Glenartney, Benvoirlich,
and Uam-Var.  Here the chase, which he sings in the first canto,
begins:--

  "The stag at eve had drank his fill,
  When danced the moon on Monan's rill,
  And deep his midnight lair had made
  In lone Glenartney's hazel shade.
      *      *      *
  Roused from his lair,
  The antler'd monarch of the waste
  Sprang from his heathery couch in haste.
      *      *      *
  With one brave bound the copse he clear'd,
  And, stretching forward free and far,
  Sought the wild heaths of Uam-Var."

Uam-Var, which in Gaelic signifies large cave, is a mountain between
Glenartney and Callander, and takes its name from a cave on the south
side of it, said by tradition to have been inhabited by a giant
centuries ago.  Glenartney was a Royal forest, and a portion of it is
still fenced off for the same purpose.  On an eminence at the head of
the glen stands Glenartney Lodge, belonging to the proprietor, the Earl
of Ancaster.  In the past as in the present the strict preservation of
game seems to have been attended with dangers and difficulties.  Some
people seem to have an uncontrollable liking for hunting and poaching.
In the sixteenth century Glenartney was the scene of a terrible
tragedy.  In the year 1588, John Drummond of Drummond-Ernoch was
forester to King James VI. there.  One day, according to one tradition,
he discovered some of the Clan Macgregor trespassing in the Royal
forest.  He seized them and cropped off their ears.  The Macgregors,
incensed by the punishment inflicted upon their clansmen, vowed
vengeance against Drummond-Ernoch.  They made a raid upon the forest,
seized the forester, and cut off his head, which they carried with them
in a corner of one of their plaids.  "In the full exultation of
vengeance," says Sir Walter Scott in his introduction to the _Legend of
Montrose_, "they stopped at the house of Ardvoirlich and demanded
refreshments, which the lady, a sister of the murdered Drummond-Ernoch
(her husband being absent), was afraid or unwilling to refuse.  She
caused bread and cheese to be placed before them, and gave directions
for more substantial refreshments to be prepared.  While she was absent
with this hospitable intention the barbarians placed the head of her
brother on the table, filling the mouth with bread and cheese, and
bidding him eat, for many a merry meal he had eaten in that house.  The
poor woman, returning and beholding this dreadful sight, shrieked aloud
and fled into the woods, where, as described in the romance, she roamed
a raving maniac, and for some time secreted herself from all living
society.  Some remaining instinctive feeling brought her at length to
steal a glance from a distance at the maidens while they milked the
cows, which being observed, her husband, Ardvoirlich, had her conveyed
back to her home, and detained her there till she gave birth to a
child, of whom she had been pregnant, after which she was observed
gradually to recover her mental faculties."  Leaving Ardvoirlich, the
Macgregors proceeded to Balquhidder, and at a meeting of the clan held
in the church--the chief presiding--they placed their hands
successively upon the dead man's head and swore to defend the author of
the deed.  At one time there was a large population in this glen.  In
1745 the farm of Auchinnar alone had eight tenants.  An interesting
document in possession of the relatives of the M'Greuthers of Meiggar
referring to the Rebellion of 1715 shows the power of the laird in
those days, and the resources of the glen as far as fighting men were
concerned.  It is as follows:--

"William M'Gruther, in Dalclaythick, you are hereby ordered to acquaint
William M'Nivan, in the same town, and Alexander M'Gruther, in
Dalchruwn, to go along with you as officers to command the company of
our men that is to come out of your glen, and all the men are hereby
ordered to obey your command on their highest peril, which you are to
intimate to them, as you will be answerable to us, and this shall be
your warrant.

"Given at Drummond Castle, the fifteenth day of August, one thousand
seven hundred and thirteen years.

"See that none of the men of Auchinnear of whatever rank be absent, as
they will be answerable, and all the men in good order.

"(Signed) DRUMMOND."


M'Gruther and his two neighbours obeyed the summons of the laird of
Drummond, and took charge of the company of Highlanders raised in
Glenartney; but the laird could not save them from the consequence of
their obedience.  When the Rebellion was quelled they were banished to
America and sold as slaves.  The two M'Gruthers managed to get back to
their native country, but were doomed to spend seven long years in
hiding.

The origin of place-names may not be of so much interest to the reader
as it is to the writer of this article, but we cannot resist the
temptation of recording a suggestion made to us years ago as to the
origin of the word Glenartney, by Mr James Ferguson, the present keeper
of the forest, and the worthy successor of old Drummond-Ernoch.  It is
this: _Gleann-ard-an-fheidh_--"the high glen of the deer."   This would
certainly account for the last syllable of the modern name, and would
also accord with the fact of the place being an ancient forest; but we
prefer the derivation _Gleann-ardan_--"the glen of heights," and we
think the last syllable has been added merely to suit the imperfection
of the Saxon's vocal organs.

The mansion-houses of the head of Strathearn and their occupants are of
some historical interest, but, as our space is limited, our reference
to them must be brief, and confined to a few of the oldest.  On the
margin of Loch Earn stands Ardvoirlich House.  The present occupant of
the estate is Colonel John Stewart, who spent the first part of his
life in India, and now resides upon the estate.  With the exception of
the Drummonds, who trace their ancestry back to Maurice, the Hungarian,
who lived about the time of the Norman Conquest, the Stewarts of
Ardvoirlich are the oldest family in the district.  They lay claim not
only to a long ancestral line, but also to Royal blood, through a son
of Murdoch, Duke of Albany, Regent of Scotland, and son of Robert II.
Among the antique curiosities of this family, it is said, there is a
large gem called _clach dhearg_--red stone, seemingly white rock
crystal, bound with four silver bands, which used to be regarded as a
talisman, giving to water into which it is dipped virtue for the cure
of all diseases of cattle.  In recent times the Stewarts have been a
family of soldiers who served in India.  Their burying-place is within
the old Chapel of Dundurn, but the monuments erected to the memory of
members of the family recently deceased are in the Parish Church of
Comrie.  They are all handsome, and a great ornament to the interior of
the Parish Church; but one of them is worthy of special notice on
account of its artistic beauty.  It is that erected by the
Governor-General of India and other dignitaries and friends to
commemorate the death of William Stewart, who, along with his wife and
infant son, was murdered in the Indian Mutiny of 1857.  It is a
cenotaph of pure Carrara marble, with the figure of a Sepoy soldier
with arms reversed on the one side, and a Hindoo in a kneeling posture
on the other.

Dunira House is the seat of the Dundases.  The present proprietor is
Sir Sidney James Dundas, the third baronet of Beechwood and Dunira, who
succeeded his father, Sir David Dundas, Bart., in 1877.  What is the
word Dunira derived from?  Is it like Dundurn, "the hill or fort upon
the Earn"? or is it _Dun aoraidh_, "the hill of worship"?  It is
difficult to say; Gaelic words have been so much corrupted to suit the
tongues of the Saxon.  There is little doubt, however, that in ancient
times the locality was intimately associated with divine worship.  Not
far from the east lodge there are to be seen large standing-stones,
supposed, as already said, to be the remains of an old Druidical
circle.  On the hillside, above Dunira House, there is a place called
Drumnakil, which signifies the "ridge of the chapel"; and farther to
the north-east, near the hill of Dunmore, is Ballochintaggart, "the gap
of the priest."  At Drumnakil there is an old burying-ground, the
grave-stones scarcely discernible among the rank grass; but all trace
of the chapel, or monks' cell, if ever there was one, has disappeared.
Dunira was once the property of Henry Dundas, Viscount Melville and
Baron Dunira.  He was son of Robert Dundas of Arniston, Lord President
of the Court of Session.  He was called to the bar in 1763, and elected
member of Parliament for the County of Edinburgh in 1774, and after
holding several important offices under the Crown, he retired with Pitt
in 1801, and the following year he was raised to the Peerage.  After
his death his Perthshire friends paid a tribute to his memory and worth
by erecting a monument on Dunmore Hill, at Comrie.  It is an obelisk,
72 feet high, built in 1812 of Innergeldie granite.  A better site
could not have been chosen.  From the top of Dunmore Hill there is a
magnificent view of varied landscape.  To the west you have a peep at
Loch Earn, the Aberuchill Hills, and the old white-washed Castle
nestling among its trees; to the south you have the village of Comrie
and the strath, with the Earn and the Ruchill winding their way through
the plain; to the east, Sir David Baird's Monument, the Knock of
Crieff, Turleum, the Ochils, and one of the Lomonds of Fife; looking to
the north, we see Glenlednock stretching far towards Loch Tay, with
Spout Rollo at its head, and guarded on each side by the lofty peaks of
the Grampians.  This, like so many others of our Highland glens, has
suffered much through depopulation during this century.  An old
Glenlednock farmer still living in the parish informs us that in his
recollection there were thirty-six tenants with their cottars, where
there are now five and a few shepherds.  One cannot help admiring the
industry, economy, and thrift of these old Highland farmers, who in
such numbers could live and thrive and pay higher rents to the landlord
than the few who are now in possession of the land.

Aberuchill Castle was for nearly three centuries the seat of the
Campbells of Aberuchill and Kilbryde.  It was originally built in 1602,
but has since been modernised and enlarged.  The Crown granted a
charter of the lands of Aberuchill in 1596 to Colin Campbell, second
son of Sir Colin Campbell of Lawers.  His son James was made a baronet
of Nova Scotia by Charles I. in 1627.  He fell fighting for Charles II.
at the Battle of Worcester in 1651.  Sir Colin, only son of Sir James,
succeeded him.  He was the most distinguished of the family.  Bred to
the law, he rose to the position of Lord of Session with the title of
Lord Aberuchill.  Sir Colin was a Whig and a Presbyterian when the most
of the gentry of Strathearn were either Episcopalians or Popish
Jacobites.  His name is associated with the massacre of Glencoe,
inasmuch as he was a member of the Council that refused the certificate
of the Sheriff-Depute of Argyle that M'Donald of Glencoe had taken the
oath of allegiance to King William, unless they got a warrant to
receive it from the King.  From 1693 to 1702 he represented the County
of Perth in the Scottish Parliament, and died in 1704.  From the
Campbells, the estate passed into the hands of the Drummonds.  It is
now the property of Captain Robert Dewhurst, son of George C. Dewhurst,
Esq., lately deceased.

It would be unpardonable to write anything about Comrie without making
allusion to the earthquakes which have made it famous.  In the
Statistical Account of Scotland, published in the year 1794, the Rev.
Mr M'Diarmid, minister of the parish, gives an account of the first
recorded earthquake in the district.  During the autumn of 1789 loud
noises, unaccompanied by any concussion, were heard by the inhabitants
of Glenlednock; but on the 5th of November of that year they were
alarmed by a loud rumbling noise, accompanied with a severe shock of
earthquake, which was felt over a tract of country of more than twenty
miles in extent.  The Rev. Mr Mackenzie, successor to Mr M'Diarmid,
writing in 1838, in the last Statistical Account, says that "at and
after the time of the last Statistical Account the earthquakes were so
frequent and violent, and accompanied with such noises, as to occasion
great alarm, especially one which occurred on a Sabbath while the
congregation was assembled."  The year 1839, however, was the time of
the great earthquakes.  Writing in 1842 in the last Statistical
Account, the Rev. John Ferguson, minister of Monzievaird, says:--"At
this time they began to be frequently felt, nearly 20 shocks being
occasionally experienced in 24 hours.  The most violent one happened
about ten o'clock on the evening of 23d October, 1839.  The shock
seemed to pass along through the parish of Monzievaird from north-west
to south-east.  For a second or two every house for miles around the
village of Comrie was shaken from top to bottom; and while the motion
was passing away to the eastward it was accompanied by a tremendous
noise like the roar of 100 pieces of ordnance discharged at once and
gradually dying away in the distance.  This earthquake was partially
felt throughout a great part of Scotland, as far as Inverness, Dunbar,
Berwick, and the banks of Loch Awe.  In this neighbourhood it was very
alarming.  Several individuals fainted, and most of the inhabitants of
the village of Comrie spent the whole night in the streets, or in the
churches, which were very properly opened for prayer.  Many stone dykes
were thrown down, walls of houses rent, and chimney-stalks shattered,
the stones being frequently shifted from their places, but no serious
damage was sustained.  The shocks have again diminished both in
frequency and violence since the autumn of 1839."  Another severe shock
occurred in November, 1846, but from that date they have decreased both
in number and intensity.  The cause of these subterranean commotions is
in this as in similar cases a matter of conjecture, but there is good
cause for thankfulness that they have hitherto been attended with no
serious damage to life or property.

The Session records of some parishes in Scotland are of some historical
value, but this is not so with those of Comrie.  Beyond the perpetual
reiteration of cases of discipline and doles to the poor, there is
little to be found in them to throw light upon the Christian life and
work of the parish.  So meagrely kept were these records that until the
year 1829 the Christian name and surname of the Moderator and Clerk
never appear in the minutes--not even the Secession of 1843 is
recorded, though the minister left the church with a great majority of
the congregation to worship upon Tomachessock.  The only exception to
what we have just stated, perhaps, is a minute of Kirk-Session dated
17th November, 1772, recording the honour due to Patrick Campbell, Esq.
of Monzie, then deceased, and the Rev. Robert Menzies, minister of the
parish, for the active and benevolent part they took in the building of
the Dalginross Bridge over the Earn.  The bridge was built in 1756 at a
cost of L230.

The Parish Church was erected in 1805, and holds 1044 sitters.  The
manse was built in 1784, and an addition was made to it in 1822.  A new
church was built in St. Fillans in connection with the Church of
Scotland in 1878, and in March, 1895, it was endowed and erected into a
parish _quoad sacra_ under the old name of Dundurn.  It is curious to
note how the land has been changing hands during the last 180 years.
In 1715, the heritors were the Earl of Perth, Duke of Athole, the
proprietors of Aberuchill, Lawers, Monzie, Cultabraggan, Ardvoirlich,
Comrie, Strowan, Drummond-Ernoch, and Balmacuin.  At present they are
the Earl of Ancaster, Marquis of Breadalbane, and the proprietors of
Ardvoirlich, Dunira, Aberuchill, Strowan, Lawers, Dalchonzie, and
Drumearn.




ON THE BANKS OF THE DEVON

By Rev. E. B. SPEIRS, B.D., Glendevon

Seeing that "St. Serf's Bridge" still spans the Devon at one part
within the parish of Glendevon, and that the good Saint did not himself
build the bridge, but, following a common practice, baptised and made
Christian what was a Pagan structure, reared in this instance by the
Imperial legionaries, it might be permissible for the local historian
to go back at least to the times of the Roman occupation.  After
describing the camp and the Roman road which still exist in the mind's
eye of the antiquaries, he might then go on to tell of holy St.
Servan's feats in the way of detecting sheep-stealers by making them,
like Speed under the influence of Proteus' reasoning, cry "Baa," or
relate some such pretty human story as that of how he turned water into
wine for the sake of a sick monk, or unfold the thrilling tale of how
he fought the Dovan dragon, as Wyntoun sings, or at least says:--

  "In Dovyn of devotyoune
  And prayere, he slew a fell Dragoune,
  Quhare he was slayne, that place wes ay
  The Dragownys Den cald to this day."[1]

The more exact methods of writing history now in vogue, however, almost
compel the chronicler to begin with the first certain mention of
Glendevon in accredited records, and that belongs to the year 1521.  On
the eleventh of July of that year an interesting ceremony was gone
through down at Cambuskenneth, on the banks of the Forth.  Abbot Mylne,
a man both of culture and character, who to a genuine love of letters
added a love of art and architecture, and who was ultimately the first
President of the Court of Session, had re-built the great altar, the
chapter-house, and part of the cloister of his Abbey, and had laid out
two new cemeteries.  In order to signalise these notable additions and
restorations he invited the Bishop of Dunblane to conduct a
consecration and dedication service.  The Bishop was directly assisted
in this solemn function by three of his principal clergy--his
archdeacon, George Newton; John Chesholme, prebendary of Kippane; and
"Jacobus Wilson, prebandarius de Glendowane."  John Tulydaf, warder of
the Minorites of "Striueling" (Stirling), preached on the efficacy of
dedication after the celebration of the Mass, and amongst those present
were the "noble and powerful" Lord John Erskin, Jacobus Haldene of
Glenegges (Gleneagles), Knight, and various others of the local clergy,
nobility, and gentry, together with a large concourse of people from
the surrounding district.  The official account of what took place on
this high day when Glendowane, Glendovan, Glenduen, or Glendevon, first
emerges into the light of history, is duly signed by Jacobus Blakwood,
presbyter of the Diocese of Dunblane, public notary by apostolic
authority, who was on the spot and saw everything properly done.[2] The
name of Prebendary Wilson occurs in several documents both before and
after this, all of which have reference to matters connected either
with Cambuskenneth or Dunblane.  He gets prominent mention in a paper
dated from Cambuskenneth, June, 1530, in which he is styled "Canonicus
Dunblanensis," heading a list of "venerable and discreet" gentlemen,
including Alanus Balward, vicar of Kalender, and Andreas Sym, vicar of
Cumry, but we cannot trace him further down than March of the following
year.  It is clear from this that Glendevon was attached to the "Kirk
of Dunblane," and that the Parish Church was served from there, not, it
is to be hoped, in the slovenly fashion characteristic of these times,
when the stipend was too often fought for by different teind hunters in
the shape of the bishop of the diocese and the abbot of some
neighbouring monastery, a state of things to which Prebendary Wilson
himself bears witness.  There is something almost pathetic in the
thought that less than forty years after that dedication service in
which the Prebendary of Glendevon took part, these additions were to be
pulled to pieces by the savage mob which wrecked, amongst other
religious houses, the stately monastery on the Links of the Forth; and
it is just possible that the great destroyer--spiritually at least--of
what Canon Wilson helped to build up was in his parish in 1556.  At any
rate a spot is still pointed out on the glebe where, according to
tradition, John Knox preached.  We know from his own statement[3] that
he spent some time in the early part of the summer of that year at
Castle Campbell--which is only some four or five miles distant--"whare
he taught certane dayis"; so it is at least not utterly improbable that
he may have come through Glenquey past the Maiden's Well, and visited a
possible congregation in Glendovan, exhorting them to "prayaris, to
reading of the Scriptures, and mutuall conference unto such tyme as God
should give unto them grettar libertie."[4]

The second direct mention of Glendevon in public records is of a
somewhat unsavoury order, and affords a rather curious illustration of
the beliefs of the people of Scotland in the seventeenth century.  John
Brughe, one of the most notorious necromancers and wizards of his day,
was tried at Edinburgh on November 24th, 1643, for practising sorcery
and other unholy arts, and amongst the charges brought against him was
that he had met Satan thrice "in the kirkyeard of Glendovan at quhilkis
tymes ther was taine up thrie severall dead corps, ane of thame being
of ane servand man named Johne Chrystiesone; the uther corps, tane up
at the Kirk of Mukhart, the flesch of the quhilk corps was put above
the byre and stable-dure headis" of certain individuals in order to
destroy their cattle.[5] John's object in collecting Glendovan "muild"
was, according to this indictment, not a beneficent one; but it is to
be remembered to his credit that he used the powdered bones of the dead
and other materials, notably "ane inchantit stane of the bignes of a
dow egg,"[6] for the healing of man and beast, and we are told that for
curing a number of oxen afflicted with the murrain by administering a
pint of one of his patent medicines, accompanied with the invocation,
"God put thame in their awin place," repeated thrice, he got "ellevin
od schillings, with twa peckis of meill and thrie tailyeis of beiff."
In those days, when not only human nature but Nature herself lay under
the black shadow of one of the foulest of superstitions, the fair banks
of the Devon were much frequented by the devil, who had whole "covins"
of witches and wizards in his service, so that it is not surprising to
hear that John was frequently in his company.  "That John Brughe had
been with the devil at the Rumbling Brigs and elsewhere was affirmed by
Katherine Mitchell to be of veritie, at the tyme of hir criminall
tryell at Culrose, and immediately befoir hir executione, the said John
Brughe being confronted with hir at the tyme."[7]  We can claim this
renowned empiric not only for the Glendevon district, but in a sense
for the Presbytery, since it was alleged against him that he had got
his uncanny knowledge "from a wedow woman, named Neane Nikclerith, of
threescoir years of age, quha wis sister dochter to Nik Neveding, that
notorious infamous witche in Monzie, quha for her sorcerie and
witchecraft was brunt fourscoir of yeir since or thereby."  Spite of
all he had done for the "bestiall," and all the testimonials he had
from patients whom he had cured of their "seiknessis" by enchanted
drinks, Glendovan and Mukhart mould, and sympathetic conjuring of
"sarkis, coller bodies, beltis, and utheris pertaining als weill to men
as to wemen," John was found guilty and condemned to be strangled and
burned.  These were the real Dark Ages, when intimations were
frequently made from the Glendevon and other pulpits that the minister
and session would be glad to receive information against suspected
witches, and when the common pricker who pricked poor witches "with
lang preins of thrie inches" to discover the marks of Satan, was
specially busy in the vale of Devon, where in a record year no less
than sixteen of the local "covin" were burned.  In the Roll of
Fugitives from kirk discipline drawn up by the Synod of Perth and
Stirling in 1649, Glendevon was represented by a warlock, "Mart.
Kennard, suspect of witchcraft," but of his fate we know nothing.  In
this connection it may be remarked that though the "Kirkyeard of
Glendovan," immortalised by John Brughe's ghoulish visit, contains no
epitaphs, humorous or otherwise, it possesses a "Plague Stone," a large
rough slab, under which lie those who died of what is vaguely called
the Plague (1645?), and the lifting of which was duly guarded against
by a solemn curse pronounced over it on whoever would dare to remove
it, for two hundred years ago a curse could break bones or "ryve the
saull out of ye."

Two years after John Brughe suffered at Edinburgh, the quiet of the
usually peaceful valley of the Devon was broken by the clatter of
cavalry and the skirling of the pipes, as Montrose, having in his usual
brilliant fashion outwitted Baillie, marched through, burning and
plundering as he passed, leaving Muckhart, Dollar, and, above all,
Castle Campbell, the lowland hold of the detested Argyles, heaps of
blackened ruins, a march which was to end in the bloody Battle of
Kilsyth, that "braw day" when, as the Highlander with grim humour
remarked, "at every stroke I gave with my broadsword I cut an ell o'
tamn'd Covenanting breeks."  When Chambers says[8] that "the
Covenanting army marched close upon the track of Montrose _down
Glendevon_, at the distance of about a day's march behind," he, of
course, means down the Devon valley, and not down Glendevon proper,
since it is pretty certain that Montrose, in making his descent from
the north, entered the low country not by Gleneagles, but by the
south-east end of the Ochils.  Glendevon Castle--originally built, it
is supposed, by the Crawfords[9] in the sixteenth century--thus escaped
the fate which befel Castle Campbell[10] and Menstrie House, and other
places in the Devon and Ochil district at this time, when the fierce
strife was not merely between cavaliers and Covenanters, but quite as
much, and specially during the Devon valley march, between the Ogilvies
and Macleans on the one hand, and the Campbells and their friends on
the other.  It is, however, impossible, to say whether the Keep, which
has been in the possession of the Rutherford family since 1766, was
actually at this time in the hands of the Crawfords, and, indeed, the
traditions regarding its ownership are so vague--one of them assigning
it to the Douglases--that, in the absence of authentic records, it is
impossible to make any really satisfactory statement regarding its
origin and history.

{195}

Some years later the parish of Glendevon came prominently before the
public in connection with the deposition and excommunication of its
doughty true-blue Presbyterian minister, the Rev. William Spence, M.A.,
though it was not till he had been removed from his living that the
really romantic part of his career began.  He had graduated at St.
Andrews in 1654, and after some years of schoolmastering[11] and
probationership he was, in 1664, duly admitted on the new Black
Prelatic conditions to the parish of Glendevon.  Under the mild rule of
Bishops Leighton and Ramsay he lived quietly there for fourteen years.
His name occasionally appears on the Synod and Presbytery Committees
during this period, and he seems to have done his best to get the
brethren stirred up to "better the provision of Glendovan."  The Bishop
and Synod did actually order a "perambulation" to be made to see if
anything could be annexed from the adjacent parishes, especially
"Denying and Fossoquhy," so that, as Mr Spence put it, "ane
augmentation proportionablie might {196} be made to him out of the
vacant teindes of the said paroches in respect of the poornes and
meannes of his stipend for the present."[12]  The perambulation, beyond
affording a pleasant outing to the visitors in the long May days, does
not seem to have had any practical result.  Mr Spence had, however,
been thinking of higher things than teinds and augmentation, and had
been looking far beyond the bounds of his own parish, and, spite of the
extreme gentleness of the somewhat mongrel Prelatic-Presbyterian rule
under which he was, and the general atmosphere of conformity which he
breathed, he began to have serious searchings of heart about the state
of the "poor afflicted" Church.  Accordingly, towards the end of 1678
he took the bold step of presenting a paper[13] to the Presbytery of
Auchterarder drawing the attention of the Court to the sundry gross
corruptions under which the Church was suffering and to the horrid
defection from its first purity, obvious to {197} every man who did not
wilfully shut his eyes.  The evils against which he asked the Court to
testify were doctrinal, liturgical, disciplinary, moral, and what may
be called ecclesiastical.  He includes in the sweep of his very
impartial denunciation not only the pernicious tenets of Pelagianism,
Arminianism, Latitudinarianism, and Popish errors, but "the dotage of
Quakers and other enthusiasts," human inventions in worship, and the
private essays made to introduce or impose an unwarrantable liturgie of
unsound and useless form, the loose spirit of atheism, profaneness, and
ungodliness reigning in all corners of the kingdom, and the dreadful
differences that prevailed, and calls for a return to sound doctrine,
the practice of "the gude Kirk primitif," the exercise of a strict
discipline, and the ways of peace.  At the special meeting of
Presbytery called to consider his paper he asked to have it back,
apparently because he now thought its terms were not strong enough, and
meanwhile a committee was appointed not to deal but to confer with him
"until he should get full satisfaction of everything that was his
scruple."  He refused, however, to meet the Committee or attend the
Presbytery, on the ground that he had {198} not "clearness" as to the
authority and constitution of a semi-prelatic Court.  The Bishop and
Presbytery thereupon suspended him, and he was summoned before the
Synod in April, 1679, but did not attend, on account of "ane aguish
distemper which had seized on him."  A Synodal Committee with full
powers was then appointed, before which he compeared in May, but spite
of earnest entreaties of the Bishop he would withdraw nothing, and even
added that he did not think the present Church government agreeable to
Scriptural rules--a view shared by some of the Episcopalian bishops
themselves.  The Bishop and Committee recorded their opinion that the
paper was contrived and adhered to for advancing some private interest
against the unity and peace of the Church, and rather unfairly
insinuated that Mr Spence was the more hardened therein by the late
execrable murder of the Bishop of St. Andrews and the expectation of a
Revolution to follow thereupon, and unanimously resolved that this
unruly and unreasonable member be deposed.  Mr Spence was quite
prepared for this, and, "with some signs of choler in his countenance,"
handed a second paper to the Bishop, which turned out to {199} be a
protest against the sentence of the "pretended" Bishop and Synod of
Dunblane passed on him.  He was asked to retire for a little till they
should consult, but he scornfully replied that he did not own their
jurisdiction, and was making for the church-door when the Bishop
ordered the beadle to lay hold of him, and carry him to his house, and
desire the Baillie to keep him safely until he should find caution to
answer before a competent judicatory.  This was Mr Spence's first taste
of imprisonment, of which he was to have a very large supply, of very
different quality, too, later on.  The good Bishop on his own
responsibility sent three of the brethren that night to reason with
him, but Mr Spence would not yield, and was let out on bail.  He
appeared at the next meeting of Synod, but, spite of the threat of
excommunication, stuck to his guns and argued against his treatment on
technical grounds, and on the following day, when, after being duly
cited, he neither compeared nor pled "ane aguish distemper," the Bishop
and Synod charged the Presbytery of Auchterarder to proceed with the
excommunication, which after some bungling they did, and finally the
superior Court ordered the {200} intimation of the excommunication to
be read from every pulpit in the Diocese on the first Sabbath of
January, 1681, but no attempt was made to detain the unruly member, and
the door of grace was left open to the very last, quite remarkable
leniency when it is remembered that 1680 was the year of the Sanquhar
Declaration and Airds Moss, and that the peroration of Mr Spence's
protest would have done credit to Cuddy Headrigg's mother.  "For these
reasons specially, and many others I need not mention now, I, the said
William Spence, protest against the sentence aforesaid, and disown the
same, seeing the said inflicters have hereby proclaimed themselves to
be the patrones and abettors of all the said corruptions, supplanters
of the Gospel faction for Anti-christ, promoters of the powers of
darkness, enemies to the kingdom of Jesus Christ, and such from whom
all good Christians ought to separate because of their maintaining and
defending soul-murdering heresies, and in persecuting with the utmost
violence and rigour any man who darr open his mouth for the truth of
Christ.  (_Sic Subscribitur_), Mr William Spence."[14]

{201}

Mr Spence as yet was only an ecclesiastical rebel, and instead of going
over to the extreme Covenanters, made his way to Holland, where he
joined the colony of Scotch refugees.  Ultimately he attached himself
to the Earl of Argyle as a kind of secretary, and conducted part of the
correspondence between the Earl and the English plotters.  He was in
London in 1683, apparently on the Earl's business, when he was arrested
and imprisoned for some months, but as he could not be efficiently
examined in England, where torture was not legal, he was finally sent
down to Scotland along with Carstares and other suspects in His
Majesty's "Kitchin Yaucht," which did not go at a royal pace, for the
journey to Leith took thirteen days.  They arrived late at night on
November 14th, having left London on the 1st, and were taken straight
to the Tolbooth.[15]  A week after, orders came from London that Mr
Spence should be put to the torture, but for some reason or other he
was left alone till the April of the following year, being evidently in
irons all the time, his close connection with Argyle rendering his
imprisonment {202} extra rigorous.[16]  He was taken out of irons on
the 25th of that month, but it was not till the 24th of July that he
was ordered to appear before the Council and required to take an oath
to answer all the questions put to him.  He refused and protested, and
was tortured in the boot, but, spite of the awful agony, remained
"obstinate and disingenuous," whereupon the Privy Council "resolved to
use all methods necessary to bring the said Mr William Spence to a true
and ingenuous confession, and for expiscating the truth in so important
a matter, do recommend to General Dalziel forthwith to call for the
said Mr William Spence from the Magistrates of Edinburgh, and to cause
such of His Majesty's forces, officers, and soldiers, as shall be found
most trusty, to watch the said Mr William Spence by turns, and not to
suffer him to sleep by night or by day, and for that end to use all
effectual means for keeping him awake."[17] The "effectual means" were
"pricking,"[18] and the intention was to induce raving, so that in his
{203} delirium the brave prisoner might perhaps reveal his secrets.
The torture was continued for eight or nine nights, but Mr Spence did
not rave, and tired his tormentors out.  It was next resolved to try
the "thumbkins" on him, and, indeed, Spence seems to have been one of
the first regular prisoners to suffer this new Muscovy torture,[19] for
the Act of Council authorising the use of "the new invention and engine
called the thumbkins" was passed only a fortnight before; but the
sanguine expectations of the Lords were not fulfilled in the present
case, for though he sank under the agonising torment, he would not
yield.  Ten days later he was again threatened with the boot, and
having meanwhile understood from his friends that the Government
practically knew already all he could tell them, he promised to make a
free and ingenuous confession on certain conditions--namely, that no
new questions should be put to him, that he should not be obliged to be
a witness against any person, and that he himself should be pardoned.
Unfortunately, by a sheer accident in disclosing the meaning of some of
the ciphers used in Argyle's correspondence, he put the Council {204}
on the track of the cipher[20] which expressed the name of his
fellow-prisoner, the famous Carstares, who, however, does not in any
way blame Mr Spence for what happened.  He was sent back to prison,
strict orders being given that he was not to be permitted to see
Carstares, and when the Council adjourned for the holidays on September
13th, he was removed to Dumbarton Castle, and granted liberty within
the walls.  Whether he escaped, or was allowed to go out of the
country, we cannot tell, but it is clear at any rate that he rejoined
his old master in Holland, and the next we hear of him is that he was
one of those who accompanied Argyle when he made his disastrous descent
on Scotland in the spring of 1685.  When the little fleet arrived off
Kirkwall Mr Spence must needs go ashore to visit his uncle who lived
there, along with one of the Earl's scouts.  "Both," says Wodrow,[21]
"were discovered and catched by the old bishop there.  The Earl was
peremptorily resolved to recover the two gentlemen, and ordered Sir
Patrick Hume with a party of Fusileers to attack the town"; but the
captains were obdurate {205} and nervous, and gave the Earl time only
to seize seven islanders and a vessel "lying ther with meall and
money," when the ships sailed away, leaving the unfortunate secretary
to his fate.[22]  He was sent down to Edinburgh,[23] indicted for
treason, and remitted in due form to the Assizes, tried, and found
guilty, and we seem at last to be near his end when we read that the
Lords ordained Mr William Spence to be taken to the Cross of Edinburgh
on Wednesday next, July 22nd, and there to be hanged.  Before that day
arrived, however, he got a reprieve, and on August 17th he was allowed
to remove to a chamber in Edinburgh because of sickness--quite
unaccountable leniency at a time when the authorities did not scruple
to hang dying men in their night-shirts.  The Magistrates were made
responsible for his safe keeping, and he undertook to re-enter the
prison on the first of September.  His reprieve was now continued till
{206} November 1st, and the last we hear of him was that in a letter
from the King, dated October 14th, orders were given that he was to be
kept a close prisoner.  His master had been executed on June 30th, and
had testified before his death that Mr William Spence had been to him a
faithful friend and servant.  It is impossible to say what became of
him between this time and the Revolution, and unless he succeeded in
escaping, it is highly probable that he remained in prison till the
general clearance made by the alarmed authorities on the eve of that
event.  All we know for certain is that the General Assembly of 1690,
amongst other items of business, declared his deposition null and void,
and restored him to his old parish, the minister, Alexander Meldrum,
having been deposed shortly before for not reading the Proclamation of
the Estates, and not praying for their Majesties William and Mary.  He
remained in it only a few months, and in the autumn of 1691 he was
translated to Fossoway, where he ended his days in peace in 1715,[24]
at the age of 80, a clear proof {207} that he was a man of iron
constitution as well as of iron will and iron convictions.

We have to go forward something like a hundred years before the parish
or its fair stream comes again into notice, though probably in the
interval occurred the summary act of justice commemorated by the
Glendevon "Gallows Knowe," on which some of the last Highland reivers
were hung, and also the tragic event at "Paton's Fauld," a spot a short
distance from the old drove road opposite the "Court Knowe," where two
local gipsy families effectively settled their quarrel by practically
annihilating each other.[25]  It was in August, 1787, that Burns first
made acquaintance with the Devon, which he has celebrated in three of
his poems, though it is evident that both on his flying visit to
Harvieston and during the longer stay he made in October of the same
year he was more pleased with the human flowers that bloomed on its
banks than with the awesome grandeur of the Rumbling Brig, and that
Peggy Chalmers and Charlotte Hamilton were more intimately associated
with his fond memories of the Devon valley than Caudron Linn and the
Deil's Mill.  Although the ladies at Harvieston were somewhat
disappointed[26] that the more prominent local glories did not inspire
the poet to an outburst, it is clear that the subtle softness of the
Devon scenery made a deep impression on Burns, if the more aggressive
beauty of its waterfalls and gorges left him cold.  You feel this in
all he has written about it, and it is significant that in one of his
last songs, composed when he was down in body, mind, and estate, his
thoughts went back to the "crystal Devon, winding Devon," whose music
seems to have got into his verse, and to the happy days he had spent on
its "romantic banks" and amidst its "wild sequestered shades."  It may
be noted here that the "Holy Fair" was continued in Glendevon long
after Burns' famous attack, and that down to 1835 the minister of the
parish received an annual grant of five, and sometimes ten shillings,
for grass destroyed at the Sacrament; while a handy parishioner also
drew five shillings per annum for putting up the Communion tent on the
glebe, and a little extra now and then for making a road to it.[27]  It
is impossible to say if Burns when at Harvieston was ever actually in
Glendevon, but about thirty years later the home of the Taits, which
the poet found so pleasant, is brought into close connection with the
parish owing to an incident which had its own share in giving to the
Church of England one of its wisest, if not one of its greatest,
primates.  It was in Glendevon House that young Archibald Campbell
Tait, according to his own statement, which was found in his desk after
his death, written on a sheet of foolscap, had an experience which he
never forgot.  His words are--"I had ridden over with my brother
Crawfurd from Harvieston to Glendevon to visit old Miss Rutherford, and
stayed the night in her house.  I distinctly remember in the middle of
the night awaking with a deep impression on my mind of the reality and
nearness of the world unseen, _such as through God's mercy has never
left me_."[28] And with this fragment of spiritual history our local
record comes to a close.  If the parish of Glendevon, nestling, like
Burns' Peggy, "where braving angry winter's storm the lofty Ochils
rise," and its clear winding river, occupy but a lowly place in
Scottish story, they have something better even than archaeological
treasures and stirring memories--the abiding presence of that spirit of
beauty, which is above all change, and which ever haunts

        "The green valleys
  Where Devon, sweet Devon, meandering flows."



[1] Much of the legendary history of the Devon is given in the
extraordinary poem "Glenochel," by Mr James Kennedy.

[2] See _Registrum Monasterii S. Marie De Cambuskenneth_, A.D.
1147-1535.  Edinburgi: 1872; p. 122.

[3] _History of the Reformation_, Vol. I., p. 233.

[4] The parish was served by readers from 1568 to 1586, when the reader
Symon Pawtoun was presented to the living, and, curiously enough, his
successor, A. Marschell, after being minister for a year, was forced by
the Presbytery to accept the lower position.

[5] See _The Darker Superstitions of Scotland_.  By John Graham
Dalyell.  Glasgow: 1835; p. 579.

[6] Mr Wood Martin in his learned work, _Pagan Ireland_ (London: 1895);
describes similar usages still prevailing in Ireland.

[7] _Dalyell_, p. 671.

[8] _History of the Rebellions in Scotland_.  By Robert Chambers.  Vol.
II., p. 87.

[9] _Statistical Account of 1794_, p. 234.

[10] _Memoirs of the Marquis of Montrose_.  By M. Napier. Vol. II., p.
537.

[11] He was schoolmaster at Abernethy, and subsequently married the
daughter of the parish minister.  She died in 1708 at the age of 80.

[12] See _Register of the Diocesan Synod of Dunblane_.  Edited by John
Wilson, D.D.  Edinburgh: 1877; page 91.

Before the passing of the Act of 1810 for augmenting parochial stipends
in Scotland, the stipend was L21 17s 11d, the smallest in Scotland.  50
Geo. III., cap. 84.

[13] _Diocesan Register_, p. 251.

[14] _Diocesan Register_, p. 150.

[15] _Historical Selections_.  _From the MSS. of Sir John Lauder of
Fountainhall_.  Vol. I., p. 138.

[16] Wodrow's _History of The Sufferings of The Church of Scotland_.
II., p. 386.

[17] Wodrow II., p. 386.

[18] Graham Dunlop MSS., quoted in Story's _Carstares_, p. 80.

[19] See Fountainhall, p. 138.

[20] Story's _Carstares_, p. 82.

[21] History, II., p. 531.

[22] Fountainhall, p. 164.

[23] That his spirit was in no way cowed is obvious from the report of
what he said and did when he was brought before the Privy Council and
informed that "Argile was tane," and urged to tell everything.  "He
laugh't at them, and with a very obstinate and unbelieving carriage
said--'If ye have the principall, what neids ye ask these questions at
me.'"--Fountainhall, p. 187.

[24] _Fasti Ecclesia Scoticanae_.  By Hew Scott, D.D.  Vol. II., pp.
766-768.

[25] The ecclesiastical quarrel which began in 1765 when Mr Patrick
Crichton was presented to the living, went on for several years, and
only ended when the presentee, seeing that a peaceable settlement was
impossible, retired.

[26] Chambers' _Life of Burns_, II., 144.

[27] Glendevon Session Records.

[28] _Life of Archibald Campbell Tait_.  By R. T. Davidson, D.D., and
W. Bentham, D.D.  2 Vols.  London: 1891.




BY THE WELL OF ST. FILLAN

By Rev. THOMAS ARMSTRONG, Dundurn

  "Harp of the North! that mouldering long hast hung
    On the witch-elm that shades Saint Fillan's spring."
            --_Lady of the Lake_.


Any one who has visited the scene hallowed in tradition as the sojourn
of St. Fillan, can understand how the genius of Scott should have
traced to Fillan's spring that draught of inspiration which conceived
such a splendid poem as the "Lady of the Lake"; for it is here that the
scenery of Upper Strathearn reaches its climax of beauty and grandeur.

Take St. Fillan's Hill as the point of vantage, and the view is most
entrancing.  Looking towards Comrie and Crieff, we have at our feet the
richest and most beautifully wooded part of Strathearn--the valley
interspersed in the most picturesque fashion, with knolls richly clad
with larch, oak, or hazel; while here and there the gleam of the River
Earn betrays her course, where she has emerged from sombre wood, or
deep and rocky gorge.  In spring-time the eye is delighted and
refreshed with the varieties of green--from the deep and sombre shade
of the Scotch pine and the almost yellow and brown of the young oak to
the exquisite freshness and tender beauty of the larch.  In autumn it
is one blaze of colour.  At our feet an avenue of beeches glowing red;
everywhere masses of oak of russet brown--the rich and varied tints of
the bracken contributing their share to the similitude of a glorious
sunset; and the whole picture is rendered complete to the eye by being
set in that massive rocky framework, known as the Aberuchill range,
whose stern and rugged sides add to the feeling of the picturesque and
beautiful the sense of the sublime.

Looking westward, we have within our immediate view a contrast in the
form of a fine piece of pastoral scenery--green fields with cattle or
sheep grazing, ploughed land and cornfield, farm-steading, and all that
suggests the peaceful but laborious life of the hardy sons of toil.

Almost at our feet, in striking solitude, we discern the chapel and
burying-ground of Dundurn.  The peacefulness of the place, and the
solemn grandeur of the mountains which soar above, and seem as if
placed there to safeguard the seclusion, are all in harmony.

From the point of view already taken, that noble Ben, called Biron,
forces itself upon our admiration--a mountain with what we might call
character--not of any common order--not beaten into any shape by the
ruthless elements, but with many determined points, which have survived
the war with winds and frosts and rains--an old veteran, who, in spite
of the scars where the shadows rest, has a look of triumph about him,
especially when his peaks at evening catch the setting rays of the sun,
or peer through a surrounding mist.

Although we are not at any great altitude on the top of St. Fillan's
Hill, we are yet high enough to get a glimpse of that gem of Highland
lochs--Loch Earn, set literally at the feet of the hills, its waters
murmuring a never ceasing song, as if happy with their near presence,
having wooed and kissed their steep and rugged sides into silver
strands and gently curving bays from end to end; and, indeed, the very
woods, as if drawn by this music and this wooing, have come to the very
water's edge to bathe and to drink, and to watch their graceful forms
mirrored in the bosom of the loch.

I need no apology for thus dwelling upon the romantic scenery of the
place, for if, in these matter-of-fact times, the fame and reputed
virtue of the Well of St. Fillans have departed, and the days of
pilgrimage to its source are over, still the pure air, and perfect
peace, and wild and romantic surroundings remain, to minister their
undoubted healing powers to wearied minds and jaded bodies.

In writing about the Well of St. Fillans and other places of
antiquarian interest in this neighbourhood, it almost goes without
saying that much must be taken on trust.  People are prone to believe
that the dirty pool of stagnant water which still remains in the driest
summer on the top of St. Fillan's Hill is the famous spring to which
pilgrims at one time resorted.  Any one who examines it will not fail
to observe that it has all the appearance of an artificially built
well, and must have been kept in order and preservation for a purpose.
Tradition confirms the belief that this was at one time the well, but
not always.  The Rev. Mr M'Diarmid, minister of the parish of Comrie
about the beginning of this century, gives us the following account of
it:--


"This spring, tradition reports, reared its head on the top of Dun
Fholain (Fillan's Hill) for a long time, doing much good, but in
disgust (probably at the Reformation) it removed suddenly to the foot
of a rock, a quarter of a mile to the southward, where it still
remains, humbled, but not forsaken.  It is still visited by
valetudinary people, especially on the 1st of May and the 1st of
August.  No fewer than seventy persons visited it in May and August,
1791.  The invalids, whether men, women, or children, walk or are
carried round the well three times in a direction Deishal--that is from
east to west, according to the course of the sun.  They also drink of
the water and bathe in it.  These operations are accounted a certain
remedy for various diseases.  They are particularly efficacious for
curing barrenness, on which account it is frequently visited by those
who are very desirous of offspring.  All the invalids throw a white
stone on the Saint's cairn, and leave behind them as tokens of their
gratitude and confidence some rags of linen or woollen cloth.  The rock
on the summit of the hill formed of itself a chair for the Saint, which
still remains.  Those who complain of rheumatism in the back must
ascend the hill, sit in this chair, then lie down on their back, and be
pulled down by the legs to the bottom of the hill.  This operation is
still performed, and reckoned very efficacious.  At the foot of the
hill there is a basin made by the Saint on the top of a large stone,
which seldom wants water even in the greatest drought, and all who are
distressed with sore eyes must wash them three times with this water."


Of such holy wells, it may be interesting to learn that there were,
previous to the Reformation, a great number throughout Scotland.[1]
They were usually called after saints, because of the cells of saints
being fixed near a spring.  Hence these wells are usually in the
vicinity of old ecclesiastical sites, and in many cases where the wells
alone remain, they mark the place of those sites.

At these wells all diseases were supposed to be within the reach of
cure.  A student of the development theory might almost find traces of
the growth of the specialist in them, for some of them acquired a fame
for the cure of special diseases.  The Well of St. Fillan, at
Strathfillan, _e.g._, was famous for the cure of insanity; the Well of
St. Fillan, about which I write, as has already been noticed, was much
resorted to for the cure of barrenness; and if we transfer the virtue
of the waters to the credit of the Saint under whose auspices a cure
was wrought, we might say of St. Servan that he was considered a great
oculist; of St. Anthony, that he was an eminent specialist in the
treatment of children's diseases; for to the Well of St. Servan the
blind were led, to the Well of St. Anthony, sickly and "backgane
bairns."  In accounting for the popularity of these wells, the
philosopher will reflect that there is a kernel of truth in most
widespread error.  The truth in the well is the truth that underlay the
hydropathic treatment involved, also the treatment of fresh air and
exercise, and the extra exertion, the stimulus of change, and the
excitement associated with such pilgrimages, not to speak of the power
of faith, based though it was on error.  From this point of view we may
in some respects regard the modern hydropathic establishment as in the
line of development with the holy well of old.

It is a testimony to the universality and the popularity of the holy
wells in this country, and to the persistency of the superstition,
after it had been condemned by the Reformation, that a public statute
had to be enacted in 1579 prohibiting these pilgrimages, and that this
having been ignored or defied, they had again to be denounced in the
strongest terms in 1679.  "It seems not to be enough," says this edict,
"that whole congregations were interdicted from the pulpit preceding
the wonted period of resort, or that individuals humbled on their knees
in public acknowledgment of their offence were rebuked or fined for
disobedience.  Now it was declared for the purpose of restraining the
superstitious resort in pilgrimage to chappellis and wellis, which is
so frequent and common in this kingdom, to the great offence of God,
the scandall of the Kirk, and disgrace of His Majestie's government,
that commissioners diligently search in all such pairts and places
where this idolatrous superstition is used, and to take and apprehend
all such persons, of whatsoever rank and quality, whom they sall
deprehend going pilgrimage to chappellis or wellis, or whom they sall
know themselves to be guilty of that cryme, and to commit them to waird
until such measures should be adopted for their trial and punishment."
It is further of especial interest to note the local effort made to
suppress these pilgrimages.  In the records of the Synod of Perth there
is a minute to the following effect:--

"It is found that there is frequent repairing on certain days
superstitiously to some wells within this province, as to one called
Dumlorn, in Comrie.  In the meantime the Synod ordains and entreats all
the gentlemen of these bounds where these wells, or any other of that
kind are, that they would use all diligence against these abuses as
they may according to the Acts of Parliament made thereanent."


Those who have an antiquarian turn of mind will, on visiting the top of
Dundurn, where the original well is supposed to have been, find
themselves expatiating upon other features of interest surrounding
them.  The hill itself, it will be remarked, is covered all round, with
the exception of the precipitous front facing the east, with piles of
loose water-worn stones.  At first view they appear only an irregular
mass, and seem to be there only to make the ascent more slippery and
difficult.  Mr Skene, in his _Celtic Scotland_; points out that here we
have the remains of an ancient fort.  It is only recently, however,
that the subject has come in for thorough investigation by Dr.
Christison, one of the Rhind lecturers on Archaeology, who, by careful
measurements and by the extensive knowledge which he has brought to
bear on the subject, has quite established the fact.  One sees that
from the east side of the hill the position is by nature impregnable
against attack; while on the south, west, and north sides, it is the
triumph of the antiquarian's research and skill to re-build for us in
imagination a series of fortified lines and enclosures, the original
sites of which time has not altogether obliterated.  The fortress was
known in early days as Dundurn, and must have been a stronghold of
considerable importance.[2]

Looking down upon the plain below, the little chapel at our feet,
called the Chapel of St. Fillan, also takes us back to antiquity,
though to a less remote one than the fortifications.  It takes us back
to pre-Reformation times.  There is no record of the century to which
it belongs, and the only relic that has been preserved to us from the
pre-Reformation period is a holy water font.  It stood in a niche in
the wall of the chapel.  When, however, it was deemed advisable to
remove the tottering roof and to preserve what of the building would
make a picturesque ruin, the font was taken in charge by Colonel
Stewart of Ardvoirlich, and handed over by him to the Trustees of the
Dundurn Parish Church.  Placed on a suitable stand, and with an
appropriate inscription, this font will represent an interesting link
between the past and the present.

This old chapel, doubtless at one time a place of worship, was
abandoned at the Reformation, and was taken possession of by the
Stewart clan as a burial vault about the year 1580.  For a long time
this interesting old burying-ground was allowed to remain in a state of
shameful neglect.  There seemed to be no direct responsibility on the
part of any heritor for its upkeep, and what seemed everybody's
business became nobody's.  This condition of _laissez faire_ was
confirmed by a sentimental though unreasonable objection to shifting
into their right position a number of head-stones which time and
weather had either displaced or Darwin's worms had covered up.  It was
only five or six years ago that a Committee was formed, which in a
regular manner, and with the consent of all parties interested, took in
charge the upkeep of the burial-ground, with the aid of public
subscription.  A head-stone of great interest to antiquarians is one
with figures of Adam and Eve sculptured in relief, while above these
figures an angel is represented.  The tree carved on the other side of
the stone is evidently the tree of good and evil, and the whole
represents in a crude way the expulsion of Adam and Eve from Paradise.
This Adam and Eve stone is considered very rare, there being very few
known throughout the country.  This one differs from the others in the
absence of the serpent, which is usually represented on them.  Another
monument of considerable interest is to be seen within the chapel.  It
is a memorial tablet recently erected by the present Laird of
Ardvoirlich upon the wall of the east gable and containing the
following inscription:--"This chapel, dedicated in early times to St.
Fillan, the leper, has been, since the year 1586, the burial-place of
the sept or clan of Stewart of Ardvoirlich."  Here follow the names of
those buried beneath, with the dates of their decease.  On glancing
over the names there recorded, one will notice the name of Major James
Stewart, and will remember that it is to the same memory that a stone
still stands erected on the south side of the loch, about three miles
up.  We there read that this Major James Stewart was temporarily
interred, and thereafter removed to his final resting-place at Dundurn.
This member of the clan seems to have been of a fiery, irascible, and
adventurous nature, and Sir Walter Scott, while in this neighbourhood,
found sufficient material in connection with this personage to
reproduce his likeness in his Allan M'Aulay of the _Legend of
Montrose_.  In his introduction to this romance the author gives an
interesting account of his character, and sets before us two different
versions of the part he acted in the death of Lord Kilpont; indeed, one
will look upon the romantic scenery of this district with redoubled
interest after a perusal of this work of the great novelist.  With
reference to this Major Stewart's tomb-stone on the side of the loch,
which has just been referred to, the legend is that the Major died a
natural death at Ardvoirlich, and his body was being carried to Dundurn
for burial, but the Drummonds and Murrays, who were at enmity with the
clan, threatened to intercept the funeral, and a snowstorm coming on,
they interred the body on the loch side near the spot where the stone
is, and subsequently took it to the chapel.

Another head-stone of considerable interest is to be seen hear the
entrance to the grounds of Ardvoirlich itself.  It marks the place
where the remains of seven of the Macdonalds were interred, the legend
being that that clan, on their way to or from a raid on Glenartney
Forest, attacked Ardvoirlich House, and the men of the clan being
absent with their cattle on the hills, the lady of the house kept them
at bay until the men came down, and then they slaughtered all the
Macdonalds, except one man, and their bodies were buried in a hole on
the loch side.  Years after, on excavating to make a pond for cattle to
drink from, a number of human bones were found, and the stone was
erected to mark the spot.

Another object of considerable antiquarian interest in the possession
of the Ardvoirlich family is the charm-stone.  It is said by tradition
to have been brought from the Holy Land at the time of the Crusades by
the Fitz-Allans, who were progenitors of the Stewarts, and who were
active Crusaders.  It was considered a most holy stone, and had healing
properties of a high order.  It is a very perfect specimen of rock
crystal; the silver setting is Saracenic in character, and said to be
very old.  Up to 1840, and even later, people used to come to
Ardvoirlich from long distances to have the stone immersed in water,
while a Gaelic incantation was repeated by the laird or lady.  Then the
water was carried home, and one condition was that the possessor of the
water must not enter any house until home was reached; then if given to
cattle to drink, or sprinkled over them, it acted as a perfect cure for
any murrain or disease.

On the death of the laird in 1854, the stone was sent into a bank for
safe custody, and then all the healing properties were destroyed.  It
was said also that the last lady of Ardvoirlich who used it, and who
was a Maxtone of Cultoquhey, had no Gaelic, and was too lowland by
birth to believe in it, and she most irreverently (not knowing the
Gaelic incantation) just repeated--"If it'll dae ye nae guid, it'll dae
ye nae hairm," and that also destroyed the charm.

Another object which does not fail to attract the attention of the
visitor to St. Fillans is the picturesque little island at the east end
of the loch, called the Neish Island, for it has its romantic story to
tell.  "It is uncertain" (says John Brown in his description of the
place) when or by whom "the island in Loch Earn rose into form or
importance; but that it was entirely the work of man (and certainly it
was no contemptible undertaking) is evident from its circular shape,
the nature of the bed on which it is raised and surrounding it, and the
purpose to which it might be made subservient in lawless times.  The
ancestors of the present family of Ardvoirlich made it their occasional
residence, at the remote period when they held the eight-mark land on
which St. Fillans is now built, an endowment which continued annexed to
the Chapel or Priory of Strathfillan till its dissolution at the
Reformation."  On the island there are the remains of what appear to
have been a number of dwellings.  That it was used as a haunt or refuge
by raiders is certain from the tradition which gives it its name of
Neish Island.  According to the tradition, it was the refuge of the
remnant of the Clan Neish who had been defeated in a bloody battle with
the MacNabs.  There the former carried on a kind of predatory warfare
with the MacNabs, and on one occasion so roused the wrath of the latter
that a speedy and terrible revenge followed.  The stalwart sons of the
MacNab, urged by their wrathful sire, whose hint in the words--"The
night is the night if lads were but lads," almost amounted to a
command, equipped themselves with dirk, pistol, and claymore, raised a
boat on their shoulders, and carrying it by night all the way from Loch
Tay across the hills by Glentarken, launched it stealthily on Loch
Earn, and taking the Neishes by surprise are said to have killed them
all, except one boy, who made good his escape.  The following lines by
the Rev. John Hunter, Crieff, give very appropriate expression and
colouring to this interesting tradition:--

  Here sit we down on this fair sun-strewn bank,
  Beside this queen of lakes, whose loveliness
  From out of half-shut eyelids softly woos
  To sweet forgetfulness.
  Above, the wood, and interspersed knolls,
  Made greener by the pat of fairy feet
  And dancing moonbeams, fringe the rugged knees
  Of scarred and bronzed heights whose wind-notched crests
  Look grandly down.  Fair scene and home of peace
  Ineffable; and yet not ever so,
  For I have seen these scars run full and white,
  And heard their trumpetings as they rush'd madly
    Adown the spray-sown steep, past wood and knoll,
  To mingle with the waters of the lake
  Vexed with the storm and sounding loud in sympathy.
    What have we here?  What human trace of times
  When hearts o'erflowed, and hand and steel were swift,
  And red in the flashing of a hasty thought?
  Ah me! these times, these woful times when word
  And blow were wed, and none could sunder them,
  And honour'd live!  See yonder isle set single
  In the lake, near by where Earn darts swiftly 'neath
  The rustic bridge to bear the music of the place
  To broader Tay, who murmurs from afar
  In the rich harmony of his many streams--yon isle,
  The haunt of lovers now, where hearts that touch
  And thrill, cling closer in the eerie sense
  Of fear that lurks amid the tumbled stones
  Of robbers' lair.  Here, once upon a time,
  When might was right, and men made wrongful
  Gain of Nature's fastnesses, a ruffian couched
  And preyed upon his kind.  Long time he throve,
  But vengeance woke at length, and the heavy tread
  Of frowning men from far Loch Tay--skiff-laden.
  Adown the glen they came one moonless night,
  Goaded by tingling sneer of white-hair'd sire.
  They rest where Tarken pours his scanty tide,
  Then silently--nor moon nor star appearing--
  Launch forth upon the lake, and softly steal
  Towards the caitiff's fire gleaming through the dark
  Like blood-shot eye.  All saving one, and he
  Was left to skirt the shore and give the foe
  Rough welcome should he 'scape to land.  Who then
  Fair-hair'd and young stood there in melting mood,
  With all his mother in his swimming eyes,
  Of abbot's line--with dirk half drawn, fearing,
  Hoping, praying, as his gentler nature bade
  That life and light would not go out together.
  The hope seem'd vain.  From out the gloom there came
  The grinding keel--the tread of hurrying feet--
  Clashing of words, of steel, and all was dark--
  And all was still.  But hark! a sound--the faint
  Breathing of one who swims with pain, the plash
  Of nerveless hands nearer and nearer comes,
  Yet ever fainter.  What boots it now to have
  Escaped the vengeful swords that smote his kin?
  The waves engulf him and his bubbling cry.
  But unhoped help is near--a friendly word--
  A plunge, then stroke on stroke, and timeously
  A hand to save.  Say not, ye thoughtless ones,
  That yon grim head, clean sever'd from the trunk,
  Was the chief trophy of that night.  Nay;
  For kindly thoughts endure, and the High Will
  That holds all things within the ever-opening fold
  Of His eternal purpose--that High Will
  Look'd down with loving eyes that pierce the dark,
  And bless'd the deeds that glorified MacNab,
  The abbot's son--half-savage and half-saint.
  Time sped; the deed was not forgot, and still
  The tale is told when nights are long and the lone
  Owl hoots upon the hill.  And now there stands
  Within bowshot of the isle--a house of God
  That calls to prayer--a parish church--the fruit
  Of kindly thoughts that stirr'd the watcher's heart,
  And clomb to Heaven in mute appeal, that night
  When vengeance smote and light and life went out together.


So much, then, for the prospect which an antiquarian standing by the
Well of St. Fillan would embrace within the programme of his research.
If we try to form a picture of the social condition of the people who
lived in the midst of this fair vale of Earn in those early days, it is
a scene of continual strife we conjure up--clan fighting with clan, and
one feud succeeding another.  These were the days of superstitious
pilgrimages, days of rooted custom and unchanging faith.  So much the
better for the Saint.  The halo of his sanctity shines out all the more
against the background of ignorance and strife.  If he were to re-visit
those scenes now, how much would he have to deplore!  No more
pilgrimages, no more belief in miracles.  What a downcome from his
dignity to be the patron of a golf course or the chaplain of a curling
club, instead of enjoying the fame and name of the holy well.
_Requiescat in pace_.

The past was not all strife, however.  Traces of agriculture lead us to
picture this fine strath as at one time throng with peaceful and busy
life.  There were, no doubt, in those warlike times intervals of peace,
when the inhabitants of the glen could tend their cattle and cultivate
their potatoes and corn at leisure; and whether we look back upon this
land of the "mountain and the flood" as having been the nursery of our
best soldiers, or as having been peopled by a race rendered strong and
manly by a simple mode of life, the present prospect of our Highland
glens cannot but fill us with sad reflection when we behold the process
of emigration and depopulation still going on, and when we see that ere
long the only links with the past of a once strong and hardy race of
people will be the mere traces of their cultivation, the ruins of their
once populous hamlets, and the grave-stones in their old
burying-grounds.

It is true there is a compensating process going on.  For while one
regrets the disappearance of the old thatched houses of the primitive
village of St. Fillans and the migration of their youthful life to the
city, the rise of the modern villa along the loch side speaks of the
growth of a temporary population known as the "summer visitors."   It
is not likely that their peaceful pursuits--their climbing and pic-nic
expeditions, their regattas and loch illuminations, will be considered
to be as worthy to be recorded in a future "Book of Chronicles" as the
feuds and raids of the past.  Still, it is to be hoped that this land
of "brown heath and shaggy wood" may even in this innocent way minister
to the rearing of a healthy manhood and womanhood, and continue to be
the nursery of that muscular body and brave spirit which in the past
have made the name of Caledonia great.



[1] _Proceedings of the Antiquarian Society_, 1882-83.

[2] Fortrenn seems to have been the ancient name of a large district of
Strathearn, of which Dundurn, or the fort of the Earn, was the capital.




THE PLAIN OF THE BARDS

By Rev. ARTHUR GORDON, M.A., Monzievaird

To supply even in brief outline a sketch of the united parishes of
Monzievaird and Strowan is to cover many centuries and to recall some
extraordinary events and remarkable persons.  These parishes comprise
an area of about eight miles long by six miles broad, and on the map
somewhat resemble a pear.  The scenery varies from the bare summit of
Benchonzie, the limit on the north, where the highest elevation is
reached at 3048 feet, and the wood-crowned Turleum, 1291 feet high,
where "wind and water sheers," the southern boundary, down to the
well-cultivated and nearly level carse, which lies all the way between
Crieff and Comrie at about two hundred feet above the sea.  The little
hills abound with coigns of vantage, rewarding the pedestrian; while
even the driving tourist finds a rich harvest for the eye in the
wonderfully diversified landscape presented on all sides.  The River
Earn, if it lacks the majesty of the Tay and the impetuosity of the
Garry, makes itself recognised as the dominating feature, whether in
its quiet meandering moods or in the flooded temper, overflowing its
banks and spreading its deposit of alluvial soil.  Its tributaries--the
Lednock, with its "Deil's Cauldron," and the Turret and Barvick, oft
visited for their pleasing cascades, along with many another rivulet
and spring--call up the Promised Land of old--"a land of hills and
valleys which drinketh water of the rain of heaven."  In climate, also,
this part of Strathearn is singularly favoured, sheltered as it is from
the biting east wind and fortified from the northern blasts by its
mountain barriers.  Its rainfall, also, is far from excessive; for many
sky-piercing hill-tops tap the rain clouds from the Atlantic long
before they reach Central Perthshire.

The name of the parish, now called Monzievaird, but formerly Monivaird,
and anciently Moivaird, is believed to be Gaelic, and to signify, not
the hill, but rather the "mossy plain" of the bards.  It is difficult
to say how far this carries us back.  The Bards are not to be
confounded with the Druids, a religious class from which they were
quite distinct.  The bards seem to have been the seanachies,
antiquaries, poets, and genealogists.  It was their special function to
compose and to chant verses or rhymes in praise of their heroes or
benefactors, and in the absence, so far as we know, of any method of
recording past transactions or histories, we may believe that our
ancestors transmitted orally, in lines composed by the bards, the
memorable sayings and deeds which they wished to hand down to
generations after them.  How far they were worthy of credit, and how
far they were subject to the vices of flattery or detraction we cannot
tell, but we may be sure that those who were accounted great in these
ancient times were anxious to have their doughty deeds immortalised,
and perhaps were as sensitive to the tone of public criticism thus
represented as is the statesman or warrior of to-day.  What would we
not give to hear from the living voice of one of those bards, were it
only possible, the stores of traditionary lore of which they were the
sole depositories!  As it is, we can but lament the almost total
absence of reliable information regarding their genius, perhaps also
the jealous competition for the laureate's place in these pre-historic
times.

Remains at the western end of the parish are supposed to represent two
Druidical temples.  Cairns and barrows have been numerous, and in one
of these, on Ochtertyre, there was discovered, near the close of last
century, a stone coffin, containing two coarse earthenware urns.  One
of these held burnt bones, and the other the bones of a head, having
the lower jaw-bone and teeth in marvellous preservation.  In the stone
coffin was also found a stone hatchet about four inches long, bluish
coloured, and of triangular shape, which evidently belonged to an age
before iron was in use here.  It is well known that the Romans had
camps at Ardoch, Strageath, and Dalginross.  Evidences of their
presence in Monzievaird might, therefore, be expected, and they are not
awanting.  A Roman burial-ground of some extent, full of large slabs of
stone, lies northeast of Clathick (hence perhaps the name), and is in a
line between the camp at Dalginross--a circular burial-place near
Victoria--and the Roman station on the Brae of Callander.  In 1783
there was found in the plain of Monzievaird a bronze vessel resembling
a coffee-pot, and in 1805 the bronze head of a spear was found in
Ochtertyre Loch.  In 1808 similar spear heads were found near the
church, erected in 1804, which now serves the united parishes.  These
relics are pronounced by the best antiquarians to be undoubtedly Roman.

We now proceed to notice the first written account which history gives
of Monzievaird.  If there be any truth in the old chroniclers, a battle
was fought here, and, after a long civil war, a contested succession to
the Crown was settled by the slaughter of the reigning sovereign of
Alban, a usurper who passes over the stage of history under the various
names of "Gryme," "Girgh Mackinat Macduff," and reigned eight years.
It may be worth while to give several references.  John of Fordun's
chronicle tells how Malcolm, son of Kenneth, strengthened by the favour
of the people, and at the instigation of some of his chiefs, sent a
message to the King, giving him the alternatives of either vacating the
throne, or that they two should submit their cause to the just verdict
of God by fighting, either man to man or accompanied by their warrior
hosts.  Gryme was very indignant at this defiance, while Malcolm, on
the other hand, boldly advanced to meet him with a small but picked
band, and reached a field called Auchnabard (the field of the bards),
styled "a meet place for a battle."  Here the two armies fought out a
cruel engagement, till at length the King was mortally wounded, and,
being led out of the battle by his men, died the same night.  Thus
Malcolm gained the victory and the kingdom.  The register of St.
Andrews calls the slain monarch "Kenneth (Grim)," and makes his death
to be "at Moieghvard" in 1001.  _The Chronykil of Scotland_ calls this
same place "Bardory," and in Latin "Campus Bardorum," which corresponds
to Auchnabard.  A cairn on a neighbouring height commemorates this
conflict which made history; but the slain King was not buried here, but

  "Carried to Colme-Kill;
  The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,
  And guardian of their bones."


The Church of Monzievaird was in all probability founded, by Saint
Serf, and he was certainly its patron saint.  If we are not compelled
to postulate two saints of this name from the number of years covered
by traditions which cannot all relate to the same person, we would
incline to quit hold of the earlier and less definite tradition, and to
consider Saint Serf as contemporary with Adamnan, the celebrated Abbot
of Iona, and distinguished biographer of Saint Columba.  St. Serf
founded many churches, and his reputation in the Middle Ages for the
neat and appropriate miracles attributed to him may be reckoned the
measure of his eminence among Scotland's early evangelists.  Wyntoun
gives a quaint dialogue between St. Serf and the enemy of mankind, in
which the Devil, plying the Saint with many knotty theological
questions, wholly fails to overcome him, and suddenly departs.  Another
of these monkish miracles makes St. Serf discover the theft of a sheep
by ordering it to bleat forth the story of its wrongs from the guilty
stomach of the thief, and to redden his face with shame for having
denied his crime!  St. Serf's memory survives here in the well called
after him, with its plentiful supply of water.  As lately as 1760 the
parishioners were wont to be drawn by a lurking superstition to drink
of it on Lammas Day, leaving in it white stones, spoons, or rags, which
they brought as remembrancers, just as devout Mohammedans still leave
their prayer rags attached to the grating of the Mosque El-Aksa, at
Jerusalem, or the lower branches of the giant oak that marks the site
of the grove at Dan.  St. Serf's festival and fair day long continued,
and was kept on the 1st of July while the market lasted.  The church
itself was impropriated to the Abbey of Inchaffray, founded by the Earl
of Strathearn about the beginning of the twelfth century, and was
served by a vicar, to whom that monastery delegated the clerical duty,
doubtless on the usual pittance of stipend.

The Tosachs, from the Gaelic word meaning "first" or "chief," were the
old proprietors of Monzievaird.  Their first residence was not at the
old castle at Greenend, but at Balmuick, on the estate of Lawers, then
called Fordie, and the foundation of the house was traceable at the
close of last century.  The chief of Monzievaird was accustomed to
execute a man on the first day of every month, and this celebration of
the almanac at Tom-an-Tosach was apparently designed to prevent the
feudal rights of pit and gallows from falling into desuetude.  The
story runs that the last chief held nightly interviews with a fairy, a
proceeding which aroused his wife's jealousy.  She tracked him by a
ball of worsted attached to his button, and, discovering him in
conclave with the fairy, demanded her immediate destruction.  Thereupon
the fairy fled, and the power of the Tosach departed also.  The
inhabitants rose against him, and he had to seek refuge abroad.

Castle Cluggy, which stands on the peninsula on the north side of the
Loch of Monzievaird, is undoubtedly very old, but how old no one can
tell.  A square tower, about 17 feet by 18 feet, with walls five or six
feet thick, of tremendous strength, is all that now remains.  It is
said to have been a seat of the "Red Cumin," the rival of Robert the
Bruce for the throne of Scotland, slain at Dumfries before the high
altar.  The prison is sometimes said to have been on the island in the
loch, but really the dungeon must be sought under the foundations of
the tower.  In the charter giving Ochtertyre to the Murrays, in the
year 1467, it is even then described as an "ancient fortalice."  The
key of the tower was found about fifty years ago on the east side of
the building.  The old church of Monzievaird, now converted into a
mausoleum, was the scene of a dreadful tragedy, characteristic of the
spirit of feudal times.  The Murrays and the Drummonds were but ill
neighbours in the days of James IV.  The collision between them in this
instance has been ascribed to the levying of tithes, but without
historic grounds; and the law of retaliation is even older than that of
teinds, and far more widely practised.  In a foray which began near
Knock Mary the Murrays or their retainers were overpowered and driven
westward.  They kept up a running fight round the western base of
Tomachastel, and an obstinate struggle took place in the hollow between
Westerton and the Loch, where many men fell.  The Murrays, however,
succeeded in reaching the church, where 120 men able to bear arms, with
their wives and children, took refuge.  They were followed by the
Drummonds, reinforced, as some say, by Campbell of Dunstaffhage, and
thirsting for vengeance.  Even then they might have escaped, had not
one of the Murray clan indiscreetly revealed their hiding-place by
aiming a successful shot at one of the Drummonds.  The Drummonds now
summoned them to surrender, but in vain, and then piled wood round the
long, low, heather-thatched edifice, and consumed it with its human
holocaust.  One Murray alone, David by name, escaped, being aided by
one of the Drummonds, who was attached to his sister.  He in turn was
hated and persecuted by his own clan, and forced to escape to Ireland.
After some years he returned thence under the effectual protection of
the powerful Abbot of Inchaffray, who was a Murray.  He was settled on
the Abbey lands, and the property which he received still bears the
name of Drummond-Ernoch (of Erin).

The massacre of Monzievaird was sternly avenged by King James IV.  The
Master of Drummond, leader of the party, and some of his followers were
executed at Stirling.  The estate of Drummond was required to provide
for the widows and orphans, and further to expiate their sacrilegious
crime by re-building the church.  Even then the house of prayer could
scarcely be called the abode of peace.  It is said to have been the
scene of fierce bickerings, and that the gauntlet of the Murrays was
for many years fastened on a small gallery of the church, and formal
challenge made to anyone to remove it before divine service was allowed
to begin.  When the foundations of the present mausoleum were being dug
a quantity of charred wood was found, and very many calcined
bones--those nearer the door on the west being of larger size than the
others towards the east, which were probably those of women and
children.  They must have been buried as they lay.

The Murrays of Ochtertyre come of the Tullibardine family, and the
present proprietor is the fifteenth in descent from the first.  The
addition of Keith to the ancient "Moray," changed to Murray, arose from
marriage with the heiress of Dunnottar Castle, in Kincardineshire.  It
is a singular fact that the succession has uniformly descended from
father to son.  The existing house of Ochtertyre was built by the
great-grandfather of the present Baronet, and for prospect it would be
hard to equal it.  The old house stood near the great ash tree further
west, and a yet older is proved by a family record, which narrates the
births of generations at Quoig House, above the church.  Robert Burns'
visit to Ochtertyre in 1787 and the two poems he produced are too
familiar to need mention here.  In the reign of Charles I. a mortality
greater even than that caused by war almost depopulated the bonnie
braes of Ochtertyre.  The dreaded Plague assumed alarming proportions,
and many huts were erected for isolation near the west end of
Monzievaird Loch.  The dead were not buried in the churchyard, but in a
large sepulchral mound near the Marle Lodge gate.

The Right Honourable Sir George Murray, G.C.B., perhaps the most
distinguished member of the Ochtertyre family, after meritorious
service in Egypt and the Peninsular War, was chief of the general staff
under Wellington at Waterloo.  He also served the State as a
politician, six times representing Perthshire in Parliament, and
attaining among many honours the office of Secretary of State for the
Colonies in the Duke of Wellington's Government of 1828.  The present
Baronet is a worthy successor of an honoured line, and his generous
consideration for the public in throwing open his grounds and granting
the fullest facilities for their enjoyment deserves the highest praise.
It is claimed for Glenturret that the two last wolves seen in Scotland
were killed there.  But a similar claim has been advanced for
Nairnshire, and, with far more likelihood, for the wilds of the Moor of
Rannoch.  The glen, however, was long famous for its falcons.  In few
places is the bird-life more various or abundant than in the woods of
bonnie Ochtertyre.  And the rabbit, introduced there while the present
century was young, has evidently come to stay and to multiply.

At Upper Quoig two reputed witches once dwelt, but whether from greater
fear or greater enlightenment here than elsewhere, they were never
called to endure the ordeal either by fire or by water.  They hunted in
couples apparently, for the story goes that two men at Clathick, rising
early on a May morning, saw them coming up the burn-side, putting a
tether across the stream, and saying, "Come all to me."  This
incantation succeeded in providing the witches' dairy with a double
supply of milk, while their neighbours had none!  Verily many poor old
crones have lost their lives on as trivial a charge.  Passing westward
to the compact property of Clathick, now owned by Captain Campbell
Colquhoun, we learn that it was given off from Ochtertyre in dowry with
a Miss Mary Murray.  It was a curious marriage contract provision that
her initials should be cut upon each lintel, and men were living thirty
years ago who had seen "M.M." carved on the stones of the old house.

The estate of Lawers conjures up from the deep oblivion of ages many
stirring times.  It was originally "Fordie," but was named Lawers after
the Campbells from Loch Tayside came into possession.  How different
our quiet Christian Lord's Days and "kirk-yard cracks" from these
Sunday and festival occasions of bloodshed,

  "When strangers from Breadalbane
  And clansmen from Loch Tay
  Brought to the priest their offerings,
  But fought each holy day!"

Still we may remark the ruined chapel almost smothered by the
overturned yew trees that were planted, less, perhaps, to mark the
"route" of the Mass carried in procession (hence "routine," corrupted
into "Rotten Row,") than to furnish the twanging bow for these martial
spirits.  That great boulder-stone at the north-eastern end of the
magnificent avenue opposite is, most likely, a Roman landmark, though
it is customary to declare that the Earn once flowed past it.  Colonel
Campbell of Lawers was not only a sincere reformer, but John Knox's
history tells us how he commanded a regiment raised to make good the
cause of religious faith and freedom.  His second successor was a yet
more staunch and eminent Scotsman, knighted in 1620, and created Earl
of Loudon in 1633.  He proved himself a stout opponent of the arbitrary
measures of Charles I. and Laud; was one of the most prominent actors
in the Glasgow Assembly of 1638, and nominated to represent the Church
of Scotland in the Westminster Assembly of Divines.  He narrowly
escaped being beheaded in the Tower of London, in spite of a safe
conduct and without trial; but the fiat of the insensate monarch was
recalled, and the warrant torn up by Charles a single day before the
axe was doomed to fall, from fear of the odium and vengeance his death
would have called forth.  Not to remain Chancellor of Scotland (as he
was for ten years) would he imperil the interests of religious liberty
and national independence, just then threatened by Stuart absolutism;
and yet he was a man of the type of the great Montrose, as loyal to the
King as he was true to Church and people.  Few deserve better to rank
among "The Scots Worthies."  He disponed Lawers estate to his brother,
who, fighting against Cromwell at Inverkeithing, was badly beaten, and
had his lands on the north of Loch Earn taken from him by an oppressive
exaction put in force against him by the same Stuart dynasty, whose
cause he had so faithfully championed.

A thrilling tale introduces the next laird of Lawers, son of the last
named.  He executed a punitive commission against his uncanny
neighbours, the Macgregors, who determined on revenge.  They surprised
him at Lawers in bed, and threatened instant death, even in his wife's
presence.  He urged for time to pray, and that it might be for
quietness in the chapel hard by, which request they granted.  On the
way thither he so played on their cupidity, offering them 10,000 merks
if they would spare his life, that at last he prevailed.  Faithful to
his engagement, he raised this immense sum, much of it being gathered
in halfpence, and carried on horseback to the appointed trysting-place.
But Lawers was better than his word, for soldiers surrounded the house,
and made the Macgregors prisoners.  The game ended with checkmate, when
the duped freebooters paid the death penalty in Edinburgh.  Colonel
David R. Williamson, the present laird of Lawers, has been long noted
for his public spirit and eminent services to agriculture.

Tomachastel, the central wooded height of the parish, now surmounted by
the monument, erected by his widow, in 1832, to the memory of General
Sir David Baird of Ferntower, is marked out beyond all reasonable doubt
as the site of the ancient Castle of Earn, for long the fortress
dwelling of the great and powerful Earls of Strathearn.  The title is
now merged in the names of Royalty, like the Dukedoms of Rothesay and
Albany.  Our own beloved Queen's father was the Duke of Kent and
Strathearn, as her third son is Duke of Connaught and Strathearn.  No
situation within the wide strath can compare with it in fair and
far-reaching prospect, combined with facilities for defence; and the
lighting of its beacon fire would be so universally observed over a
wide domain that a personal summons, like that of the fiery cross,
would scarcely be needed.  Romance and gruesome horror are strangely
blended here; for was it not from the walks in close proximity to the
castle that the fair Lady Mary Graham, only daughter of stout old
Malise, Earl of Strathearn, espied her future husband, John Moray of
Drumshergart, fishing in the well-stocked pools below?  And did he not
find her society more engrossing than any (whole or half) scaly
inhabitant of the mermaid's pool?  The Morays of Abercairny estate (the
fair lady's marriage portion) and many another territorial family claim
descent from the union of these happy lovers.  The rough hospitality,
and swift, if not always impartial, administration of feudal justice
are themes inviting to historic imagination; nor is the religious
element wanting, for the Earls of Strathearn,  besides founding
Inchaffray Abbey, endowed the Bishopric of Dunblane with one-third of
their domains.  A sad and shameful story links the castle with the good
King Robert the Bruce, and probably brought about its destruction.
Joanna, only child of the seventh Earl, was Countess in her own right,
and married to John de Warenne, Earl of Surrey, and English Governor of
Scotland.  The husband and wife had different minds and purposes.  The
lady was found guilty of conspiracy, with Lord Soulis of Hermitage
Castle and others, against the life of the good King Robert.  She
confessed her offence, and was condemned to perpetual imprisonment
within her own castle.  Constant tradition affirms that it was set on
fire and burnt to the ground, whether as the result of accident or a
successful siege.  One story tells how the Earl tried to save his wife,
but failed from the irresistible power of the flames.  The castle
became a ruin, and was never re-built.  Actual observation, after more
than 500 years, has confirmed the truth, in this case stranger than
fiction.  Sir David Baird, the hero of the Nile, Cape of Good Hope,
Corunna, and Seringapatam (remembered by the oldest folk for hunting
with hawks, attended by a native Indian), having died at Ferntower in
1832, was first buried in Monzievaird Churchyard, and old people still
recall the extraordinary storm of thunder and rain which signalised his
funeral day.  His widow prepared the massive monumental obelisk of
granite, said to be exactly similar to Cleopatra's Needle, since struck
by lightning in 1878, and badly rent, but now restored.  It required
foundations broad and deep.  Most of the stones of the old castle had
gone to form dykes in the neighbourhood.  The workmen, thinking they
had to deal with solid rock, proceeded to blast it, when to their
amazement the charge of gunpowder, instead of only throwing stones and
debris into the air, operated downward and revealed a dungeon cut in
the solid rock.  There lay all that remained of the proud and daring
Joanna, Countess of Strathearn and Princess of the Orkneys.  A few gold
and silver bracelets and ornaments, belonging to a lady's dress, were
found among the black rubbish with another trinket, teaching the old,
old lesson, "Vanity of vanities, all is vanity."

It only remains to describe the antiquities of Strowan.  There was a
Thane of "Struin" in Strathearn, in very early times, when Thanes were
servants of the King, holding their land in fee-farm for a certain
"census," or feu-duty.  Strowan, like Monzievaird, had a Celtic saint
for founder--St. Ronan.  He is not to be identified with the saint of
that name, of whom the venerable Bede records that he championed the
later Roman method of calculating the time of the Easter festival
against Bishop Finan of Lindisfarne, who stoutly held the Columban
rule.  Rather may we count him the same with the Abbot of Kingarth, in
Bute (died 737 A.D.), and founder of Kilmaronog, on Loch Etive, the
parish of similar name in Dumbartonshire, and the Parish Church of
Iona, called after him "Tempul Ronain."  St. Ronan's name is to this
day associated with his well, the pool that never failed to supply him
with fish on Fridays; the ruins of the old church or chapel, and St.
Ronan's bell.  Tradition says that the Cross of Crieff was taken from
Strowan to Crieff upwards of 200 years ago.  The market cross of
Strowan now stands on a small mound west from the old kirk and near the
mansion-house.  A fine old lime tree which shaded it succumbed to the
unprecedented storm of November, 1893; and all who know the venerable
Laird of Strowan hope that he may live to see the young lime sapling
with which he lately replaced it grow up to cast its shade over the
cross once more.  The latter is Maltese in form; and has on it, besides
the initials of the Latin inscription on the Saviour's cross, I.N.R.I.,
the Moray star, and other symbols.  It was probably taken from the
churchyard.  The arches of the bridge, with its narrow roadway and
parapet, and little cities of refuge for foot-passengers, are not of a
hoary antiquity; but the pillars, on which at one time planks used to
be laid for crossing, are much older.  The Kirk-Session records contain
many entries of sums paid to the boatman for ferrying parishioners from
the north side to Strowan Church.  Picturesque ruin though the church
is, it is not 230 years old in any part, and public worship on
alternate Sundays was performed there till the beginning of this
century.  In 1669 the previous church was still standing, and in such
repair that an application was made to the Synod to require the lairds
of Monzievaird, Ochtertyre, Fordie, Clathick, &c., to attend the Church
of Strowan in consequence of Monzievaird Church having become ruinous
and past repair.  The Commissioners of Teinds had ordered one church to
be built near the present site, but the heritors of each of the united
parishes did their best to evade complying.  Two graves are deserving
of special mention.  One is the resting-place of "fair Helen of
Ardoch"; the other marks the place of repose of the eldest son of the
House of Strowan, who laid down his life on the sands of Tel-el-Kebir,
bravely advancing to the charge against the Egyptian lines.

St. Ronan's Bell is preserved at Strowan House.  It is small, circular,
and looks as if it had been made to be grasped by the hand.  Tradition
says it was rung under the bell-man's gown when mass was said in Romish
times.  The tongue is wanting.  Some say it never had one, but was
meant to be struck from without.  It never could have been heard afar
off.  Close scrutiny proves it to be slightly cracked.  But worthless
for music, it is excellent for law!  It is the symbol of tenure of
Ballindewar or Dewarland.  (Dewar is from the Gaelic for keeper).  The
Dewars were the hereditary beadles of Strowan, and keepers of St.
Ronan's bell.  They held their croft free of all cess, stipend, or
public burden, as it still remains.  When the present Laird of Strowan
negotiated at a high price the purchase of this piece of land, he
received with "the bellman's pendicle" the bell itself as the charter
of the feu lands, and as custodier of all rights of the same.

The saddest feature in making this short survey of the united parish is
the great and continuous decline of the population.  In 1755 there were
1460 people; in 1793 there were 1025; in 1891 the number had sunk to
490.  No doubt the livelier prospects of town life allure many.  No
doubt many have profited by the fact of removal.  The agricultural
outlook appears gloomier than ever, which tends to restrict the area
under cultivation.  But it cannot be gainsaid that many have had to
remove from the mistaken policy of adding land to land and field to
field.  It is breaking down when viewed in the sole interest of the
proprietor; how much more is it found wanting when viewed from the
standpoint of the wider interests and welfare of our common country?

The minister of Monzievaird and Strowan most likely to achieve
immortality is the Rev. William Robertson, the gifted versifier and
author of Hymns 3--"Thee God we praise, Thee Lord confess," the
Monzievaird _Te Deum_, and 311--"A little child the Saviour came," the
first baptismal hymn, in the Scottish Hymnal.  To him the account now
given, incomplete as it is, owes more than to any other.  He has also
cast into verse that seems worth preserving his parish musings in the
following lines:--

  A shady knoll o'erlooks a dale
  Where Earn meanders down the vale;
  A knoll enwreathed in oak and fern,
  The sweetest nook in all Strathearn.
  The morn there breaks with earliest ray,
  Here latest shines the lingering day,
  There summer reigns supremely fair,
  And winter ev'n is lovely there.
  Its eastern prospect looks entire
  Along the glades of Ochtertyre;
  Its south, a mountain forest shade
  By dark blue pine and larches made;
  While lone Glenartney in the west
  Lies cradled like a turtle's nest,
  And huge Benvoirlich crown'd with snow
  Defends the smiling glens below.
  Dear shady knoll, whose varied view
  Enfolds green field and mountain blue,
  How oft at morn and eventide
  I've strolled around thy stony side
  And listened to the artless song
  That swell'd the glorious vale along!
  Mark'd where the sunbeams kindliest fell
  On rocky ridge and heathery dell,
  And yielded all my soul to share
  The teachings of a scene so fair!
  In storm or calm, thy grateful shade
  My fond retreat was ever made.
  There have I marked the thunder cloud
  Invest all heaven with sable shroud;
  There heard the peal arouse again
  The echoes of the Turret glen,
  While Auchingarroch from afar
  Rolled back the elemental war;
  There have I watched wing'd lightning play
  Adown Glenartney's rugged way,
  Or gild each flinty summit hoar
  From Callander to far Ken More;
  There seen the Ruchill deluge foam,
  And o'er the strath in eddies roam,
  Sweeping beyond the power to save
  A golden harvest on its wave.

      *      *      *      *      *

  High on my left, unstained by storm,
  An obelisk uprears its form;
  Commemorates in fitting style
  Heroic deeds upon the Nile,
  When he who conquered in Mysore
  To Afric's sands his legions bore,
  And showed the trembling prince and slave
  The gentleness of one that's brave.
  Yet on that monumental stone
  More feats of high renown are shown,
  Where he a prisoner and enchained,
  At last his noblest laurels gained:
  Lived to avenge each treacherous wrong,
  And triumph when he suffered long.
  There, too, his brilliant tasks to cope,
  'Tis told he seized the Cape of Hope;
  And sad Corunna's bloody shore
  But added to his fame the more.
  A widow's love the warrior praised,
  A widow's love the column raised;
  And yet that column tall and bold,
  Traced in the lines of Egypt old,
  Arises as a new cut stone
  Amid the dust of ages gone;
  For while it tells of yesterday,
  It stands upon the summit grey
  Where stately tower and donjon stern
  Were keep and tomb of fair Strathearn;
  Where Wallace oft his prowess tried,
  And royal Bruce in valour vied.
  Talk we of Bruce?  By yon dark wood
  The Comyn's ancient fortress stood--
  That traitor whose unhappy fate
  Still on the monarch's conscience sate,
  And urged him in a zeal divine
  To send his heart to Palestine.

  See where the waters dash aside,
  And swiftly round the thicket glide,
  Where mossy crag and fan-like bough
  Inshade the torrent far below.
  Within a towery wilderness
  Of nature's wildest gorgeousness,
  There rose in architecture quaint
  The cell of Strowan's valiant saint--
  A soldier-priest whose claymore long
  Was more persuasive than his tongue;
  Here stands his cross, there flows his well,
  Here still is seen his holy hell;
  Here, ivy-mantled, still remain
  The ruins of the ancient fane,
  Where once to heaven the anthem rose,
  And silent now the loved repose.

  On every side each scene has store
  Of song and legendary lore;
  Each stream has still its story true,
  Each height some bloody conflict knew;
  Each crag must give its meed to fame,
  And consecrate a hero's name.
  High o'er the rest, all bleak and dern,
  Moulders the royal Kenneth's cairn,
  Who for his crown his good sword bared,
  And fell in fight at Monzievaird.
  Even in their church, the doom of fire
  Consumed the clan of Ochtertyre;
  And in his home across the plain,
  Old Drummond-Ernoch was slain;
  Sons of the mist avenged their dead,
  And bore away his grisly head.

  Old tales like these, old legends true,
  Spring up where'er I turn my view--
  From Turret's glen and brawling wave,
  From Tosach's keep and fairy grave,
  From Ochtertyre's unfading bower,
  From Comyn's lone and moated tower,
  From where our chief with skilful eye
  Watched wonders in the midnight sky,
  From Tomachastel's haunted brow,
  From cell for Ronan's prayer and vow,
  From lordly Drummond's forest wall,
  From Lochlane's grim empannelled hall,
  From stately Turleum clothed in pine,
  And every height surrounding mine.
  'Twere idle then each tale to tell,
  Of ancient feat by stream or dell,
  From Benychonzie's snow-clad breast
  To green Glenartney in the west,
  Or round by sweet Dunira's den,
  Where "bonnie Kilmanie gaed up the glen."
  No need I ween of distant view
  My sauntering footsteps hence to woo;
  No need of song or knightly feat
  To add new charm to my retreat.
  Its own associations claim
  Far better meed than modern fame,
  With books and scenes and neighbours sage,
  I commune with a former age.




BETWEEN STRATHALLAN AND STRATHEARN

By Rev. JAMES MACGIBBON, B.D., Blackford.

The name Blackford was given, according to tradition, by an ancient
king of Caledonia, whose experience in passing the River Allan at this
point was of the saddest.  The stream spread itself out in those days,
says the story, so as to be more lake than stream.  When the king came
to it with his queen and suite the waters were deep and the current
strong.  It must have been at night surely, if we are to have any faith
in the tale, for the poor queen was carried away beyond help and hope.
They drained the strath dry to recover the body; and a solitary knoll
on the Allan's bank some way below the present village marks the place
where they found and buried the remains of fair Queen Helen.  Hence the
name Blackford.  In the days of the Roman occupation the legionaries
frequented this upper part of Strathallan, and have left traces of
their presence.  Many of them, indeed, must have quartered near; for at
the Loaninghead, about two miles east of the village, there is an
undeniable Roman camp, an outpost of the great camp at Ardoch.

But the earliest historical reference to Blackford is in Blind Harry's
"Acts and Deeds of Sir William Wallace."  After taking the peel of
Gargunnock, Wallace and his men passed up Strathallan on the way to
Methven, and at Blackford met a party of the English, whom they slew,
and threw their bodies into the Allan.

  "At yai Blackfurd, as at yai suld pass our,[1]
  A squeir come, and with hym bernys four.
  Till Doun suld ryd and wend at yai had beyne
  All Inglismen, at he befor had seyne.
  Tithings to sper he howid yaim amang.
  Wallace yarwith swyth with a suerd outswang.
  Apon ye hede he straik with so great ire,
  Throw bayne and brayne in sondyr schar ye swyr.
  Ye tothir four in hands sone wer hynt,
  Derfly to dede stekyt or yai wald stynt.
  Yar horss yai tuk, and quhat yaim likit best,
  Spoilzied yaim bar, syne in the brook yaim kest."

Further on in the same story, we learn that Wallace after slaying
Fawdoune, and seeing his ghost at Gask Hall, rode south, hotly pursued
by the English.  He forded the Earn at Dalreoch, and crossed the Muir
of Auchterarder.  "Ye horss was gud," but the forced pace sorely taxed
its strength; so "at ye Blackfurd" he alighted and walked.  After he
had gone a mile his pursuers overtook and harassed him.  They had great
advantage, being on horse, while he was on foot; yet Wallace beat back
the foremost of them, recovered his seat, and fled towards Sheriffmuir.

  "Quhil yat he cum ye myrkest mur amang,[2]
  His horss gaiff our and wald no furthyr gang."

Then, rather than let the steed fall into the hands of the enemy,

  "His houch sennownnis he cuttyt all at anys,
  And left hym yus besyde ye standand stanys.
  For Southrone men no guid suld off hym wyn.
  In heith haddyr Wallace and yai can twyn."


In the year 1488, according to the Lord Treasurer's accounts, King
James IV., returning from his coronation at Scone, halted at Blackford
for refreshment:--"Item--Quhen the King cum forth to Sanct Johniston
for a barrel of Ayll at the Blackfurd, xijs."  Again, on November 7,
1496, on a journey from Methven to Stirling:--"Item--That samyn day at
the Blackfurd quhaire the King baytit for corn to the horss, ii.s.";
and the same year, on the way to Perth, March 12th--"Item--Giffen at
the Blackfurde quhair the King drank as he raid by, xiiii.d."  In 1498
there is the curious entry:--"Item--xxv March, to ane woman of the
Blackfurde that brocht coppis to the King and at the Kingis command,
xiij.s. iiii.d."  These "coppis," probably wooden drinking cups or
quaichs, were evidently of some value according to the reckoning of
that day.  A more quaint and artistic record of this monarch's doings
was made later in Tullibardine.  Pitscottie tells that in 1511 King
James IV. built "ane very great monstrous schip," called "The
Micheall."  Nearly all the woods of Fife were cut down to provide the
necessary timber, in addition to that brought from Norway.  A year was
spent in the building, and the cost to the King was L40,000.  When
complete she was manned by 300 sailors, 120 gunners, and 1000 "men of
warre," besides officers.  The dimensions of this leviathan were 240
feet long, 36 feet broad, and the sides 10 feet thick, "so that no
cannon could doe at hir"; "and if any man believes that this schip was
not as we have schowin, latt him pas to the place of Tullibardyne
quhair he will find the breadth and length of hir sett with
hawthorne."[3]  Three of these thorn trees were standing in 1837; none
of them exist now.  A farmer, to improve his field, rooted them out,
and did his best to fill up the hollow representing the hull; but spite
of these obliterations, the plan of the great ship may be traced yet.

At what date the historic ford was superseded or assisted by a bridge
we cannot tell.  Some kind of primitive structure evidently existed
about the year 1700; for in 1703 the Kirk-Session Records minute that
Mr Archibald Moncrieff, the minister, caused his elders to make a
collection throughout the parish, "being that when there came rain that
did raise the waters a great many people were stopt from coming to ye
kirk, and such as came behoved to wead if they wanted horse, which was
very discouraging."  Thereafter one James Waddel is commissioned "to
repair the bridge upon Allan, and he is to bring hom some great trees
from ye wood for helping ye same, and over each of ye two streams of ye
water there is to be put four trees, at least three of greater size,
and they are to be covered with fells and sand."

In 1715, being uncomfortably near the Sheriffmuir, Blackford was
seriously disturbed.  For four Sundays, between October 23d and
November 27th, the church was closed, and again for eight Sundays
between December 3rd, 1715, and February 5th, 1716.  In the latter
interval, as we learn from an account preserved by the Maitland Club,
Blackford was burned to the ground by a party of Highlanders.  The
minister "had stayed at home, preached and prayed for King George and
success to his arms, till he was threatened, and parties sent to seize
him from the garrisons of Tullibardine and Braco, upon which he was
forced to retire and shelter himself with some of his well affected
friends."  His wife remained, however, and had the presence of mind, so
soon as she learned what had happened, to call for "a trusty servant,
and by force of money and promises prevailed with him to go to Stirling
... to give ane account to the General and other officers there what
was done and acted at Blackfoord."  Such is the last eventful incident
in the secular history of the parish.


II.

The Church of Blackford, beside the River Allan, was transplanted
thither after the Reformation.  In former days the name of the parish
was Strageath, and the church stood by the Earn, seven miles from its
present place.  The ruins of the old church are yet standing, preserved
from clean removal, doubtless, because the graveyard about them is
still in use.  Strageath Church has a very ancient origin, being
founded by S. Fergus some time in the eighth century.  According to the
Breviary of Aberdeen, S. Fergus, after he had been Bishop in Ireland
for many years, crossed over to Scotland with some companions and
settled in Strageath.  Finding the district favourable, he set to work
and founded three churches--presumably Strageath, Struthill, and
Blairinroar.  Having appointed these as he best might, and put
ministers in them, he quietly retreated to preach the word of God in
further parts.[4]

Towards the end of the twelfth century, Gilbert, Earl of Strathearn,
founded the Abbey of Inchaffray; and in the year 1200, moved to greater
liberality by the death of a son who was buried there, he further
endowed the abbey with five churches and additional teinds.  One of
these five was the Church of S. Patrick of Strageath.  The gift is
confirmed in a second charter, when the Earl added four other churches
and more lands to the same abbey, and again in a charter of King
Alexander.[5]  Twenty-five or thirty years later the Church of S.
Patrick was the scene of a somewhat significant ceremonial.  Earl
Robert, Gilbert's son, had evidently offended against the powers
spiritual, and sought, or was brought to seek, a reconciliation.  A
charter of his time records that Earl Robert, son of the aforesaid
Gilbert, in presence of Abraham, Bishop of Dunblane, Gilbert, the
archdeacon, and other notable witnesses, binds himself towards
Innocent, the abbot, that he will never in all his life vex the said
abbot or his convent unjustly, but will love and everywhere honour them
as his most special friends, and will add to the possessions of their
house whatever he may by the counsel of his friends.  In particular, he
confirms to them the Churches of Gask and Strageath.  The Abbey of
Inchaffray thus held the appointment to the parish of Strageath, and,
in spite of many changes, the minister of the parish still receives
part of his stipend from "the great vicarage teind of the Abbey of
Inchaffray."

In pre-Reformation times there were two other ecclesiastical buildings
in the parish besides the Church of Strageath--Tullibardine College and
Gleneagles Chapel.  The College Church of Tullibardine was founded in
1445 by Sir David Murray, who endowed it with a provost and four
prebends, thus making provision not only for the wants of the people,
but for younger sons of the family who might enter the service of the
Church.  Within the church, on the west end of the wall, are seen the
arms of the founder and his lady, Dame Isabel Stewart, impaled,[6] the
three stars within the bordure for Murray, and the galley for Stewart
of Lorn, of which family this lady was a daughter.  William Murray of
Tullibardine, the son and successor of Sir David, enlarged the College
of Tullibardine, and built that part where his arms and his lady's are
impaled--the three stars within the tressure for Murray, and a cross
ingrailed for Colquhoun, finely cut in stone on the outside of the
wall.  The Provostry was suppressed at the Reformation, but in the
early years of the eighteenth century the Session Records frequently
mention "sermon at Tullibardine, the Earle and his lady being there at
present."  Lord George Murray, though he favoured the Stewart cause,
evidently encouraged Presbyterian worship, and occasionally showed his
zeal by holding a court "for the fineing and punishing of any such
persons as should be delated and found guilty of drinking themselves
drunk or of profane swearing or Sabbath breaking or any such gross
immoralities."  The church, although no longer used for worship, is
still excellently preserved, and is used as a burial-place for the
Strathallan family.

Gleneagles Chapel is a small and unadorned building, standing near the
present mansion-house.  The old lairds of Gleneagles are buried within
its walls, and the enclosed space about it has been used as a
graveyard.  The Session Records have an entry showing that the chapel
was used as late as March 18, 1705--"Being that the Lady Gleneagles was
brought to bed of a child, and the laird was desirous to have his child
baptized on the Lord's Day, and was unwilling to bring him out so far
as the kirk because of the seasons being yet cold and sometimes stormy.
Therefor desired the minr. to preach at his chapel in the afternoon,
and to baptize his child, which this day ye minr. did."  As far back as
1149[7] there was a church in Gleneagles under the rule of
Cambuskenneth Abbey; and, indeed, according to the most likely
derivation, Gleneagles is the Gaelic rendering of the monastic "_Vallum
Ecclesiae_"--Glen of the Church.  The present chapel seems neither of
age nor consequence enough to give a title.  The first church, if it
stood on the same site, must surely have been a larger building.  A
mile further up the glen, however, there rises a spring of the purest
water, once believed to have virtue in curing certain diseases, and
still called S. Mungo's Well.  The saintly name and the fame of healing
point to this spot as the more probable situation of the old church.

Our only glimpse of Blackford at the Reformation shows slight
resistance on the part of some to the orders of the new church
government.  On October 25, 1564, Sir Patrick Fergy--"sir" being
equivalent to the modern "reverend"--was cited before the Kirk-Session
of S. Andrews[8] as coming in place of the consistorial court, "to
underlie diciplyn for takyng upon hand to prech and minister the
sacraments withoutyn lawfull admission and for drawyng of the peopll to
the Chapell of Tullbarne frae ther Paroche Kyrk."  On the same day,
"Schyr Johan Morrison efter his recantacion admittit reader in Mithyll,
was delaytit and summoned for ministration of baptisme and mariaige
efter the Papistical fasson, and that indifferently to all persones,
and also for profanacion of the sacrament of the Lordis Supper, abusyng
the sam in privat howsis, as also in the kirkyard about the kyrkyard
dykis and resavying fra ilk person that communicat ane penne, and in
speciall upon Pasche day last was, in the hows of Jhon Graham in
Pannalis he ministrat to ane hundreth personis.  He oft tymmis called
nocht comperand beand of befoir divers tymmis monest to desist tharfra
under panis of excommunicacion now wordely mentis the sam to be execut
aganis hym and sa decretit to be used."

A relic of pre-Reformation days is the old church bell, which hung till
recently in the belfry of old Blackford Church.  The bell is inscribed
with the words "O Mater S.D., O Mater S.D., O Mater S.D., I.S.," and
the sign of a hammer.  The thrice repeated phrase is evidently a
contraction for "O Mater Sanctissima Domini"--"O Most Holy Mother of
the Lord."

From the Book of the Assignation of Stipends, 1574, it appears that
Strageath, Muthill, and Strowane were combined under the ministry of
Alexander Gaw at a stipend of L60 Scots and kirk-lands, while Andro
Drummond was reader at Strageath at a stipend of L20.

In 1617, the Parish Church was changed to Blackford by Act of
Parliament:--

"Our Soveraine Lord and Estaittis of this present Parliament
understanding that ye kirk of the parochin of Strageth wes of auld
situat and biggit upoun the newk and utmost pairt of the said parochin
of Strageath, and the parochiners thereof found it nowayes to be meit
to be the paroche kirk of the said parochin in respect of the wyidnes
and gryit bonndis of the said parochin, they thairefore be the space of
twentye-four yeiris or thairby biggit and foundit within the town of
Blackfurde qlk lyis and is within ye middis of the said parochin, ane
new kirk for the gryit ease of the parochoneris ... thairefore ...
ordanis the samen kirk, now biggit within the said town of Blackfurde,
to be ye principal kirk of ye said parochin of Strageath in all tyme
cuming, and ordanis the haill parochoneris thairoff to resort thairto
and ressave the benefit of ye kirk thairat."[9]


The year 1689 brought the Revolution, and the minister, Mr David Moray,
A.M., refusing to conform with the new state of things, was deprived of
his living by the Privy Council.  He retired to Edinburgh, carrying
with him the kirk bible as a memento of his ministry.  When the
Kirk-Session met in 1697 "it was recommended to the minister to use his
endeavours to get the kirk bible from Mr Murray," and early in 1699
there appears the item--"To James Brown, the carrier, for bringing home
the kirk bible out of Edenburgh from Mr David Murray, 9. 4."; and a
fortnight later--"Twopence to James Brown for compleeting his payt. for
bringing home of ye kirk bible."

The first minister after the Revolution was Mr Archibald Moncrieff, an
admirable and faithful pastor, whose conscience forbade him to ask a
manse from the heritors for several years, during which he lived at
Stirling, and travelled to and from his work.  He was succeeded in 1738
by his son, who became Sir William Moncrieff Wellwood.  In that year
the old kirk was burned in rather curious circumstances.  The kirk was
being used as the parish school, and was heated by a peat fire.  In the
master's absence one day the boys amused themselves by throwing about
the lighted peats.  The kirk caught fire, and was burned to the ground.
Sir Henry Moncrieff succeeded his father in 1771, the sixth minister of
the family in a lineal descent.  He had not finished his University
course when his father died, but the patron and parishioners waited for
him.  Sir Henry was too brilliant for Blackford, however, and in 1775
went to S. Cuthbert's, Edinburgh.  The next minister, Mr John
Stevenson, evidently did not please all.  Three of the elders and a
number of the congregation left the kirk.  They met for some time in a
stackyard beside the old ford, and eventually, with some like-minded
ones in Auchterarder, formed the Relief congregation there.  Mr
Stevenson was followed, in 1815, by Mr John Clark--a splendid type of
what was best in the reviled Moderates, an eloquent preacher, a true,
large-hearted gentleman, a keen wit, and skilful farmer, as well as a
faithful pastor.  A new regime began with his worthy and lamented
successor, the Rev. David Bonallo.  The kirk on the brae-head was
abandoned as insufficient and the present church, less prominent, but
more convenient, was built at the east end of the village.


III.

Blackford has been the home of not a few distinguished families; but
the old castles where they lived are, without exception, the most
meagre ruins; of one, indeed (Tullibardine), not a stone remains to
mark the site.

The chief heritor of the parish is Captain W. H. Drummond Moray of
Abercairny, whose family, though old proprietors, seem never to have
lived in the parish.  Ogilvie Castle, a ruin on their lands, which
originally belonged to the Montrose family, does not appear to have
been ever occupied by the Morays.

In the south end of the parish stands Gleneagles, which Sir David
Lyndsay, in his "Tale of Squire Meldrum," describes as "ane castell ...
beside ane mountane in ane vaill," and a "triumphand plesand place."
Gleneagles Castle was for many centuries the home of the Haldanes.
They held the neighbouring lands of Frandie by charter of William the
Lion, A.D. 1165-1214, and came into possession of Gleneagles about a
century later.  From time to time we find them taking an active and
prominent part in the affairs of the kingdom.  Sir John Haldane, in the
reign of King James III., became "Lord Justice-General of Scotland
benorth of the Forth"--a dignity next to that of Lord Chancellor; a
later Sir John fought and fell at Flodden; another was one of the Lords
of the Congregation.  Sir John, in 1650, fell as a leader in the
Presbyterian army against Cromwell at the Battle of Dunbar.  Towards
the end of the 17th century Mungo Haldane was an active member of the
Scottish Parliament; his son John was member for Perth County in the
last Scottish Parliament, and in the first British Parliament after the
Union.  At the beginning of the present century the estate passed into
the hands of Viscount Duncan of Camperdown, and is now the property of
his descendant, the Earl of Camperdown.  The old castle, of solid
walls, surrounded by a moat, was superseded in 1624 by the modern Place
of Gleneagles, built from the ruins.  Locally, the family is best
remembered in one of its Presbyterian members, an ardent respecter of
the Sabbath.  He forbade the keeping of stalls and selling of wares on
the Kirk Brae on the Lord's Day; and, finding his injunction slighted,
was so roused that he went next Sunday with drawn sword, scattered the
offending merchants down the brae, and tossed their wares into the lake
beneath.  There was no more Sunday trading at the kirk.

East of Gleneagles, overlooking its own deep wooded glen, stood
Kincardine Castle, the residence of the noble family of Graham.  The
estate came to them from Malise, Earl of Strathearn, who granted it to
his sister Amabil on her marriage with Sir David Graham, c. 1250.[10]
The Grahams, as Earls, Marquises, and Dukes of Montrose, retained
Kincardine till the beginning of this century, when it was sold to
James Johnston, Esq.  Many a fact and many a fancy attach to the old
Kincardine.  In 1579, the Earl of Atholl, Chancellor of Scotland,
stayed at Kincardine on his way from Stirling, and suddenly took ill
and died.  The crime was never absolutely proved, but evidence went far
to show that some rival had given him poisoned food at Stirling.
During the boyhood of the great Marquis, Kincardine Castle was the
principal residence of the family, and the young Lord James was a
well-known figure in the neighbourhood.  When his father died in 1626,
the funeral took one month and nineteen days to accomplish; and the
accomplishment was attended with such a consumpt of good things as
makes it hard to see where room was left for mourning.  When Montrose
attended the General Assembly of 1638, he sat as commissioner for the
Presbytery of Auchterarder, from which we may conclude that he was
still closely associated with Kincardine.  With the great Marquis the
story of Kincardine Castle ends.  In 1646, being Montrose's principal
house, it was besieged and taken by Middleton, the Covenanter.  We have
a full account of the siege in Bishop Guthrie's Memoirs.  Learning that
the castle was fortified with a company of foot under Lord Napier,
Middleton "brought a number of great ordnance from Sterlin Castle to
batter the walls."  After ten days the besieged were distressed from
want of water.  Lord Napier, guided by his page, who was a Graham,
managed to escape.  The rest surrendered, twelve being shot on the
spot, and thirty-five taken prisoners to Edinburgh.  "Then Middleton
ordered the Castle of Kincardine to be burnt, which was done upon the
16th day of March."

Close by the Church of Tullibardine used to stand Tullibardine Castle.
Here lived for generations the family of Murray, who played many a part
in the changeful events of Scottish history.  There was one Sir William
Murray--the builder of part of the College Church--who is chiefly
remembered as the father of seventeen stalwart sons.  He took them one
day to pay court to the King at Stirling.  When the King saw their
numbers he was angry, for an Act had been passed forbidding such
formidable retinues.  But when the Laird of Tullibardine explained that
he brought only his sons, each with a single man attendant, the King's
anger was turned to compliment, and he forthwith gifted an addition to
the estate which grew so many men.  There was a circular room in the
castle, with a pillar in the centre, where all the seventeen sons are
said to have slept--heads towards the wall, and feet at the pillar.[11]
Fully a century later there was another Sir William Murray with the
King at Stirling Castle.  He so far forgot himself one day as to break
the nose of the Earl of Argyll in the King's presence, for which double
breach Sir William was exiled.  But ere long the King felt need of him.
Refractory subjects would not pay the King his mails and silver marts,
and he was heard to sigh--"Oh that I had Will Murray again."  The sigh
was duly conveyed to the exile, who returned, and speedily regained the
Royal favour by persuading the unwilling debtors to pay their dues.
His son, Sir John, was educated with the young King at Stirling, and
earned the title of Earl of Tullibardine in 1606.  In 1670 the title
went to the Earls of Atholl.  Fortune was less kind to their
descendant, better known as Lord George Murray.  He took the Stewart
side in 1745, and entertained Prince Charles Edward at Tullibardine
Castle.  Exile followed the disaster which overtook his cause; the old
castle, abandoned as a dwelling-place, fell into decay; and a
philistine farmer carted off the last stone of it to build field dykes.

In a M.S. book of Sir John Ogilvy, her Master of the Household, we
learn that Queen Mary stayed at Kincardine and Tullibardine on a
journey which she made to the North in 1562.  Having left Edinburgh on
August 11th, "she continued at Stirling until the 18th of August, when
she set out from thence with a part of her train, and dined and supped
at Kincardine.  On the 19th she left Kincardine after dinner, and slept
at St. Johnston."  On the return journey, leaving St. Johnston on the
16th November, she "slept at Tulliebarne.  On the 17th she proceeded
after dinner to Drummond."  Twenty years later these same castles were
again favoured with a Royal visitor, King James VI.  The visit to
Tullibardine happened in August, 1584, and the motive of it was typical
of that monarch's way.  Moysie's Memoirs, which chronicle the visit,
narrate that the King had been living ten days at Ruthven "or ever he
knew there wes sex houssis infectit in Perthe, his seruandis being
theare; and thairfoir with a few number the samyn nycht depairted to
Tullibardin, and from that to Sterling, leavand his haill housald and
seruandis encloisit in Ruthven."  The visit to Kincardine is inferred
from a letter written by Thomas, tutor of Cassillis, to the Laird of
Barnbarroch, dated 10th October, 1585--"As for newis, it is trew my
lord arrane was to have been in Kincarne upone Saterday last, and thair
to have given his presens to the King, and the King thocht guid to stay
him thereof for the ambassadouris causs being with his majestie, sua my
lord hes nocht presentit the King as yit."

Early in this century the estate of Tullibardine was sold to Viscount
Strathallan, who had married Amelia, daughter of the Duke of Atholl.
Tullibardine thus became attached to the adjoining estate of Machany,
long possessed by the Drummonds.  The Laird of Machany and Viscount
Strathallan were united first in William Drummond of Machany, who
succeeded his cousin as fourth Viscount Strathallan.  True to the
traditions of his House and title, the fourth Viscount was a loyal and
devoted Jacobite.  He fought in 1715, and again in 1745, when he was
killed at Culloden.  After his death the penalty of his ill-fated zeal
descended on his family.  His wife Margaret, daughter of Lord Nairne,
was taken prisoner, and kept in Edinburgh Castle from February to
September, 1746; his son James, who had attended his father at
Culloden, suffered attainder, and for many years the title was
withheld.  There was more caution in the character of Andrew Drummond,
brother to the fourth Viscount, who founded the Charing Cross Bank in
London.  He lent large sums to the Government; but his family connexion
brought him under a suspicion of double dealing, which Sir Robert
Walpole was inclined to believe.  Learning, however, that the suspicion
was unfounded, Sir Robert sought to conciliate the Drummond by warmly
offering to shake hands with him when they encountered one day in the
King's drawing-room.  But Mr Andrew, proof against blandishment no less
than against suspicion, met the advance by holding his hands behind his
back.  The ancestral spirit shone again in Andrew John Drummond, who
should have been seventh Viscount.  He died in 1812, a General in the
British Army.  The forfeited title was restored in 1824 to his cousin,
James Drummond, Esq.



[1] Blind Harry's _Wallace_.  Book iv., l. 309.

For this and other references and much valuable assistance the writer
is indebted to the kindness of A. G. Reid, Esq., Auchterarder.

[2] Ib. Bk. v., l. 293.

[3] Lindsay of Pitscottie's _History of Scotland_.  Vol., p. 256.

[4] _Brevarium Aberdonense Pars Hyemalis_.  Fol. 164.

[5] _Liber Insule Missarum_, pp. 4, 8, 18, 19.

[6] Nisbet's _Heraldry_.  Vol. II., app. 188.

[7] _Chartulary of Cambuskenneth_.  Walcot's _Scoto Monasticon_.

[8] _Register of Kirk-Session of S. Andrews_.  _Scot. Hist. Society_.

[9] Thomson's _Scots Acts_, IV., 556.

[10] _Liber Insule Missarum_, p. xxxiii.

[11] This and the anecdote about Mr Andrew Drummond are given by the
kindness of Viscountess Strathallan.




THE ABBEY OF INCHAFFRAY

By Rev. JAMES BROWN, M.A., Maderty

To those who appreciate time and labour expended upon historical and
antiquarian research, there can be few--if, indeed, there be any--among
our Scottish counties which present scope for their enthusiasm so
extensive and so varied as that contained within the borders of
Perthshire.  Generally speaking, the attractions identify themselves.
The Cathedral at Dunblane, the Round Tower at Abernethy, the Camp at
Ardoch--these preserve still many of their original features and
characteristic lineaments, and need hardly fail to arrest attention.  But
what chance traveller by road or by rail would, when midway between
Crieff and Methven, dream that the bare, solitary column he sees in the
valley below could prove other than the gable-end of a disused barn?
Nay, did he approach and pass the remnant itself, he would probably
wonder to learn that the gloomy, forsaken pile alone marks a spot once
the centre of much holy rigour, educational zeal, and industrial
activity; that thence sallied forth, six hundred years ago, the monk
patriot, with whom the Scottish warriors knelt to pray upon the field
before engaging in the memorable conflict whose issue achieved for them
their country's independence.  A ragged wall, an arched chamber, several
solid heaps of fallen mason-work are all that remain of Inchaffray Abbey.

Perthshire owes largely to the ancient Earldom of Strathearn.  Little is
known concerning the line till Gilbert succeeded in 1171.  Unlike his
immediate predecessors, he manifested no hostility to the inroad of
Norman and Saxon customs and usages.  He was the first to adopt the wise
precaution of obtaining charters for his lands, and rivalled the most
ardent and obsequious followers of David I. in munificent gifts of these
to the Church.  Although it would be hazardous to accept as altogether
faithful the statement of Fordun, the chronicler, that Earl Gilbert
apportioned his whole estates--which extended in length from Newburgh to
the west end of Balquhidder, and from the Ochils to the Grampians in
breadth--equally between the See of Dunblane, the Abbey of Inchaffray,
and himself with his heirs, we have yet sufficient reason to consider
that his liberality to ecclesiastical settlements was handsome.  It
certainly reflects upon him high credit that, due to his pious devotion,
the family of Strathearn were the only Scottish subjects (excepting
possibly the Lords of Galloway) who established a bishopric and inherited
its patronage.

About 1189 the King made over to Gilbert the lands of Maderty with all
their feudal rights and privileges.  In return, the Earl bound himself to
contribute half a knight's service, and to secure that no part of these
lands should ever be allowed to come again into the hands of their former
owner, Gilliecolm Marischall, or any of his heirs.  This
Gilliecolm--elsewhere described as _arch-tyrannus et latronum
princeps_--had incurred his monarch's bitter displeasure by an act of
felony, having betrayed the sovereign Castle of Earn to his Majesty's
most mortal foes, and taken part with them to do him hurt to his power.

Not long after the transference, the Earl sought to signalise his
estimate of the Royal favour by founding a religious house.  He chose for
a site the swamp-girt island which lay toward the northwestern corner of
his lately acquired possession.  So frequent were the liturgical
celebrations there that the settlement received the name of _Inis
Aifreen_ (Celtic), _Insula Missarum_ (Latin), Inchaffray--signifying
"Island of Masses."  He dedicated the monastery to God, St. Mary, and St.
John Evangelist; deputed Malis, the hermit, to select Augustinian Canons
from Scone, and granted his first charter, which bears the signatures of
himself, his wife (Matilda), and his six sons.  The edifice must have
been completed by 1198, as Gilchrist, the heir, who died in that year,
was interred within the building.  Through this bereavement, the family's
affections became more closely united to the place.  "We love it so
much," the parents are recorded to have said, "that we have chosen it as
the place of sepulture for us and our heirs, and have already buried
there our eldest son."  Further and more extended benefactions followed.
By the great charter, of date 1200, Inchaffray was endowed with the
Churches of St. Kattanus of Abruthven, St. Ethernanus of Maderty, St.
Patrick of Strogeath, St. Meckessok of Auchterarder, and St. Beanus of
Kinkell; with tithe of the Earl's kain and rents of wheat, meal, malt,
cheese, and all provisions throughout the year in his Court; with tithe
of all fish brought into his kitchen, and of the produce of his hunting;
with tithe of all the profits of his tribunals of justice and all
offerings; with the liberty to its monks of fishing in the Peffer, of
fishing and birding over all the Earl's lands, waters, and lakes; of
taking timber for building and other uses from his woods, and pannage or
mast feeding for pigs, as well as bark and firewood, in whatever places,
and as much as they chose.  Some years later an additional charter
granted also the Church of St. Beanus of Foulis, with the dower land of
the church and the common pasturage of the parish, and likewise the
Church of the Holy Trinity of Gask, with the same privileges.  To this
document appends a fragment of the donor's knightly seal, which shows on
the obverse side a mounted knight with drawn sword, and on the reverse
side the inscription--"Secretum G.  comitis, de Straderne."

Whatever may have been the demands of spiritual functions upon the time
of the monks, they cannot fairly be charged with "agricultural
indolence."  Their glebe consisted entirely of marsh and bog when the
Abbacy was created.  By 1218--_i.e._, in about twenty years--it had all
been ditch-drained and reclaimed.  The beneficial results of their labour
are noticeable to-day.  Fields immediately adjoining the ruin exhibit
quite a different appearance in spring and yield quite an appreciable
advantage in autumn compared with those more remote.  No stronger
evidence need be required than that the rental of the former doubles that
of an equal area of the latter.

The detail of the great charter includes, as we said, "the tithe of the
fines levied at the Earl's Court."  Nowhere else throughout Scotland
could a subject of the King exercise _jura regalia_.  Perth was our only
county, and the Earls of Strathearn our only Earls Palatine.  When
precisely this independent jurisdiction was bestowed and when revoked and
abolished we have no clear account.  But, according to the trustworthy
evidence embodied in the above-mentioned deed of gift, we gather not only
that the privilege existed in the thirteenth century, but that it
operated favourably for the monks.

The source and reference of the name given to the parish has never been
satisfactorily determined.  Some have attempted to connect it with the
dedication of Inchaffray.  Now, whatever truth there might be in the view
that part of the dedication--"to the Virgin"--was suggested by the name
of the parish (Maderty being the English for the Celtic "mother of God"),
there is certainly nothing whatever to support the opinion that the
district took its style from the Abbey.  Maderty was Maderty long before
Inchaffray was Inchaffray.

Earl Gilbert died in 1223.  Robert, his successor, maintained the like
generous attitude which his father had borne toward the Church.  We may,
no doubt, feel disposed to conjecture some proof of estrangement having
marred the hitherto peaceful relations between patron and clergy.  But if
such did arise, it can have been only temporary, for the very record
which excites the suspicion assures us of even more devoted loyalty on
his part.  "In the Church of Strogeath, and in the presence of Abraham,
Bishop of Dunblane, and others, Robert, Earl of Strathearn, bound himself
toward the Abbot of Inchaffray that he would never in his life vex the
said abbot or his convent unjustly--nay, would love and everywhere honour
them as his most especial friends, and would add to the possessions of
their house whatsoever he might by the counsel of his friends.  He
particularly confirmed to them the Churches at Gask and Strogeath."

The year 1240 witnessed Inchaffray narrowly becoming Chapter of the
Diocese.  "Clement, Bishop of Dunblane, went to Rome, and represented to
Pope Gregory IX. how of old time his bishopric had been vacant upwards of
a hundred years, during which period almost all the revenues had been
seized by the seculars; and although in process of time there had been
several bishops instituted, yet, by their simplicity or negligence, the
former dilapidations were not recovered, but, on the contrary, the
remainder were almost quite alienated; so that for ten years a proper
person could not be found to accept of the charge; that the case having
been laid before the Pope, he had committed the trust of supplying that
vacancy to the Bishops of St. Andrews, Dunkeld, and Brechin, who made
choice of this Clement; but he found his church so desolate that he had
not where to lay his head in his cathedral.  There was no college there,
only a rural chaplain performed divine service in the church that had its
roof uncovered; and the revenues of the See were so small that they could
hardly afford him maintenance for one half of the year.  To remedy these
evils the Pope appointed William and Geoffrey, the Bishops of Glasgow and
Dunkeld, to visit the Church of Dunblane, and if they should find these
things to be as represented, he authorised them to cause the fourth part
of the tithes of all the parish churches within that diocy to be assigned
to the bishop thereof, who, after reserving out of these tithes so much
as should be proper for his own sustenance, was by the advice of these
two bishops and other expert persons to assign the rest to a dean and
canons whom the Pope enjoined to be settled there, if these matters could
be brought about without great offence; or, if otherwise, he ordered that
the fourth of the tithes of all such churches of the diocy as were in the
hands of seculars should be assigned to the bishop, and that the bishop's
seat should be translated to St. John's Monastery of Canons-regular,
(_i.e._, Inchaffray), within that diocy, and appointed that these canons
should have the election of the bishop when a vacancy should happen
thereafter."  Either "these things were found to be not so," or else the
former part of the alternative was duly carried out, as the bishop's seat
remained at Dunblane, and Inchaffray was denied its only opportunity of
elevation to cathedral rank.

[Illustration: Inchaffray]

The next event of interest connected with the Abbey is the pilgrimage of
the Abbot Maurice to Bannockburn.  Every schoolboy can tell the story,
for no annals of Scotland omit to record his presence and service when
the rival hosts stood face to face for a huge trial of strength and
valour.  But probably it is not quite so well understood that much of the
glorious success which crowned the Scottish arms was popularly attributed
to the fact that the monk carried with him the arm of St. Fillan.  A
legend is that St. Fillan, when Abbot of Pittenweem, transcribed with his
own hand the Holy Scriptures, and that his left arm became so luminous
that it enabled him to proceed during darkness with his pious work.
Lesly asserts that this wonderful limb afterwards came into the
possession of Robert Bruce, who enclosed it in a silver shrine, which he
commanded should be borne at the head of the army.  Previous to the
battle, a story has it, the King's chaplain (Maurice), with the view of
preserving the treasure from all chance of abstraction by the English,
had it removed and deposited in a place of security.  While, however, the
King, unaware of what had been done, was addressing his prayers to the
empty casket, it was observed to open and shut suddenly.  On inspection,
the Saint was found to have himself returned his luminous member to its
place as an assurance of victory.  The writers of the Statistical Account
of Maderty thus express themselves--"This relic might, indeed, have given
some encouragement to the superstitious; but one arm of a brave Scotchman
fighting in earnest for the liberty of his country had more effect in
obtaining that memorable victory than could have been produced by the
innate virtue of all the relics of the dead that could have been
collected."  If these critical authors had been less anxious to square
truth with orthodoxy, and not orthodoxy with truth, they would have known
that where the entire force was "superstitious" the influence of the
sacred arm would enormously intensify soldierly enthusiasm, and that it
is impossible to define its comparative share in the result.  Robert
Bruce, indeed, appears to have been sensibly impressed by the good
offices of the sacred relic, and attested his gratitude in a substantial
manner.  He founded a priory at Strathfillan, on the Dochart, a stream in
the Breadalbane district of Perthshire, and consecrated it to the Saint.
At the dissolution of religious houses this priory with all its revenues
and superiorities passed, by order of the King, to Campbell of Glenorchy,
ancestor of the Lords of Breadalbane.  Maurice's conduct on the field
attracted the attention of others besides Bruce.  Macleod of Scarinche,
in Lewis, conceived a strong regard for the Abbot, and induced him to
reside for a time at his western home, where he erected a monastery to
St. Kattanus, whose bones lay buried there.  Strathfillan, Scarinche, and
Abernethy were cells of Inchaffray.

The Earls continued successively to be bountiful benefactors of the
convent.  One of them, Malise, in 1258, presented it with certain of his
slaves (_nativi_)--namely, Gilmory, Gillendes, and John Starnes, the son
of Thomas and grandson of Thore.  Absolute serfdom was then a Scottish
institution, comprising part of the labouring class, who were bought and
sold with the land to which they were attached; and gifts of nativi by
their masters to the religious establishments of those times are
frequently recorded.

After the ancient line of Strathearn had failed in the direct male
descent, and when Maurice de Moray, created Earl by David II., had met
his death at Durham in 1346, leaving no issue, the King bestowed the
Earldom upon his nephew, Robert, the High Steward, afterwards Robert II.,
who on his accession to the throne (1370) relinquished the Earldom in
favour of his son David.  Seventy years later the title and estates fell
vacant and were merged in the Crown, the bishopric and temporalities
being henceforth held in free barony of the Sovereign.

The intimate association of Inchaffray Abbey with the national and
religious fortunes of Scotland receives further guarantee in 1513.
Whether as chaplain or as common soldier, and under what designation, no
available narrative declares.  But certain it is that the stubborn fight
which evoked Scotland's most waefu' dirge, no less than that which
occasioned her immortal paean of victory, was graced by an abbot of this
monastery.  The respective fates of these two divines, however, were
widely different.  Not even monks, clad though they be in all the panoply
of the Church, are safe from sword or arrow.  He of Flodden never saw his
northern charge again.  Unknown, yet not unwept, he fell beneath the
spoiler's weapon with the "flowers of the forest."

It is noteworthy that Abbots of Inchaffray, _ex-officio_ prelates of
Parliament, took little to do with public affairs.  They do not seem to
have shared at all extensively in the transactions which so often brought
together the leaders of the various religious houses.

The subjoined list is fragmentary, but authoritative so far as it goes:--

MALIS--The Hermit--was present and acted as the head of the establishment
at the beginning.  Earl Gilbert must have considered him a person of
trust, since he committed to him the important duty of selecting the
necessary canons.

INNOCENT--The first Abbot--officiated during the lordship of Robert,
1223-1231.

ALAN--1258-1271.

HUGH--1284.

THOMAS--1296.

MAURICE--The Bannockburn celebrity--was promoted to the See of his own
Diocese of Dunblane.  Early in his Episcopate a dispute which arose
concerning the lands of Airthrey was submitted to arbiters, one of whom
was his successor in the Abbacy of Inchaffray, viz.:

CHRISTIAN.

WILLIAM appears to have acted for an unusually long term, or had a
successor of the same name.  On the Feast of Matthias, 1398, a deed of
Janet Moray, wife of Alexander Moray of Abercairny, was witnessed by
William the Abbot, John the prior, and the whole Convent of Inchaffray.
On 25th January, 1468,

GEORGE obliged himself to make Lawrence, Lord Oliphant, his bailie for
life of the lands of the monastery within twenty days after he should be
admitted to the spirituality by the ordinary and by the King to the
temporality of the said benefice.  The family of Oliphant held this
relation during the reign of James V., Mary, and James VI.  In 1539,

GAVIN DUNBAR, Archbishop of Glasgow, had the Abbacy _in commendam_.  On
15th May of that year he granted Anthony Murray a tack of 4 merk lands of
the "Raith" "for furnishing of our bulls"--probably for the expense of
his confirmation.  Before the tack had run out the tenure was made
perpetual by a free charter of the same lands of "Raith" and of the Moor
of Maderty, granted by

ALEXANDER, styled Archbishop of Athens, postulate of the Isles, and
perpetual commendator of the Monastery of Inchaffray, dated at
Inchaffray, December 24th, 1554.  This commendator was Alexander Gordon
(brother of George, fourth Earl of Huntly), who was defeated in his hopes
of the Archbishopric of Glasgow on the death of Gavin Dunbar, and
imperfectly consoled by the high-sounding title of Archbishop of Athens
_in partibus fidelium_, the poor See of the Isles, with, on November
26th, 1553, the Abbacy of Inchaffray _in commendam_, which last he held
till 1564.  In 1558 he was promoted to the See of Galloway.  Nine years
later he was accused before the General Assembly of the Kirk, and
confessed to the indictment that he had not visited for three years part
of the churches within his charge; that he had haunted Court too much;
that he had purchased to be one of the Session and Privy Council, which
cannot agree with the office of a pastor or a bishop; that he had
resigned Inchaffray in favour of a young child, and set diverse lands in
feu in prejudice of the Kirk.  The young child was James Drummond of
Innerpeffray, second son of David, second Lord Drummond.  The Abbey was
erected into a temporal lordship in his favour, and in 1609 he was
created Lord Maderty.  From him is descended the noble family of
Strathallan.


And now the old Abbey fell on troublous times.  The Reformation--that
harbinger of good not unmixed with evil--closed the book of the
monastery.  It is strange and sad that ecclesiastical changes should
partake so largely in the destruction of buildings and the spoliation of
belongings.  Never yet did religious fanaticism satisfy its own desires
without simultaneously and obligingly ministering to the rapacity of the
attendant greedy grabber.  And so Inchaffray, experiencing the fate of
other such establishments, had its walls torn down, its vessels strewn
and broken, its canons put to flight or death, its revenues disposed by
rude, regardless hands.  The Earl of Kinnoull is the proprietor of the
ruin and the few acres that surround it.  These gave him the patronage of
the seven parishes with which, we observed, the convent had been endowed.

Quite a crop of stories are told in connection with the demolition of
Inchaffray.  It is said, for instance, that long ago the ploughman-tenant
of the dwelling contiguous to the convent discovered, while digging, the
golden image "of a sow."  This relic (for relic it was supposed to be of
the abbey practices) he carefully secreted, but latterly converted into
current coin, and became himself a very wealthy man.  But perhaps the
most reliable and authenticated is the following:--A Fowlis widower,
lately bereaved, sought to find a grave-stone to honour his spouse's
memory.  Either he was too fastidious or too ungenerous, but he
abstracted from Inchaffray a stone to be utilised for this solemn
purpose.  The writer quite lately identified the stone as the lid of the
coffin of Abbot Maurice.  There is the figure of a battle-axe engraved
upon the slab.

And now we return to the point from which we started.  All that the
passer-by can see of this object is a chimney-crowned gable.  Nearer
approach shows an arched chamber.  But the whole history of an
interesting past appears to be covered with debris.  It is impossible to
fancy the feelings of Abbot or Earl were he to rise from his tomb and
hear to what uses the fabric of his cherished house was being devoted.
Pig-styes, barn-walls, fences--these comprise the objects to which the
"holy stones" are set.  _O tempora, O mores_.

If these words should meet the eye of antiquarian enthusiasts, and should
happen to stir within them the desire of research, a welcome and a
courteous lodging will be found at the Manse of Maderty.




A SOUTHERN OUTPOST ON THE EDGE OF THE HIGHLANDS

By Rev. HUGH M. JAMIESON, Monzie

Monzie--a southern outpost on the edge of the Highlands--is said to
derived from the Gaelic _Moeghe_, signifying "a good plain."  It is a
long, narrow, irregular parish, extending for nearly twelve miles up
both sides of the River Almond, until it touches, on the north, the
parishes of Dull, Weem, and Kenmore.

The vale of Monzie--the southern boundary of the parish--where stands
the church, the hamlet, and the Castle of Monzie, extends for nearly
three miles in a north-east direction, gradually rising to the height
of several hundred feet.  The most striking peculiarity of the
surroundings of Monzie is the combination of wild and mountainous
scenery with cultivation and picturesqueness.  One of the finest views
in the whole of Strathearn can be had from the Highland Road, to the
east of the church.  In the foreground are the luxuriant woods, the
rich pastures, and the Castle of Monzie, and at a distance of seven or
eight miles is the Aberuchill range, towering in majesty on the
horizon, with the giant Ben Voirlich just visible over their heads.  A
little to the left is Turleum--a conical-shaped hill of respectable
altitude; while Benchonzie and other off-shoots of the Grampians bound
the view on the north.  The general effect is exceedingly beautiful,
and the mingling, within a short distance, of the sublime and the
picturesque is probably not surpassed anywhere in Scotland.

There are three streams rising in the hills to the north that find
their way into the vale.  The Barvick, which runs for three or four
miles along the western boundary of the parish, descends rapidly with
leaps and bounds into a deep and rocky dell, until it terminates in the
fall known as Spout Barvick.  The Keltic, rising in the hills some four
miles to the north, enters a rocky ravine fully a mile up from the
turnpike road, and tumbling precipitously down a height of eighty feet
it reaches the vale, skirts the castle grounds, and, joining the
Shaggie, falls along with it into the Turret.  The third stream--the
Shaggie--rises to the north-east of the Keltie, and, threading its way
for three miles between lofty banks covered with wood, it passes the
village, and pursues its course beneath the old ivy-crowned Roman
bridge, through the castle parks, until it becomes lost in the Turret.

The neighbourhood is peculiarly rich in trees.  On the lawn behind
Monzie Castle are three of five famous larches planted in the year
1738--the fourth one fell during the November gale of 1893.  They rival
those of the Duke of Athole at Dunkeld.  There is a tradition that the
Duke's gardener, on his way home with the seed, was hospitably
entertained at Monzie, and planted them in remembrance of his visit.
The gardener was sent annually to observe their growth and report to
his master.  "When this functionary returned and made his wonted
report, that the larches at Monzie were leaving those of Dunkeld behind
in the race, his Grace would jocularly allege that his servant had
permitted General Campbell's good cheer to impair his powers of
observation."[1]  Altogether, the district is beautifully and
bountifully wooded, and many a laird gathered to his fathers must have
laid to heart some such advice as the laird of Dumbiedykes gave to his
son--"Jock, when ye hae naething else tae dae, ye may be aye stickin'
in a tree; it will be growin', Jock, when ye're sleepin'."

The valley of the Almond runs parallel to the vale of Monzie.  Leaving
the manse, and passing the church and the school, the Keppoch Road
joins the road to Glenalmond, and after a walk of fully two miles the
traveller finds himself at the entrance to what is known as the Sma'
Glen--a romantic pass, stretching along the sides of the Almond for a
distance of fully two miles.  Standing half-way up the glen on a
summer's day, looking northwards, the scenery is magnificent.  Here,
from the mountain's brow rushes a foaming stream; there, a clump of
trees dressed in the most luxuriant green; here, mountains towering
bleak and wild; there, a few spots of verdure growing amid the rocks;
behind, the swift, pellucid Almond water; before, hills stretching on
and on till they are lost in the azure sky.

The banks of the Almond along the vale are associated with much
romance.  Some time in the last century there lived at Corrivarlich a
noted sheep-stealer named Alastair Bane.  Little is known of his
boyhood.  He was supposed to have been brought to the district by
Highlanders who were in the habit of bringing to Crieff cartloads of
split pine from Rannoch Forest, which they sold to riddle-makers to
make riddle rims.  During one of those visits the child is supposed to
have been left.  He was called Alastair, owing to his supposed Highland
descent, and Bane, because of his white hair.  As he grew up to manhood
he showed symptoms of a wandering disposition, and went frequently to
Amulree and Falkirk, acting in the capacity of a drover.  While
pursuing this occupation he became acquainted with many of the
ferocious caterans who were at that time following the same calling.
How long Alastair continued a drover is not chronicled in oral
tradition.  After a time he associated himself with a band of
bare-legged mountaineers, sixty in number, who located themselves under
his leadership in a cave in the glen, to the great terror and annoyance
of the district.  It is said that the last combined effort of the band
at cattle-lifting was at a farm situated in the moor between
Fowlis-Wester and Buchanty.  On this occasion dissension broke out
amongst the thieves, which ultimately ended in the breaking up of the
band.  That Alastair Bane had his dwelling-place among the rocks in
Wester Glenalmond was well known, but every effort to discover its
whereabouts was in vain, until one night a shepherd, wandering on the
hills, chanced to see a light shining through a crevice in the rocks.
Creeping cautiously forward and peering through the opening, he
observed the formidable thief sitting on the floor, amusing himself
with an old fiddle and singing--

  "Many a cow has lost her calf, many a sheep her lamb,
  But I'll sit on a stane, and sing at my den--
  The thief of Glenalmond will never be ta'en."

He was taken, however, and paid the full penalty of the law at
Perth--hanging for sheep-stealing being in practice at that date.  When
on the scaffold he prophesied that "the water o' Almond runs ower mony
a stane, but it'll ne'er run twa years withoot takin' ane."  The
prophecy has reference to the number of people drowned in the river,
which is remarkable for the impetuosity of its floods.

At Fendoch--the entrance to the Sma' Glen--we tread on historical
ground.  Here, at Tom-an-Die--"Hill of God"--there is no reason to
doubt, was one of the chief stations of the Romans, a standing camp,
formed, not for a halt of a few days, but to be occupied for a
considerable time.  It was formed by Agricola in the year 84 A.D., in
his seventh and last campaign, probably a little before the Battle of
Mons Grampius.  It had many advantages of situation, and we may well
believe that it continued to be occupied by the Romans so long as they
had possession of North Britain;--by Lollius Urbicus, who in the next
century anew drove back the Caledonians to their fastnesses beyond the
Grampians; and by the Emperor Severus in the beginning of the third
century.  So distinct were the traces of the camp in the year 1795,
when the first Statistical Account of the parish was written, as to
admit of its being measured.  At that time the trenches were entire,
and in some places six feet deep; but both rampart and trenches have
disappeared under the operation of the plough.  Though the camp covered
upwards of fifty acres, nothing can now be seen but a small piece of
breast-work facing the Almond.

At the mouth of the Sma' Glen there is a round
knoll--Tom-an-Tighe--"the House of the Hill"--where Fingal, the father
of Ossian, is said to have dwelt until his house was destroyed by Gara.
The place is called Fendoch, a corruption of Finn-Tighe--"Finn's
House."  When Fendoch was burnt, Fingal built a fort on the summit of
Dunmore, on the east side of the glen, where he and his father, Comhal,
are said to be buried.  The remains of this fort, still visible, show
it to have been a place of retreat almost impregnable.  That Comhal,
his son, and grandson lived in the parish, the etymology of the place
can scarcely leave a doubt.  Not only have we Fingal's house, but on
the moor contiguous to Fendoch we have Cairn-Comhal--"the cairn over
the grave of Comhal"; while at Cultoquhey we have a camp called in
Gaelic Comhal Cults--that is, "Comhal's battle"; and it is worthy of
note that, towards the close of last century, some urns with ashes in
them were dug up in this locality.

In the centre of the glen stands Clach-na-Ossian--"Ossian's
Stone"--which tradition held to cover the mortal remains of Scotia's
early bard.  When the Government troops under General Wade were engaged
in carrying a highway through the glen, they found it necessary to
shift the position of Ossian's Stone.  The detailed narrative of what
took place is as follows:--

"I have so lately mentioned Glenalmond, in the road from Crieff,
northward, that I cannot forbear a digression, though at my first
setting out, in relation to a piece of antiquity which happened to be
discovered in that vale, not many hours before I went through it in one
of my journeys southwards.

"A small part of the way through this glen having been marked out by
two rows of camp-colours, placed at a good distance one from another,
whereby to describe the line of the intended breadth and regularity of
the road by the eye, there happened to lie directly in the way an
exceedingly large stone, and, as it had been made a rule from the
beginning to carry on the roads in straight lines, as far as the way
would permit, not only to give them a better air, but to shorten the
passenger's journey, it was resolved that the stone should be removed,
if possible, although otherwise the work might have been carried along
on either side of it.

"The soldiers, by vast labour, with their levers and jacks, or
hand-screws, tumbled it over and over till they got it quite out of the
way, although it was of such an enormous size that it might be matter
of great wonder how it could ever be removed by human strength and art,
especially to such who had never seen an operation of that kind; and
upon their digging a little into that part of the ground where the
centre of the stone had stood, there was found a small cavity, about
two feet square, which was guarded from the outward earth, at the
bottom, top, and sides, by square flat stones."[2]


"The people of the country," says Newte, who travelled through the
district in 1791, "venerating the memory of the bard, rose with one
consent, and with bagpipe music carried the sacred dust away by force,
and buried it on the top of Dunmore, in the centre of his father's
fort."  Burns visited Ossian's grave.  Writing to his brother, on his
return to Edinburgh from the North, he says--"Being warm from Ossian's
country, where I have seen his very grave, what care I for fertile
plains and fishing villages?"  Whether the dust of Ossian slumbers
amidst these mountains or within this glen no one can say--we have but
dim tradition to guide us; but surely no spot seems more suitable for
the resting-place of the Caledonian bard.  No monument is erected to
perpetuate his memory, nor speaking stone whispers to each passer-by in
the language of Wordsworth--

  "In this still place remote from men
  Sleeps Ossian in the narrow glen";

but it is surrounded by mountains torn and thunder-split, and it is
laved by a stream as pellucid as his own Cona, which ever sings as it
flows the lonely dirge of the bard who sang of battles and the breath
of stormy war.  "We feel a pride," says Fittis, writing of Ossian's
tomb, "we feel a pride in cherishing the thought that the hoary bard's
pilgrimage closed in Perthshire's 'narrow glen,' where the murmuring
Almond sang his requiem, and that his ashes still rest not far from the
banks of the stream."

Innerpeffray, annexed _quoad civilia_ to the parish of Monzie about the
beginning of the seventeenth century, is one of its historic scenes.
It derives its name from the Pow--a small stream which joins the Earn
near this place.  Inner-Powfray signifies the junction of two rivers.
The name Powfray was given to it when the marshy grounds around the
Abbey of Inchaffray were cut and drained, after the Battle of
Bannockburn, by order of King Robert the Bruce, for the services of
Maurice, Abbot of Inchaffray.  In process of time "Powfray," or
"Innerpowfray," became merged into "Innerpeffray," the name by which it
has been known for many generations.

The first laird of Innerpeffray was Sir John Drummond.  The lands were
bequeathed to him by his father as his patrimony, and in 1508 he
founded here a collegiate church, which he endowed with a revenue
sufficient to maintain a provost and prebend.  The ruins of the chapel,
dedicated to Saint Mary, mentioned as early as 1342, are still to be
seen.  The chapel has one feature not observed in any ecclesiastical
edifice--what is termed "a squint"--an oblique opening in the wall to
allow those who were late in attendance to hear mass without attracting
the attention of the officiating priest.  Few traces of ornament are to
be seen on the building, but at the eastern gable there is a niche in
which a half life-size figure of the Saint may have been placed.  The
chapel was an off-shoot of the Abbey of Inchaffray, and part of it has
been used for generations as the burial-place of the Earls of Perth.

Robert Mercer, the third laird of Innerpeffray, granted to the Abbot
and Convent of Inchaffray the right to fish for eels in the water at
Polpefery, within the lordship of Dullory.  Eels, it appears, formed a
favourite article of food among all classes of the people.  During the
season of Lent the monastic establishments throughout the country
consumed large quantities.  The fish were captured principally by means
of weirs, the eel-skins being used for making bindings to flails.  The
licence to the Abbey of Inchaffray is dated 1454, and is as follows:--

"To all who shall see or hear this charter, Robert Mercer of
Innerpeffry wishes eternal salvation in the Lord.  Be it known to your
University that I, not led by force or by fear, nor fallen in error,
but determined by my pure and spontaneous will, with consent and assent
of Alexander Mercer, my heir, and with consent and assent of Andrew
Mercer of Inchbrakie, are pledged for a certain sum of money, have
given, granted, and by this my present charter have confirmed, in
perpetual and pure charity, for the honour of Almighty God, and the
glorious Virgin Mary, and the blessed John the Evangelist, for the
salvation of my soul, and of the soul of Janet, my spouse, and that of
Alexander, my heir aforesaid, and of all my successors, to the Abbot
and Convent of Inchaffray, and their successors, serving, or that shall
in future serve God in that place, entire liberty and perpetual licence
of fishing, by means of enclosures, nets, or whatever instruments are
necessary for catching eels and other fishes....  In witness whereof
the seal of me, Robert Mercer, and the seal of Andrew Mercer, my uncle,
are appended to my present charter, before these witnesses, Tristram of
Gorty, John Quhyston, Alexander Cardeny, William Bonar of Kelty,
Alexander Sharp of Strathy, an John Crab, shield-bearer, with many
others, on the twenty-fourth day of the month of June, in the year of
our Lord one thousand four hundred and fifty-four."[3]


The Library of Innerpeffray was founded by David, third Lord Madertie,
whose family is now represented by Viscount Strathallan.  Lord
Madertie's grandfather, James Drummond, was the second son of David,
Lord Drummond, and was created Lord Madertie on 31st January, 1609.  He
was educated along with James VI., and was esteemed by that monarch as
"a man of parts and learning," and became a special favourite of the
Court.  By his marriage with Jean, daughter of Sir James Chisholm of
Cromlix, he obtained the Barony of Innerpeffray, which had been his
mother's portion, and at his death, in 1623, his eldest son, John,
succeeded to the title.  John was married to Helen Leslie, eldest
daughter of Patrick, Commendator of Lindores; and David Drummond, the
founder of the Library, was their eldest son.  His second wife was Lady
Beatrix Graham, sister of the great Marquis of Montrose, and the
intimate relationship betwixt the families accounts no doubt for the
existence of several volumes that belonged to Montrose, which are now
in the Library.

The Library was intended for the benefit of students, and any other
persons in the district possessed of a literary turn of mind, or having
a thirst for knowledge.  By his will, dated 1680, David, third Lord
Madertie, bequeathed the half of 6000 merks to be employed by Lord John
Carmichael and John Haldane of Gleneagles for the maintenance of a
library and schoolhouse which he had erected at the Chapel of
Innerpeffray.  The sum conveyed was in a heritable bond, which made the
bequest inept; but in 1691 the nephew and heir of Lord Madertie
executed a deed of mortification, having for its object the vesting of
5000 merks for the encouragement of learning and the good of the
country; "and as a constant and perpetual stock for the preserving of
the said library and maintaining a keeper and schoolmaster, and for
augmenting the library and building a house; but under reservation of
his rights and those of his successors to nominate the librarian and
schoolmaster."[4]  The endowment covered a school and library, but
under the new scheme, instituted in 1888, the school has been taken
over by Muthill School Board, and the present trustees are empowered,
after paying L15 per annum for the maintenance of the school and the
expenses of the trust, to pay over the remainder of the income, and to
transfer the library to any town or village within five miles of
Innerpeffray.

The Library is particularly rich in old Bibles.  The oldest one in the
collection, and one having a special interest of its own, is dated
1530.  It is in black-letter French, the translation being by St.
Jerome.  It is a large folio copy, and contains initial letter
illustrations and pictorial woodcuts, the title-page being in red and
black ink.  There is also a copy of what is popularly known as the
Treacle Bible, so called because of the rendering given to the passage
in Jeremiah viii. 22--"Is there not tryacle at Gylyad?"  Two other
peculiarities deserve passing notice.  The seventh commandment
reads--"Thou shalt not break wedlocke"; and Genesis xxxix. 2--"And God
was with Joseph, and he became a lucky man."  One of the smallest
Bibles in the collection is one that is said to have been carried about
by the Marquis of Montrose.  It bears his autograph in more than one
place, written in a bold plain hand.  It seems to have been lost for a
number of years, and only turned up after a more careful supervision
was exercised.  It was printed in the French language at Sedan in the
year 1633.  There are quite a number of mottoes or extracts copied by
the Marquis himself on the leaves of the Bible, taken from classical
authors, showing that the book was one for close companionship.  Three
of these extracts freely translated may be here transcribed.  The first
is--"Honour to me is better than life"; the second, "Though the
shattered universe o'erwhelm him, the ruins should find him
untrembling"; and the third, under a pen-and-ink sketch of a mountain
and a rose, "Roses grow not without thorns."  Of psalm-books there are
several very interesting examples.  The oldest of these is an edition
of Marot and Beza's Psalms, dated 1567, and having music set to many of
the Psalms in staff and sol-fa notation.  This copy is believed to be
unique.  It contains a great number of prayers.  The volume of
translations and paraphrases of the Psalms, which was published in 1630
as the work of James VI., is to be found in this collection.  It is
entitled "The Psalms of King David, translated by King James."  It has
portraits of King David on one side of the title-page and that of King
James on the other--one of the portraits being, of course, apocryphal.
Of prayer-books there is a copy of the "Booke of Common Prayer,"
printed by Barker in 1604; and also a copy of the book known as John
Knox's "Confession and Declaration of Prayers," which was printed in
1554, and which lately gave rise to considerable discussion as to
whether the early Reformed Church in Scotland used a liturgy.  The
oldest printed book in the Library is a copy of Barclay's "Ship of
Fools," the date being 1508.  Next in point of value as a specimen of
typography is the famous Paris edition of Hector Boece's "Chronicles,"
printed in 1527; and of as much interest is the edition of Bellenden's
translation of this work, printed by Thomas Davidson, of Edinburgh, in
1536.  There is a specimen of early English printing shown in Fayban's
"Chronicle," the copy at Innerpeffray being the extremely scarce first
edition of 1533.  The first edition of Holinshed's "Chronicles of
Englande, Scotlande, and Ireland," which was printed in 1577; is also
to be found here in good condition.  Amongst other notable books may be
mentioned:--"The AEneid," by Gavin Douglas, 1533; Bishop Lesley's
"History of Scotland," in the original Latin, printed at Rome, 1578;
Drummond of Hawthornden's "Flowres of Sion," 1630; the same author's
"History of the Five Jameses," 1654; and also his "Miscellaneous
Poems," 1656; Drayton's "Polyolbion"; Dr Donne's "Elegies"; Stowe's
"Chronicles," 1580; Hitchcock's "Quintessence of Wit," 1590; John
Major's "De Gestis Scotorum," 1536; Bacon's "Essays," 1639; and the
first edition of Burton's "Anatomy of Melancholy."  Students of warfare
will find much to interest them in some of the military books of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries--one of these especially, printed
in the German language in 1620, being the work of John Jacobi von
Wollhausen, and entitled _Kreigskunst_.  It contains engravings showing
the mode of pike exercise and the method of drill adopted for the
management of the musket with rest and linstock as then used.  Amongst
the law books are numerous volumes of decisions by Kilkerran, Forbes,
Durie, Dirleton, Maclaurin, and others; as well as textbooks on law by
Grotius, Montesquien, Duffendorf, and other well-known writers.

Monzie is best known in connection with the burning of a witch.  The
traditionary story makes out Kate M'Niven to have been a nurse in the
family of the Grammes of Inchbrakie, and as a proof that she was a
member of the weird sisterhood, a story is told of her in connection
with a visit which the Laird of Inchbrakie made to Dunning on the
occasion of some festivity.  According to the fashion of the time, he
took with him his knife and fork.  After he was seated at the dinner
table he was subjected to annoyance similar to that which teased Uncle
Toby--namely, the hovering of a bee about his head.  To relieve himself
from the tiny tormentor, he laid down his knife and fork, and attempted
to beat off the insect with his hands.  It soon flew out at the window;
but behold! the laird's knife and fork had disappeared.  They were
searched for all over the table, and under the table; nowhere could
they be found; but when their owner reached home and recounted his
mysterious loss, Kate M'Niven, who was present, straightway went and
produced both articles safe and sound from their accustomed repository.
It was whispered that Kate had personated the bee.

Relieved of her duties in the house of Inchbrakie--as the result, it is
said, of an attempt to poison the young laird--Kate M'Niven returned to
her old home at the Kirkton of Monzie, where she acquired an "uncanny"
reputation.  Evidence of her sorceries was collected or suborned, and
through the machinations of the young laird of Inchbrakie, she was
apprehended and brought to trial on a charge of witchcraft, and her
guilt being conclusively established, sentence of death was pronounced
against her.  The stake was pitched and the faggots piled on the summit
of the Knock of Crieff, and thither was the sorceress dragged, to
suffer in presence of an immense multitude gathered from all the
surrounding country.

  "From Fowlis and Logiealmond, even from Perth,
    The rabble-multitude poured thick and fast,
  Until it seemed as if the conscious earth
    Believed this spectacle might be the last
  Of fire and faggot she would e'er behold,
    Lighted by _legal cruelty and crime_.
  For never did such hosts of young and old,
    Of tottering crones, and women in their prime,
        Of high and low, of poor men and of rich,
        Assemble at the burning of a witch."[5]


The Inchbrakie family tradition is much more reliable than the
traditionary story as related by Dr. Marshall and Rev. Mr Blair.
Writing under date November 25, 1895, Miss L Graeme says:--"My mother
was the wife of the second son of Inchbrakie, and I have over and over
again heard her relate how, on her home-coming as a bride, my
grandfather on one occasion told her the story.  He spoke of Monzie
having brought a witch to the notice of the authorities.  She was being
burnt on the Knock of Crieff, above Monzie, when the Inchbrakie of the
day,[6] riding past, did all in his power to try and prevent the matter
from being concluded, without avail.  Just as the pile was being lit
she bit a blue bead from off her necklet, and spitting it at
Inchbrakie, bade him guard it carefully, for so long as it was kept at
Inchbrakie the lands should pass from father to son.  Kate then cursed
the Laird of Monzie.

"My grandfather had the ring[7] carefully kept in a casket, and his own
daughter was not allowed to touch it--only the daughters-in-law.  On my
mother presenting my grandfather with his first grandson, he bade her
slip it on her finger, as the mother of an heir.  Nearly forty years
after, when I was a young girl, I well remember my mother's horror and
dismay when my cousin Patrick--the head of the family--after his
majority, opened at our house a box of papers which, during the
family's absence abroad, had been left in my mother's care; for there
was the ring in which the stone was set--no longer guarded within the
walls of Inchbrakie.  A few years after this the first acres of the old
Barony of Inchbrakie and Aberuthven were sold; now there is not one of
them left.

"The ring is still retained among the family papers--such, at least, as
were left after the burning of the castle by Cromwell.  It is a
moonstone sapphire, set in two brilliants of different shape.  There is
a curious bluish enamel on part of the gold, which is embossed half-way
round.  There is also a charm, which is said to have belonged to Kate
M'Niven.  It is a slight iron chain with a black heart, having two
cross bones in gold on the back, bearing the words 'cruelle death' on
it, and attached to it a death's-head in the shape of a serpent's head
with curious enamel."

The first statute in Scotland against witchcraft was passed in the year
1563, during the reign of Queen Mary, and is here inserted as a sample
of the simple and concise enactments which were passed in these days:--

  "Queen Marie--Ninth Parliment
      IV. of June, 1563.
   73.  Anentis Witchcraftes.

Item--For sa meikle as the Queen's Majesty, and the three estates in
this present Parliament, being informed that the heavie and abominable
superstition used by divers of the lieges of this realm, by using of
witchcrafts, sorcerie, and necromancie, and credence given thereto in
times by-gone, against the law of God; and for avoiding and
away-putting of all such vain superstition in times to come, it is
statute, and ordained by the Queen's Majesty, and the three estates
aforesaid--that no manner of persone or persones, of what-sum-ever
estait, degree, or condition they be of, take upon hand in onie times
hereafter to use onie manner of witchcraft, sorcerie, or necromancie,
nor give themselves forth to have onie such craft or knowledge thereof,
their-throw abusan the people; nor that onie persone seek onie help,
response, or consultation at onie such users or abusers foresaid, of
witchcraft, sorcerie, or necromancie, under the pain of death, as well
to be execute against the user, abuser, as the seeker of the response
or consultation.  And this is to be put in execution by the justice,
sheriffs, stewards, bailies, lords of regalites and royalties, their
deputies, and other ordinary judges competent within this realm, with
all vigour, and they have power to execute the same."[8]


That Kate Nike Neiving--not M'Niven, as her name is generally
pronounced--was among the first to suffer as the result of the passing
of this statute, is clearly proved by referring to the case of John
Brughe, the notorious Glendevon wizard, who was tried at Edinburgh on
November 24th, 1643, for practising sorcery and other unholy arts.  It
was alleged against him that he had obtained his knowledge "from a
wedow woman, named Neane Nikclerith, of threescoir years of age, quha
wis sister dochter to Nike Neveing, that notorious infamous witche in
Monzie, quha for her sorcerie and witchcraft was brunt fourscoir of
yeir since or thereby."[9]

That the date of the burning of the witch at Monzie took place in the
year 1563, and not, as is generally supposed, in the year 1715 is not
only proved by the recorded evidence in the case of John Brughe already
referred to, it also receives confirmation from the fact that although
reference is made over and over again in the Session Records to public
events, there is no mention made of the witch.  An additional argument
for the earlier date is also found in the fact that Patrick Graeme,
younger of Inchbrakie (referred to by Dr. Marshall as the person who
brought Kate to the stake, and by Mr Blair as the man who would prove
the means of her death), had been for over twenty years in exile.
Having slain John, the Master of Rollo, when returning homewards from a
revel at Invermay, he escaped abroad, and it was not till the year 1720
that he procured remission of his sentence and returned to Inchbrakie.
That he did return is proved by the fact that he was a witness to a
feu-charter, granted by Anthony Murray of Dollary, to Donald Fisher,
taylzior in Crieff, dated "at Dollary," January 13th, 1725.

An attempt has been made not only to fix the date as 1715, but also to
give a list of the "understanding gentlemen, magistrates, and ministers
of the neighbourhood," who acted as judges on the occasion; and in
particular the then minister of Monzie--Mr Bowie--is singled out as one
of those who are said to have been bitter against the witch, and
because of the part he is supposed to have taken in bringing her to
justice, not only was a curse pronounced upon the parish, but for
rhyming purposes a curse is also pronounced on Mr Bowie and his
successors in office--

  "Yon bonnie manse shall ne'er a tenant see
  Who shall not yet this bitter day abye,"--

a curse which has not been realised, so far as we know, in the case of
any of those who have ministered in holy things in the parish.  If
there is any honour attached to the work of burning witches, we
conclude that the parish can claim the honour of being the first to
obey the law enacted on the 4th of June, 1563, and if the evidence
given at the trial of John Brughe be at all reliable--as we have no
reason to doubt--the real name of the witch was Kate Nike Neiving.

Fifty years ago, Monzie was a flourishing village of one hundred and
twenty inhabitants, while in the immediate neighbourhood there would be
perhaps two hundred and thirty more.  Now, the population over the same
area is not above a fourth of that number.  The few cottages that
remain speak of other days, and the old churchyard, and the jougs--an
iron collar in which offenders were pilloried--fastened to the porch of
the church, bring back the long-forgotten past.  Many changes have
taken place during the last fifty years.  Pendicles have been swept
into large farms; the industry of weaving and spinning has disappeared.
But the natural aspect of Monzie is unchanged: the Almond and the
Shaggie still run sunny and clear from the everlasting hills through
her silent vales, which look upon the lover of nature with a face of
beauty as fresh and entrancing as ever.



[1] _Statistical Account of Monzie_, by Mr Laurie.

[2] _Letters from a Gentleman in the North of Scotland_, 1732.

[3] _Liber Insule Missarum_.

[4] _Memorials and Queries_.  Printed by Constable, Edinburgh, 1846.

[5] _The Holocaust_.  By Rev. George Blair.  Edinburgh: 1845.

[6] The first Graeme of Inchbrakie was a son of the first Earl of
Montrose.  His father gave him a charter to it, and to Aberuthven,
dated June, 1513.

[7] The stone had been honoured by being set in a gold ring.

[8] _Waverley Anecdotes_, p. 190.

[9] _The Darker Superstitions of Scotland_.  By John Graham Dalziel.
Glasgow: 1835, p. 579.




THE CASTLE, BARONY, AND SHERIFFDOM OF AUCHTERARDER

By A. G. REID, F.S.A., Scot., Auchterarder

Tradition asserts that the Castle of Auchterarder was one of the seats
of the Scottish Kings and the residence of King Malcolm Canmore, who
granted the Common Muir to the neighbouring burgh.  The Barony was
originally a Crown possession.  Being situated on the road from the
Royal Palaces of Scone and Forteviot to Stirling, and the principal
manor place of a Barony belonging to the Crown, there is every
probability that the tradition of its having been a royal palace is
correct, and that the warlike Malcolm and the sainted Margaret abode
within its walls.

Auchterarder was one of the Royal Burghs of Scotland.  It may be said
that no charter of erection is in existence, but its absence is
explained by the fact that the proximity of a royal seat gave the
neighbouring town the status of a Royal Burgh.  Whether or not
Auchterarder got a charter of erection from the Sovereign, no doubt can
exist that at a very early period it was one of the Royal Burghs of
Scotland.  In the charter of William, the son of Malise, of the lands
within or outside the town of Auchterarder, still known as the Abbey
lands, granted to the Canons of Inchaffray, which lands he had bought
from John, the son of Baltin, he not only appended his own seal to the
writing, but, for greater security and fuller evidence, procured to be
appended thereto the common seal of the Burgh of Auchterarder.

The Barony of Auchterarder remained Crown property until the time of
King Robert the Bruce.  King Alexander II., by charter, dated at Cluny,
the 13th day of August, in the eleventh year of his reign (1227),
granted to the Canons of the Abbey of Inchaffray the teind of his
duties of Auchterarder to be drawn yearly by the hands of his tacksmen
and bailies of Auchterarder.

In 1296, Edward I. invaded Scotland with 5000 armed horse and 30,000
footmen.  He passed the River Tweed on 28th March, and continued his
progress until 24th April, when he routed the Scots at Dunbar with
great slaughter.  He continued his triumphant progress northwards,
resting at various places.  We are told that "on the Thursday he went
to Stirling, and they who were within the Castle fled, and none
remained but the porter, who surrendered the Castle, and there came the
Earl of Strathearn 'to the peace,' and there tarried the King five
days.  On the Wednesday before the Feast of St. John (20th June) the
King passed the Scottish sea, and lay at Auchterarder, his Castle; on
the Thursday, at St. John of Perth, a good town, and there abode
Friday, Saturday, and Sunday; this same day was John the Baptist's
Day."  His progress and the places at which he stayed are
circumstantially narrated in the Itinerary from which we quote.  He
returned to Berwick on 22nd August, and the chronicler adds--"And he
conquered the realm of Scotland, and searched it, as is above written,
within twenty-one weeks without any more."[1]

Attention is directed to the terms of the words of the Norman French
Itinerary in reference to the King having taken up his residence in
Auchterarder Castle.  "_Le Mescredy devaunt Seint Johne passa le roi le
Mere d'Escoce et jut a Outreard, son chastelle._"  Reference is made in
the narrative to many other castles in which the King lay, but only in
this instance is the castle stated to have belonged to him.  This is
conclusive evidence that the Castle was the property of the Crown, and
that the King took up his abode in it as such.

The halting of Edward I. with his army at Auchterarder was not the only
occasion upon which Auchterarder received an embattled host.  In 1332
the Scottish army of Donald, the Earl of Mar, 30,000 strong, lay at
Auchterarder previous to the disastrous Battle of Dupplin,[2] and in
1559 the army of the Dowager Queen Mary, under the Duke of Hamilton and
Monsieur d'Osel, lay there, prepared to encounter the Lords of the
Congregation.[3]  The most disastrous military visit and the last was
when the Earl of Mar, in 1716, burnt the town.

Auchterarder being the only Royal Burgh in Strathearn, was the head
burgh of that County Palatine and the seat of a Sheriffdom, the area of
which was probably co-extensive with Strathearn.  In the interregnum
after the death of Alexander III. the office of Sheriff was vested in
Malcolm of Innerpeffray, who, in the _compotus_ of the extent of all
the King's lands of Scotland for the period between 25th April, 1304,
and 28th February, 1305, accounted as "Sheriff of Uthrardor of its
issues, iocs."; and again, "from said Sir Malcolm of the issues of the
Sheriffdom of Uthrardor and the farms of Glendowiche, L58."[4]

The Sheriff figures in a transaction in the Scottish War of
Independence.  There was an Inquisition at Perth held on 1st September,
1305, before Malise, Earl of Stratherne, lieutenant of the warden north
of Forth, and Malcolm de Inverpefray, Knight, Deputy of John de
Sandale, Chamberlain, and William de Bevercotts, Chancellor of
Scotland, on certain articles touching the person of Michael de Miggal
by Gilbert de Hay, David de Graham, and others; "who say on oath in
Michael's presence that he had been lately taken prisoner forcibly
against his will by William le Waleys, that he twice escaped, but was
followed and brought back, and he was told if he tried to get away a
third time he should lose his life.  Thus, it appears, he remained with
William through fear of death and not of his own will."  The following
deliverance is endorsed:--"The Chamberlain is 'commanded to give him
his goods and chattels of the King's special grace.'"[5]  The Sheriff,
as Chamberlain, no doubt favourably represented to the King Michael's
excuse, as the subsequent conduct of both the Earl of Strathearn and
himself showed a fellow-feeling, and that, like Michael, they had been
acting under constraint.

On 15th September, 1305, King Edward I., with the concurrence of ten
Scots and twenty-two English Commissioners to his Parliament, made an
ordinance containing certain regulations "for the settlement of
Scotland."  Amongst these regulations was the following:--"That there
should be Sheriffs natives either of Scotland or England, to be
appointed or removed by the Lieutenant or the Chamberlain, at
discretion, who should execute the office of escheatry as usual, and
that none should be appointed but the most sufficient men and most
profitable for the King, and people, and the maintenance of peace."
Sir Malcolm de Innerpeffer was appointed, or rather continued, in
office of Sheriff of Auchterarder, and he was at same time appointed
Sheriff of the shire of Clackmannan.[6]  The appointment did not,
however, extinguish the Sheriff's patriotism, as the next thing we hear
of him is:--

"The King sends to Walter, Bishop of Chester, the Treasurer, Malcolm de
Innerpeffrei, Knight, who at the time of this last 'riote' of the Scots
was the King's Sheriff of Clackmannan and Auchterarder, but
nevertheless was one of the first to join Sir Robert de Brus, and
wickedly allotted the Earls of Menteth and Strathern in aiding said
Robert; also fought against the King at the Battle of Seint Johan de
Perth, and has done all the damage he could, commanding that he be
secured in some strong castle, not in irons, but body for body."

"Whereon said Malcolm was at once delivered to the Constable of the
Tower of London, on the 7th of December."

Another writ follows regarding Sir Malcolm's two horses, which the King
permits him to make profit of at pleasure.[7]

We do not know the result of the proceedings against the Sheriff of
Auchterarder, but as his two horses were restored to him, he seems to
have been treated leniently.  In regard to the Earl, we find that in
November, 1306, he presented a memorial to the King and Council,
showing that he was compelled to join Sir Robert de Brus through fear
of his life.

The Castle and Barony of Auchterarder appear to have been Crown
possessions until the reign of Robert the Bruce, when they became the
property of Sir William de Montfichet or Montifex, appointed Justiciar
of Scotland in 1332.  The family was of Norman extraction.  They had
possessions in England, and a branch for some time settled in Scotland,
Robert Montfichet being a witness to a charter of William the Lion in
1184.  In Robertson's _Index of Ancient Charters_ there occurs an old
official inventory, compiled, apparently, about the close of the
sixteenth century, in which mention is made of a charter--"Wilhelmo de
Montefixo of the lands of Auchterarder with the town duty."  Sir
William Montfichet or de Montifex had large possessions, being not only
proprietor of the Barony of Auchterarder, but of Cargill and Kincardine
in Menteith, and other lands in Perthshire; and also of Kilmahew, in
Dumbartonshire, and other lands.  He had three daughters, who became
his heirs-portioners.  To his eldest daughter Marie he left the estates
of Auchterarder, Cargill (or Stobhall), and Kincardine in Menteith.
She married Sir John Drummond, the seventh Thane of Lennox.  Sir John
Drummond's eldest daughter was Annabella Drummond, Queen to Robert III.
Our present Gracious Sovereign Queen Victoria is a lineal descendant of
Marie Montifex of the Castle of Auchterarder.[8]

In the reign of David II. mention is made of the Burgh of Auchterarder
in the account of the Great Chamberlain for 1366 as being in arrear of
the contribution for payment of the King's ransom, being due the sum of
thirty-one shillings.[8]  In 1374, the Chamberlain debits himself with
thirty-three shillings and fourpence received from the bailies of
Auchterarder for contribution; and there are two different entries in
the rolls of 1390, both relating to a debt owing by the Crown to the
community of Auchterarder on account of certain services to the late
King Robert II.  There is also another entry in the Chamberlain Rolls,
under date 1435, in which it appears that the services to the Crown had
not been uplifted by the Chamberlain from the burgesses of Cromarty,
Dingwall, and Ochterardor, because no Chamberlain aires had been held
within those burghs at the time when the account was made up.  Under
date August, 1569, in the accounts of the High Treasurer there is an
entry, where the "customaries of Ochterairder" are mentioned along with
those of St. Andrews.

On 14th August, 1565, by Act of the Privy Council, in name of Henry and
Mary, it was ordained "that lettres be direct to officiaris of armes
chargeing thame to pas to the mercat croces of the Burrowis of
Edinburgh, Hadingtoun, Linlythquow, Striviling, Clakmannane, Kinross,
Uchterardour, Perth, Cowper, and all utheris places needful, and thair
be oppin proclamation in thair Majesteis' name and autoritie to charge
all and sindrie Earlis, Lordis, Baronis, frehalderis, landit men, and
substantious gentilmen dwelland within the bundis (_inter alia_ of the
Stewartrie of Stratherne), with their houshaldis, honest friendis, and
servandis weil bodin in feir of weir, and providit for xv. days after
thair comin, to convene and meet the King and Quenis Majesteis at the
places and upon the days respective efter following--that is to say,
the inhabitantis of Stratherne to meit thair hieneises at Striviling
Brig upon Sounday the xii. day of August instant."[10]

Not only is there thus evidence of Auchterarder being assessed in dues
and exercising the privileges of a Royal Burgh, but, what is of more
importance, as showing its burghal character, is, that there are three
separate precepts of Parliament--in 1570, 1581, and 1600--summoning
Commissioners to Parliament from the Burgh.  No doubt the names of the
Commissioners do not appear in the Rolls of Parliament, but that did
not derogate from the right of the Burgh to send them; and the probable
cause of their not having been sent, and of the infrequency of
Auchterarder appearing in the public records, arose from its being
completely inland, and without foreign trade, on which the great
customs were levied, and consequently being one of what were called dry
burghs.  Owing to this, and being much exposed to predatory incursions,
it had fallen into an unprosperous and decayed state, which would well
account for the fact common enough to Royal Burghs of its not sending
any Commissioners to Parliament.

This state of matters is quaintly described in the Act of Parliament of
30th November, 1581, entitled "Ratification of the Fair of
Vchterardour," which had been obtained with a view to restore the
prosperity of the burgh.  The Act is in the following terms:--

"Oure Souerane Lord and three estaites of this p'nt Parliament,
understanding that the burgh of Vchtirardour is of auld erectit in ane
frie burgh regall, and that the samin is far distant fra the say
portis, and hes not usit faires nor m'cat dayis; the samin is becum
decayit, and the inhabitantis thereof pure sua that thai ar not abill
to intertene the civill ordor of ane frie burgh, nor zit execute sic
justice as thay micht in the cu'trie about being opressit dyvers tymes
be broken men and lymmeris, quha makis incursiones, and hereis mony
cu'trey men and manassies aftymes the inhabitantis of the said town and
burgh; and thairfoir said Souerane Lord wt. auise foirsaid, for help of
the comoun welth of the said burgh, and support of the inhabitantis
thairof, hes given and grantit lyk as his heires wt. auise forsaidis,
gevis and grantis license, fredome, and libertie to the provost,
bailleis, inhabitantis, and communitie of the said burgh of
Vchtirardour to hald zeirlie ane trie fair and m'cat day upoun the 25th
day of November nix to cum, and to cotinew zeirlie thairefter in all
tymes cu'ing, declarand expresslie be thir p'ntis that all or Souerane
Lordis liegis may resort and repair thairto for bying and selling of
all guidis and m'chendice thairintill, quhairby the policie of the said
burgh may the better incres, and that the liegeis also may haif the
better eisement and intertertenigment for decora'un of the realme; and
ordainis l'res of publica'un to be direct hereupon in form as effeiris."

This fair--the date being transferred by the change of style to 6th
December--though shorn of its former importance, is still held.  It was
the day for reckoning and paying yearly accounts in the town and
district, and was until lately a large cattle market.

After the Act of Parliament establishing the fair there is little
reference in contemporary records to Auchterarder.  The Castle and
Barony continued in possession of the noble family of Perth, which
during the eventful years of 1715 and 1745 exercised its influence, not
without effect, in the district in favour of the exiled family.  One of
the most memorable events in the history of Auchterarder was the
burning of the town in January, 1716, by the Earl of Mar, after the
Battle of Sheriffmuir, in order to prevent shelter to the Duke of
Argyll's army, which in pursuit had to encamp amidst the scene of
desolation.  This was an impolitic act, and calculated to exasperate
the public mind against the exiled family.  The burning was accompanied
by great hardship, having been done during the depth of winter in a
snow storm.  The sufferers, after great delay and protracted
litigation, succeeded in obtaining payment from the Exchequer of a
pecuniary consideration, called the "burning money," in respect of
their losses.

After the Act for the abolition of the heritable jurisdictions in 1748
the portion of Auchterarder strictly burghal ceased to have titles
completed in the burgage form.  Until that date titles were made up on
burgage holding and resignations made in favour of the bailies of
Auchterarder, who probably received their appointment from the family
of Perth, the proprietors of the adjoining Barony.  No burgh register
existed, and the instruments were somewhat anomalously recorded in the
Particular Register of Sasines.  A difficulty was presented as to
completing titles when there were no bailies to give infeftments or
receive resignations; and so late as 1832 a petition was presented to
the Court of Session praying the Court to appoint bailies to the burgh
of Auchterarder to give infeftment.  The then proprietor of the Barony,
conceiving this was derogatory to his rights as alleged superior,
entered appearance, and the petition was withdrawn on the superior
offering to give a charter of the lands in question to complete the
title.

The Barony of Auchterarder continued in the possession of the Perth
family until its attainder after the death of James, Duke of Perth,
when the lands passed into the hands of the Commissioners of the
Annexed Estates.  Under their administration a good deal was done for
the improvement of the place.  The Commissioners encouraged the
manufacture of linen, and they laid out the lands of Borland Park into
convenient divisions, erecting cot-houses thereon for the soldiers who
had been engaged in the German War.  They also made a grant of the
Girnal House of Auchterarder for the benefit of the inhabitants.  The
lands were restored to the Perth family in 1784, and were disposed of
by Lord Perth shortly thereafter; the Castle and the adjoining lands of
Castlemains becoming the property of the late John Malcolm, Esq., while
the remainder of the Barony was purchased by the Hon. Basil Cochrane,
by whose trustees it was sold in 1831 to the late Lieutenant-Colonel
James Hunter, who erected a mansion-house thereon.  He died in 1874,
leaving the estate to his nephew, Major Patrick Hunter, who in 1887
sold it to the late James Reid, Esq., Lord Dean of Guild of Glasgow,
and it is now possessed by his trustees.

The Castle of Auchterarder, which is situated about a quarter of a mile
to the north of the town, though not of large dimensions, must have
been a place of considerable strength.  It was surrounded by a moat,
the traces of which are still visible.  The only remaining fragment is
a part of the donjon keep.  A carved stone is built into the wall.
Through exposure it is very much defaced, but it represents a warrior
seated in a chariot, and is supposed to be Roman.  The wall is nine
feet thick.  Some years ago the draw-well of the Castle, built around
with masonry, and of considerable depth, was discovered.  The Castle is
said to have been entire until the end of last century, when a vandal
farmer took it down to build farm offices.

A Common of upwards of two hundred acres in extent is situated to the
west of the town, over which the inhabitants from time immemorial
exercised a right of pasturage.  A Process of Division was raised
before the Court of Session in 1808 by the Honourable Basil Cochrane,
then proprietor of the Barony.  This process was wakened in 1814, and
again in 1841.  Defences were lodged for the portioners and feuars, and
thereafter by the inhabitants, on the ground that, as the Common was a
pertinent of a royal burgh, it was indivisible, and the Act for
division of commons did not apply.  Litigation followed, and ultimately
in 1860 a Bill was brought into Parliament and carried through for the
vesting of the Common for the benefit of the town in a set of
Commissioners.  Under the Muir Improvement Act, 1860, the Common was
reclaimed by the Commissioners, being drained, trenched, and fenced.
The debt incurred in the reclamation is nearly wiped out, and it now
forms a valuable source of public revenue.  The careful and economic
conduct of the Commissioners since the Act was passed, by which such a
favourable result has been attained, is deserving of all praise, and
the gratitude of future generations.

In 1894 the ratepayers resolved to adopt the Burgh Police Act, and the
affairs and management of the town are now entrusted to Police
Commissioners.

Having given this retrospect of the civil history of Auchterarder, we
shall now advert to a few prominent facts in its ecclesiastical annals.

The first notice we have of the Church of Auchterarder is in the
foundation charter by Gilbert, Earl of Strathearn, dated in 1198, in
favour of the Abbey of Inchaffray.  By that charter he granted the
Church of St. Meckessock of Eochterardeour, and the four other Churches
of Aberuthven, Madderty, Strageath, and Kinkell.  This grant was
subsequently confirmed, and the additional churches added thereto of
Dunning, Monzievaird, Fowlis, and Kilbryde.[11]

As already stated, King Alexander II. granted the teind of his duties
of Auchterarder, and, by a subsequent charter, amongst other grants he
confirmed the grant of these churches to Inchaffray.

William the Lion executed a similar confirmation of the grant of the
Churches of Madderty, Kinkell, and Auchterarder.

In virtue of these grants the teinds of the Church of Auchterarder were
drawn by the Abbey of Inchaffray, but, as a condition, the Abbey had to
provide divine ordinances in the Parish Church, and the cure
accordingly was served by a vicar.  The church and parish were within
the Diocese of Dunblane.  The old parish church is situated about half
a mile to the north of the town, and, though roofless, is standing
nearly entire.  It is a long, narrow building with no architectural
beauty.  The foundation cross--a long slab with a Latin cross
thereon--was, a number of years ago, exhumed, and now stands within the
walls; while the baptismal font, which until lately stood at the
western entrance, was recently removed for safe custody to the new
parish church within the town.  The old bell is also there.  Although
small, it gives forth a very sweet and clear sound, and bears the
impress of antiquity.

The Church of Auchterarder was dedicated to St. Mackessog, who was also
the patron saint of Luss and Comrie.  He flourished in the sixth
century, and his day was the tenth of March.  His legend and office are
given under that date in the Breviary of Aberdeen.  Southward from the
church a few hundred yards there is a perennial spring still bearing
the name of Mackessog's Well, and which until recent times was resorted
to for the healing virtue of its waters.  After the Reformation the
Saint's day was kept on the 10th of March, O.S., as one of the
principal fairs of the town, and so continued until a recent period.

The old church appears to have been used as a place of worship until
about the time of Charles I.  The tradition is that the roof fell in on
a Sunday after the congregation had left and were returning on the Brae
of Powhillock to Auchterarder.  While the old church continued to be
the church of the parish, there was at an early period, and anterior to
the Reformation, a chapel in the town of Auchterarder where the present
parish church stands.  The croft at the back is still named the Chapel
Croft.  The northern part of the present parish church and the steeple
were erected about the middle of the seventeenth century, the steeple
being built of stones taken from the old Castle of Kincardine,
dismantled after the siege in 1646.  The southern portion of the church
was added in 1784.

There is incorporated with the parish of Auchterarder the eastern
portion of the parish of Aberuthven.  Aberuthven was one of the
earliest ecclesiastical foundations in Scotland.  It was dedicated to
St. Cathan, Bishop and Confessor, who flourished in the sixth century.
His festival was held on the 17th of May.  The Churches of Kilchattan,
in Bute, and Fortingall, in Perthshire, were also dedicated to him.
Aberuthven was one of the churches appropriated to the Abbey of
Inchaffray by the foundation charter of Gilbert, Earl of Strathearn,
before referred to.  The cure was served by a vicar appointed by that
house.  In the charter it is named "_Ecclesia Sancti Kattani de
Abbyrrothueuen_."  This charter was confirmed, and other churches
granted by a subsequent charter of the Earl Gilbert.  Alexander II.
confirmed this last charter.  Earl Malise confirmed by charter the
gifts of his grandfather, Gilbert, and the confirmation of his father,
Robert, Earl of Strathearn, and granted four merks of the rents of his
lands of Aberuthven, which the Canons of Inchaffray were accustomed to
receive previous to the year 1247.

Aberuthven continued a separate parish from Auchterarder until some
time after the Reformation.  It was united to Auchterarder prior to
21st February, 1618, and the minister for some time thereafter occupied
the manse and glebe of Aberuthven.  The parish of Aberuthven included
the Brae of Foswell, south of the Ruthven, now partly situated in the
parish of Auchterarder and partly in Blackford.  Kincardine Castle, the
seat of the Earls of Montrose, was within the bounds.  Aberuthven was
the parish church where that family worshipped and where their remains
were interred.  The walls of the Church of Aberuthven--a long, narrow
building like that of Auchterarder--are still standing.  On the south
side, and partly within the area, a four-square building named "the
Aisle" has been erected as a mausoleum for the ducal family of
Montrose.  The last received within its walls was James, Duke of
Montrose, who died in 1836.  This aisle was designed by Adam, the
eminent architect.  At the east end of the church, on the gospel side
of the site of the high altar, there is a recess in the wall, forming
an ambry of elegant form.  It is evident there has been a door upon it,
from the iron sockets which still remain.  This was probably used for
holding the church utensils.  Worship was continued in Aberuthven
Church until the end of the seventeenth century, as the funeral sermon
of the Marchioness of Montrose was preached in it on 23rd January,
1673, by the Rev. Arthur Ross, the then parson of Glasgow, afterwards
Archbishop of St. Andrews.  His daughter, Anna, Lady Balmerino, was the
mother of the gallant Lord Balmerino who was beheaded on Tower Hill in
1746.

Sir David Cardney was vicar of the Parish Church of Auchterarder in
1527.

After the Reformation it was proposed by the General Assembly, in 1581,
that the Presbytery should be erected as the Presbytery of Crieff.  The
Assembly, on 8th April, 1593, "ordaines the Presbyterie of Dumblane to
be transportit to Ochtirardour, and ordainis the Presbyteries of
Stirling and Perth to establishe the said Presbyterie in Auchtirardour
upon Thursday come xv. days," being 19th April, 1593.  It was changed
to Muthill prior to 18th January, 1633, but Auchterarder was resumed
before 1638.

At the Reformation the parish of Auchterarder was supplied by David
Murye, reader, in 1567.  The first Protestant minister in Auchterarder
was John Hamyll.  He was previously vicar of Dunning, having succeeded
there to his uncle, Sir John Hamyll, who from his title was likely
vicar of Dunning in the old church and conformed to the new opinions.
John Hamyll was presented by King James VI. to the Vicarage of
Auchterarder on 28th June, 1568, and to the Vicarage of Aberuthven on
1st March, 1582.  He had also charge of Kinkell and Dunning.

John Graham was minister of Auchterarder in 1636.  He was a member of
the General Assembly at Glasgow, in 1638, at which the famous James,
Marquis of Montrose, was representative elder from the Presbytery of
Auchterarder, he being then on the Covenanting side.  Mr Graham was
deposed by the Commission of the Assembly on 27th November, 1644, for
speaking once to the Marquis of Montrose.[12]  The sentence was taken
off by the Assembly, 8th February, 1645; but he was again deposed by
the Assembly, 6th July, 1649.  His prelatic predilections were
attributed to his wife being a descendant of John Hamilton, the last
Catholic Archbishop of St. Andrews.

James Drummond, son of the Rev. James Drummond, minister of Fowlis, and
a near relative of the Earl of Perth, was successively incumbent of
Auchterarder and of Muthill.  He was consecrated Bishop of Brechin on
Christmas Day, 1684, in the Chapel Royal of Holyrood.  He is reported
to have been a man of strict Protestant principles, and a decided
opponent of King James' interference with the Church, though he, like
most of his brethren, was a keen supporter of hereditary monarchy, and
took a decided part with King James when the most of his courtiers
deserted him.  Bishop Drummond was deprived of his bishopric at the
Revolution, having preached at Brechin for the last time on Sunday,
18th April, 1688.[13]

David Freebairn was minister of Auchterarder from 1680 to 1686, when he
became minister of Dunning.  He was deprived by the Privy Council, 4th
September, 1689.  He went to Edinburgh, and was consecrated a bishop of
the Scottish Episcopal Church, 7th October, 1722, and died Primus and
the oldest Presbyter in Scotland, 24th December, 1739, in his
eighty-seventh year and sixty-fourth of his ministry.  "He was of
blameless conversation and sweet temper, while he was a vigilant
preacher and a successful physician."  His son Robert was a bookseller
and printer in Edinburgh, and a staunch adherent of the Stuart family.

Andrew Duncan, D.D., was minister of Auchterarder from 1781 to 1802,
when he was translated to Ratho.  He was Principal Clerk to the General
Assembly, and Moderator of the Assembly in 1824.

Robert Young was presented to the church by the Earl of Kinnoull, 14th
September, 1834.  Objections were taken to him under the Veto Act, and
his settlement was delayed till 1843.  He died 15th September, 1865.
He was an excellent scholar, an able preacher, and a faithful pastor.

In conclusion, let us express a hope that Auchterarder may long
flourish and increase in prosperity, and that the sentiment contained
in its motto may continue to be verified--_Non potest civitas abscondi
supra montem posita_.



[1] M.S. in the Imperial Library at Paris.  Fonds Lat., 6049, folio 30
b.

[2] Buchanani Hist.

[3] Knox's _History of the Reformation_.

[4] _Calendar of Documents relating to Scotland_.  Vol. II.; 1689.

[5] _Calendar of Documents relating to Scotland_.  Vol II.; 1646.

[6] _Calendar ut supra_; 1691.

[7] _Calendar_; 1858.

[8] _History of the House of Drummond_.  By Viscount Strathallan.

[9] _Rotuli Camerarii Scotiae_.

[10] _Register of the Privy Council of Scotland_.  Vol. I., p. 348.

[11] _Liber Insule Missarum_.

[12] _Guthrie's Memoirs_.

[13] _History of Brechin_.  By David D. Black (pp. 97-98.)




AT THE GATE OF THE HIGHLANDS

By Rev. JOHN HUNTER, M.A., Crieff

The title describes admirably the position of the town of Crieff,
planted as it is on the Knock, at the base of which the main road from
Stirling and the South splits into two portions--the one running by way
of Monzievaird and Comrie, the other by Monzie and the Sma' Glen, into
the Western and Northern Highlands.

Crieff has had a long history.  The most probable meaning of the name
is "Tree-town," from _Craobh_--Gaelic for "tree"--a fact that carries
us back into a remote age.  Fifty or sixty years ago, the Breadalbane
Highlanders spoke of Crieff as the "town of the tree."  In early
historical times the fame of Crieff was overshadowed by that of Foulis,
near by which was the Castletown--the principal residence of the Earls
Palatine of Strathearn--not the Celtic Earls whose home was at
Tom-a-chastel, but the Stewarts, and afterwards the Grahams, who rose
into place and power in Strathearn upon the ruins of the ancient line,
which seems to have had no family name.

Treasonable practices against the life of Robert the Bruce brought
about the downfall of the Celtic Earls.  The Black Parliament, which
sat at Scone in August, 1320, condemned Joanna, daughter of Malise, the
last Earl, to perpetual imprisonment.  She had married Warrenne, Earl
of Surrey--appointed Guardian of Scotland by Edward I. in 1296--and in
1334 her father resigned his Earldom of Strathearn to his son-in-law.
For the doing of this he was forfeited and attainted, in 1345, "as an
enemy to the King and Kingdom of Scotland."  The fief reverted to the
Crown.  Next year was fought the Battle of Durham, and David II. was
carried captive to London, where he remained for eleven years.  While
in England he bestowed the forfeited Earldom of Strathearn upon his
nephew, Robert, the High Steward of Scotland, afterwards King Robert
II.  On his accession to the throne, in 1370, Robert II. transferred
the Earldom to David, the eldest son of his second marriage to Euphemia
Ross, the widow of Randolph, Earl of Moray.  Earl David took the title,
Earl Palatine, in 1375, and his only daughter, Euphemia, who succeeded
him in 1389, styled herself "_Senescalli Comitissa Palatina de
Strathearn_."  She married Patrick Graham, who was killed at Ferntower,
in 1413, by Sir John Drummond of Concraig, Steward of Strathearn, and
kinsman of James I., whose mother was Annabella Drummond.  The only son
of Patrick Graham and his wife, Euphemia, was Malise Graham, who, as
Earl of Strathearn, became security along with twenty-seven others for
the payment of the ransom of James I.  He was detained as a hostage in
England for thirty years, and meantime his estates and title were
resumed by the King, on the ground that they did not descend to the
heir-female.  To compensate him for this, he was created Earl of
Menteith.  The annual rental of his estates as Earl of Strathearn was
set down in the Durham Schedule at 500 merks.  The schedule was drawn
up in the year 1424.

Even in the time of the old Earls, Crieff held an important position in
public affairs.  It will hardly do to say that it was the capital of
Strathearn.  As a Royal Burgh of the foundation of Malcolm Canmore,
perhaps Auchterarder was entitled to claim the premier rank.  But it
would seem that the business of the ancient Earldom was transacted
here.  So early as 1218, Earl Gilbert, the founder of the religious
house of Inchaffray, granted a charter of "six marcis of Abercarnich,
dated apud Crefe die Santi Ambrosii."  Fifty years later, Earl Malise,
who was the first of his race to show fondness for English
ways--sending his sons, Gilbert and Robert, to be educated in the
English Court--granted, to the Convent of Inchaffray, permission to
quarry stones within his lands at Nether Gask.  The permission was
dated at Crieff, 1266.  Later traces are a narration by Robert, the
Steward of Scotland and Earl of Strathearn, of the proceedings of his
Court, held at Crieff on May 8th, 1358; and the fact that on May 7th,
1491, William, Lord Ruthven, moved King James IV. and his Council for a
return of the record of "ane justiceayr holden at the Skait of Creif on
the penult day of July, 1443."

The Steward's Court of Strathearn was held in the open air.  The site
was included within the park of Broich.  It was a circular mound,
twelve yards across, and was recognisable up to the year 1860.  A
"fail" dyke surrounded the spot, and two aged larch trees threw their
shadows upon it.  A certain reverential feeling, due to a site from
which had gone forth the issues of life and death, kept the place
intact.  But in that year vandalism scored a regrettable triumph.  The
site was trenched and levelled.  Two cists were discovered of the
rudest construction.  Human remains were found within one of them,
bearing traces of fire action; also an urn, which measured 5 inches in
height and 5 inches across.  Here, then, was the stayt, or skait, or
skeat of Crieff.  The Court continued in the full vigour of its energy
for more than a hundred years, dispensing justice both in civil and
criminal cases.  Originating in the claim of Earl David in 1375 to be
Earl Palatine, its jurisdiction continued in unimpaired strength and
scope down to the year 1483--well on into the reign of James III., and
exactly thirty years before the disastrous Battle of Flodden.  This
latter date is interesting to us, seeing that it marks the turning
point in the fortunes of Crieff.  With the decay of the power of the
Court of the Earl Palatine of Strathearn Crieff also decayed, and sank
into the position of an ordinary kirk-town.  The period of decaying
prosperity lasted for 200 years--on to 1683, when a forward impulse was
given by George Drummond of Milnab, who in that year became Lord
Provost of Edinburgh.  By giving off pieces of his lands, in feu, he
offered an inducement to settle in Crieff, which was taken advantage of
to some small extent.  Others have taken up the lead of the
enterprising Laird of Milnab, and Crieff is now a town of feuars,
holding mainly of the Perth Estate, Dollerie, and Broich.  But this is
modern history, and we have not yet done with the old.  I have still to
relate as briefly as may be how it came about that the Court of the
Earls Palatine lost power and influence.

The result was due in great measure to the jealousies and dissensions
of the rival families of the Murrays and the Drummonds.  The people of
Crieff, in the period of its decadence, may well have anticipated
Shakespeare's "A plague on both your houses," as applied to the
Capulets and the Montagues.  The hereditary office of Steward of
Strathearn was a prime bone of contention.  In the days of the Celtic
Earls the office was usually held by a younger son, or other near
relation.  The last of these Seneschals of the old line was Malise, who
had married Murialla, the widow of Fergus, son of Gilbert, Earl of
Strathearn, the benefactor of Inchaffray.  He got with her the lands of
Tullibardine in dower.  A son, Henry, and a daughter, Ada, were born to
them.  The daughter married Sir William Murray, who got the lands of
Tullibardine conveyed to him, in 1284, by his mother-in-law, and
confirmed, for his greater security, by his brother-in-law, Henry.
This Sir William Murray was one of those who were summoned to Berwick
by Edward I. in 1292 to hear the advocacy of the claims of Bruce and
Balliol.  Henry, the brother-in-law, became Steward of Strathearn on
the death of his father, Malise.  His only daughter married Sir Maurice
Drummond of Concraig, and carried with her the office and lands held by
her father.  Sir Maurice was the first Drummond who was Steward of
Strathearn.  Both he and his wife were buried within the choir of the
Church of Muthill.  It is not to libel human nature to say that the
Tullibardine Murrays looked with disfavour upon the passing of the
Stewardship to the Drummonds of Concraig.  The latter, however, were
legally in possession, and the Murrays had to bide their time.  The
opportunity was not long in coming.  King Robert II. died in 1390.  He
is described by Froissart as a man "not valiant, with red, bleared
eyes, who would rather lie still than ride."  His reign was prosperous
but at his death "every man did what seemed right in his own eyes."
His third son, nicknamed the Wolf of Badenoch, quarrelled with the
Bishop of Moray and burned his Cathedral of Elgin.  The Duke of
Rothesay, heir to the throne on the death of his father, Robert III.,
was starved to death in Falkland Palace by his uncle, the Duke of
Albany in 1401.  In these wild days Strathearn had its own troubles.
In or about the year 1391 the Stewardship was held by Sir John Drummond
of Concraig the grandson of Sir Maurice, who lies buried in the choir
of Muthill Church.  Sir John married Matilda Graham, the sister of Sir
Patrick Graham who subsequently became Earl of Strathearn in right of
his wife Euphemia, the daughter of Earl David, first Earl Palatine.  It
was his duty, as Steward of Strathearn, to try Sir Alexander Murray of
Ogilvy for the murder of William de Spalding.  This was specially
unfortunate, seeing that Sir Alexander Murray's father had got the
Barony of Ogilvy in compensation for the loss of the Earldom of
Strathearn, when it was assumed by Robert Stewart, afterwards King
Robert II.  He was at the bar of a Court over which he doubtless
thought he had a right to preside.  The Court sat at Foulis.  Upon the
bench were Sir John and Maurice Drummond, deputies of the High
Justiciar, the Lord of Brechin.  The accused pled the privilege of one
who was within the ninth degree of kin and "bluid" to Macduff, some
time Earl of Fife, stating that he had gone to the Cross of Macduff,
near Newburgh, and "given nine kye and ane colpindach (young cow), and
was therefore free of the slaucher committed by him."  His counsel were
Sir Bernardo de Hawden, Knight of Gleneagles, and Sir John de Logy of
Logiealmond.  The judges referred the matter to the High Justiciar, who
decided that Sir Alexander should make his defence before the Court at
Foulis.  He submitted, and got off easily, "not with such severities
and rigours of law as might have been shown."

[Illustration: Gateway, Foulis Church.]

This affair made matters worse between the Murrays and the Drummonds.
Sir Alexander and his friends set about trying to emancipate themselves
from the jurisdiction of the Stewards of Strathearn.  They found an
aider and abettor in Sir Patrick Graham, who had assumed the title of
Earl of Strathearn in right of his wife.  Sir John Drummond of
Concraig, the Steward, was his brother-in-law, but disposed to stand
stiffly upon his position as hereditary Steward.  He declined to resign
his office into the hands of the Earl of Strathearn as superior.  Upon
this there ensued a bitter personal quarrel between the Earl and the
Steward.  The Murray party saw their advantage and took it.  The wife
of the Laird of Ogilvy was grand-niece to the second wife of the Earl
of Strathearn, and through this connection or otherwise he was induced
to give a pledge that he should either have power to dispose of the
Steward's office or not be Earl of Strathearn.  He set out from Methven
Castle with the intention of breaking up the Steward's Court at the
Stayt of Crieff.  Sir John and his friends encountered him in the park
of Ferntower at a place still marked by a large standing-stone.  The
Earl was killed, and Sir John and his friends fled to Ireland.  Fordun
states that none of them were brought to justice, except William and
Walter Oliphant.  These were probably sons or grandsons of Sir Walter
Oliphant of Gask, who married Elizabeth, the youngest daughter of
Robert the Bruce, on 11th Jan., 1364.  This fatal encounter in the park
of Ferntower took place in 1413, during the regency of Albany, who
succeeded to power in 1406, after the death of his brother, King Robert
III.  Sir John had secured the succession to his lands and offices in
favour of his son, Malcolm, so that the outlawry decreed against him
affected himself only.  He died in Ireland.  But misfortune dogged his
House.  Even in the time of his grandson, the family historian states
"that ever since the killing of the Earl of Strathearn the family had
no settled peace, but were forced to keep house to so many friends and
servants for their security that it brought a consumption upon their
fortune, ingadged it in burdens, and made him pairt with many of his
lands to relieve his debts."  In 1474 the laird of the time, Maurice
Keir Drummond, sold lands and his office of Steward to his chief, John
Drummond of Cargill, afterwards Lord Drummond.

Thus the Murrays had gained their object, so far.  The family of
Concraig was ruined.  But they were foiled in their attempt upon the
Stewardship.  They had tried for that many ways.  In 1441, Sir David
Murray of Tullibardine had attempted "to wind himself once in
possession of the Stewartrie" by proposing a marriage alliance between
his daughter, Isabella, and Malcolm Drummond, son of Sir John.  The
scheme fell through somehow.  Meantime, King James I. had put new life
into the central governing body.  Parliament was now waking up to a
sense of its rights and duties.  The actual reign of James I. only
lasted for thirteen years (1424-1437), but he held no fewer than
thirteen Parliaments during these years.  It was his object to break
the power of the nobles and local dignitaries.  The unique position of
the Earldom of Strathearn and the hereditary Stewardships which had
grown up alongside of it attracted his attention.  The Earldom was the
only Palatinate within the bounds of Scotland; the only Earldom
possessing Royal privileges.  King James I. was a reformer of the
"hot-haste" school.  The execution of a plan of action followed hard
upon the heels of the conception of it.  An Act of his first Parliament
directed an inquest to be made by the Sheriff--"what lands pertain to
the King, or has pertained during the reign of the last three kings,
and in whose hands they now are."  In terms of this statute, King James
I. resumed the Earldom of Strathearn on the ground that it was a male
fee, and did not pass to the wife of Patrick Graham, the heir-female.
This happened in 1436, and it cost the King his life the following year
at the hands of Robert Graham, uncle and tutor of the young heir,
Malise, who was still detained as a hostage in England in security for
the payment of the King's ransom.  But the impulse had been given;
though dead, the reformer King still spoke to the nation, and in 1442
James II, and his Parliament declared that the Earldom had fallen to
the Crown.  In 1455 it was enacted that all regalities in the King's
hands should be annexed to the royalty, and subject to the King's
Court.  This action in Scotland had the support of the Murray faction.
They had come to see the futility of any attempt upon the Stewardship.
In the year 1474--the very year in which Maurice Keir Drummond of
Concraig had parted with lands and office to his kinsman, the Laird of
Cargill--Sir William Murray of Tullibardine obtained from King James
III. a discharge or dishonouration of the Seneschalship of Strathearn.
The effect of this was that his person and his lands were emancipated
from the jurisdiction of the Steward's Court.  This example was
followed by the Laird of Abercairny, who held a tack of the lands of
Tullichettle, which Sir William Stirling of Keir, the granter, was
called on to warrant.  In 1483, the Laird of Abercairny, Humphrey
Murray, appeared at the Stayt of Crieff and withdrew his
suit--"_Levavit sectam suam de predicta curia_," which was transferred
by Crown charter to the King's Sheriff Court at Perth.  Thus terminated
the jurisdiction of the Earls Palatine of Strathearn.  It was followed
up by a declaration of date 16th February, 1505, to the effect that
"the Baroneys of new create and maid within the King's Earldom of
Strathearn within thir three years bipast" were released of all service
in the Steward Court of the King's Earldom of Strathearn.  Such service
was now due to the King's Sheriff Court of Perth "in all times to cum."

In giving this rapid sketch of the early history of Crieff, I have
followed mainly the guidance of the writer of a historical introduction
to a little book entitled _The Beauties of Upper Strathearn_.  For the
short account of the Skait of Crieff, I am indebted to one or two
articles in the _Strathearn Herald_, written by the late H. B. Farnie,
on the 17th and 24th days of November, 1860, just when the trenching
and levelling were in full swing.  We must now turn to the later period
during which Crieff tasted the sweet uses of adversity.  It suffered
eclipse for 200 years--from the year 1483, when the jurisdiction of the
Earl Palatine terminated, down to 1683, when a citizen of
Crieff--George Drummond of Milnab--became Lord Provost of Edinburgh.
During these long years, Crieff was an ordinary kirk-town, nowise
distinguished among its fellows.  It had its Gothic Church, which seems
to have dated from a very remote period.  When it was demolished, in
1787, forty gold coins of Robert I. were found in a hole in the wall
six feet from the ground.  There was a law plea for the possession of
these coins between the Crown and James Gentle, the purchaser of the
old walls, which was decided in favour of the Crown.  The houses of
Crieff were clustered round this old church--mainly east and north and
south.  Crieff had no west end beyond the Cross until after 1731, when
the Master of Drummond made good his title to the Perth Estate, after
the forfeiture which ensued upon the proceedings of 1715.  It was
burned to the ground in this year, but, thanks to the Master of
Drummond, it had reached a thriving condition as a market town for the
midland and western districts of Scotland, when the Highlanders broke
loose again in 1745.  It suffered no second burning, though the
Highlanders had possession of it, and Prince Charlie held a stormy
council of war in the old Drummond Arms, at the foot of Hill's Wynd.
Since then, Crieff has become a "braw toon" without the other "singe"
its Highland neighbours destined for it.  The coming of the railway in
1856, and the adoption of the Police Act in 1864, have done wonders,
enabling it to take full advantage of its many attractions.  It was
loyal to the Hanoverian dynasty during the troubles of the "'15" and
the "'45"; but one hundred years before the last outbreak it gave a
kindly welcome to Montrose, who entrenched himself very securely at
Callum's Hill, having doubtless his headquarters at the house of his
kinsman, Inchbrakie.

We come now to look more closely at Crieff, when it set out upon its
comparatively undistinguished career as a kirk-town.  No doubt it felt
the loss of the Court of the Steward of the Earl Palatine of
Strathearn, just as the whole strath felt the want of the sunshine of
the Royal favour after the murder of King James I. in the Blackfriars
Monastery of Perth, at Christmastide, 1437.  But though, doubtless,
many forsook it, some remained, and there were kirk-lands near by for
the maintenance of the Gospel.  Conflicting interests began to stir in
connection with these lands.  When they come under our notice the
kirk-lands of Crieff are attached to the Chapel Royal at Stirling.  In
"Ane Index of Rights of the Chappell and of their Bulls or Patents" we
read, as one of the contents, "Applicatio prima fructuum de Air,
Kincardin, Crieff, et Pettie Brachley."  This seems to have been
sanctioned by a Bull of Alexander VI., of date May 16th, 1502; and
surely it is interesting to know that the kirk-lands of Crieff, Ayr,
Kincardine, and Pettie Brachley--wherever that was--were allocated to
the Chapel Royal at Stirling by the Borgia Pope, Alexander VI., one of
the prime disgraces of the Chair of St. Peter.  But the allocation did
not pass unchallenged.  Crieff had its perpetual pensionary vicar in
those days, and naturally enough he could see neither rhyme nor reason
in the arrangement which a Pope had no doubt sanctioned, but which
completely ignored his interests.  The name of the worthy vicar was
Master John Broune,[1] a discreet man, as he is called in the public
instrument in which the process is recorded, by means of which he got
an augmentation of stipend.  The instrument begins in this way:--

"In the name of God.  Amen.  By this present public instrument, be it
evidently known to all men, that in the year of the Incarnation of our
Lord, 1511, on the 5th day of March, the 15th year of the Indiction,
being the 9th year of the Pontificate of the Most Holy Father in
Christ, and Master of our Master, Julius II., Pope by the Divine
Providence.  Compeared in person, in Court, Master John Broune,
perpetual pensionary vicar of the parish of Crieff, in Stratherne, on
the one part, and on the other, Masters William Sterheid and John
Goldsmyth, Canons of the said Chapel Royal and Prebendaries of the same
Church of Crieff."


The President of the Court was Master David Abercrummy, principal
official of Candida Casa and of the Chapel Royal, Stirling, also
sub-deacon of the same Chapel Royal.  A notary public was also present
and certain subscribing witnesses.  Master John Broune, the vicar,
stoutly maintained that the pension was too small and mean (_exigua
parva et exilis_) for his proper maintenance, and strengthened his plea
by the production of two documents--one subscribed by the proper hand
of the most excellent Prince and Master of our Master, James IV., the
most illustrious King of the Scots; the other subscribed by the proper
hand of the reverend Father in Christ, and Master of our Master, David,
by the Divine compassion, Bishop of Candida Casa and of the Chapel
Royal, Stirling.  Then follows the King's letter in "braid Scots":--

"We, as patrone of the Kyrk of Creyf, gyffis our full consent and
assent to thir ouyr lettres that the Bishop of ouyr Chapel Rial erec
and mak the vicar's pension of the said kyrk equivalent to the utheris
vicaris pensionarys of the Kyrks of Balmaclellene, Suthwyth, and
Kellys, unit and erectit to our said chappell with ane manse, yard, and
gleyb of twa akaris of the kyrk-land of Creyf, callyt 'For,' next
adjacent to the said kyrk, to the sustentacion of the vicar thairof to
serve the cuyr, payand procuragis and synnagis, and mak the dene rural
expensys in visitacion as efferys, and ordains that this be done be the
Bishop of ouyr Chapell Ryal and official tharof by tharis dyscrecionys,
the quantyte of the cuyr beyng consyderit.

"Subscrivit with ouyr hand at Edynbrugh, the xxv. daye of September,
and of our reng the xxiiij.or zeir, 1512.  _Et sequitir subscripcio
manualis_.  Rex James."


There is a slight discrepancy in the above record; for whereas the
Royal letter is dated the 25th day of September, 1512, it is stated to
have been produced by the vicar before the Court of Master David
Abercrummy on the 5th day of March, 1511.  The explanation may be that
it was found difficult to grit the augmentation out of the clutches of
the Stirling Canons, even after the Bishop of Candida Casa (Whithorn)
had decreed in the vicar's favour, and that the Royal authority had
again to be invoked to give effect to it.  However this may be, it is
certain that Master John Broune gained his point, as will appear from
the following document, also in "braid Scots":--

"Schyr official, forsamekyll as the vicarage of the Kyrk of Creyf, is
nocht contenyt, in the erectioun of our Souerane lordis Chapell Rial as
the layf of the vicarages that are incorporat tharto, this is, tharfor,
that ze assygne and mak ouyr vicar of Creyf als meikle zeyrly to his
pensioun of the fructis o' the sayd vicarage to sustene him and serve
the cuyr as ony of the vicarages of Balmaclellene, Suchwych, or Kellis
has, with ane manse, zard, and gleyb and twa akaris of the kyrk-land
callyt 'For,' next adjacent to the sayd kyrk, wyth certain gress soums
for gudying of the sayd gleyb, according to the extent of the sayd
kyrk-land, he payand of the samyn procurage and synnage aucht and wount
and makand the deyne rurale expense quhen he vesiis the sayd kyrk.

"Alanerlye, for that our Souerane lordis, patroun of the sayd Kyrk of
Creyf, has consentyt heirto, and commendit us to hys writtings to do
the samyn, keip this our mandment for your warand, and cause the samyn
to be fulfyllyt, sa that we heir na complant tharof in tymys cuming.
Subscrivit wyth our hand at Edinbrugh, the v. day of March, the zer of
God im. vc. xi. zeris.  _Et sequitur subscripcio manualis dicti
Episcopi D. Candide Case et Cappelle Regie Striuelingensis Episcopus_."


Then follows a narrative of proceedings in monk Latin, which I have
been at some pains to translate thus:--

"Certain relevant documents having been publicly examined and shown in
open Court, the said vicar immediately demanded from the judge that he
should proceed with the augmentation of his annual pension of the said
perpetual vicarage according to the tenor of the said two documents,
especially because no reasonable bar had been alleged in Court why the
augmentation in this kind should not be granted.  And Master
Abercrummy, the foresaid judge, having carefully examined the two
documents and the foundation of the foresaid Chapel Royal, Stirling,
particularly in that point where it treats of the erection of perpetual
vicarages and of their annual pensions, as in the case of the Parish
Churches of Suchwych (Southwick), Kellis (Kells), and Balmaclellan,
belonging to the said Chapel Royal, augmented the annual pension of the
perpetual vicarage of Crieff in the manner which follows, and
ordained--viz., that the perpetual vicar of the Church of Crieff, in
Strathearn, who has had, _pro tempore_, shall have in perpetuity of the
fruits of that Church of Crieff for his own sustenance and for those
dependent on him, wherewith he may be able to live in comfort,
twenty-four merks of the usual money of Scotland and two acres of
arable land adjacent to the said church of the town, which is called
'For,' pertaining to the same church and (origin?) the house built upon
it, along with pasture for his own animals according to the congruency
(convenience?) of the same said acres, and with 'hearth-rights in the
muirs and marshes of the said town' (focalibus competentinus in moris
et marresiis ejusdem villae.)  [The Latin is barbarous, and may mean
anything; but it does seem to have some connection with the right of
digging peats.]  And besides, that the forenamed vicar, who has been
bound, _pro tempore_, so, hereafter is, in perpetuity, bound to pay
annually to the bishop in ordinary of the place the procurations aucht
and wount on behalf of the said church, the synodal moneys and expense
in ordinary for the Dean of Christianity who has annually visited the
said Church of Crieff, in Strathearn, and the parish thereof; and that
the payment of the pension, as regards the said 24 merks, shall be made
to the said vicar of Crieff for the time being, at the four usual
annual terms, in equal portions, to be lifted annually out of the
fruits of the said Church of Crieff--viz., at the Festivals of the
Finding of the Holy Cross; of St. Peter of the Chain; of All Saints;
and of the Purification of our Lady.

"Upon which premises--all and single--the foresaid John Broune,
perpetual pensionary vicar of the said parochial Church of Crieff, in
Strathearn, asked the present public instruments to be executed for him
by me, notary public undersigned.  These deeds were lodged in the
Chapel Royal, near the town of Edinburgh, in the consistory of the
same, at the twelfth hour before mid-day, or thereby, in the year, day,
month, indiction, and pontificate as above, there being present
discreet men, Masters Ninian Spottiswoode, Archdeacon of the furesaid
Chapel Royal, Stirling; John Tod, Alexander Painter, William Atkyn,
Nicholas Buchan, all of the Chapel; James Aikman, burgess of Edinburgh;
John Abercrummy, and Alexander Ramsay, with divers others, witnesses to
the premises.

(Signed)  "J. PRYMROIS."


It would appear from all this that there was a deal of trouble in
connection with the erection of the Church of Crieff.  One is apt to
get confused among the Popes, Bishops, principal officials, and
notaries public who were all concerned in the erection.  We seem to
reach the close of the long process on the first day of September,
1537, the year of the marriage of James V. to Madeleine of France, the
year which lies almost exactly midway between the Battle of Flodden and
the outbreak of the Reformation in 1560.  Upon the second day of
December, 1537, "the reverend father in Christ, Henry, by the Divine
compassion, Bishop of the forenamed Chapel and of Candida Casa, from
the tribunal with the consent of his brother canons, or at all events
of the greater part of them, being assembled in Chapter, and as a
memorial of a perpetual thing, ordered, ordained, and decreed that the
erection of the Vicar Church of Crieff should be registered by Master
John Lambert, Prebendary of the sacred Chapel and scribe of the
foresaid Chapter, and to be inscribed and placed upon the books of the
Registrars of the oft-mentioned Chapel."

I am greatly indebted to A. G. Reid, Esq., Auchterarder, for kindly
furnishing me with the above valuable extracts, and I bring the paper
to a close with a word or two about the Crieff of a later time.  The
annals of Crieff as a kirk-town are a dreary waste in the judgment of
one who assures us that he has waded through the records of services
from 1549 to 1700.  One incident, however, took place between these
dates which may be mentioned as being the last expiring flicker of the
old jurisdiction exercised by the Stewards of Strathearn.  The Earl of
Perth discharged the duties of the office--what remained of them--down
to the abolition of heritable jurisdictions in 1748.  In the year 1682,
the minister of Trinity-Gask, by name Richard Duncan, was condemned to
death for the murder of a child which was found concealed under his own
hearth-stone.  Lord Fountainhall reports that he was convicted on very
insufficient evidence, and the country people took the same view of the
case.  He was hanged on the "kind gallows of Crieff," on the knoll near
the Cemetery, still marked by a solitary tree.  The story goes that a
messenger was seen and heard approaching, bearing a reprieve, but he
came too late.  Local sympathy asserted that the hour of execution was
anticipated to gratify the spite of some one in authority.  However
this may be, the hanging of the Episcopal minister of Trinity-Gask was
the last exercise of criminal jurisdiction on the part of the Steward
of Strathearn.  This was the last time the "kind gallows of Crieff"
bore its ghastly fruit.  The Highlanders' salutation to it is familiar
to everybody.

A pleasanter sight by far than a string of dangling caterans was the
great annual tryst, or Michaelmas Market.  It was largely frequented,
as being the only market of any consequence between Stirling and
Inverness.  We have it on the authority of Macky, a Government secret
agent, who visited Scotland in 1723, that no fewer than thirty thousand
cattle were sold to English dealers for thirty thousand guineas.  He
came from Stirling expressly to see the market, and here is his graphic
description of what he saw:--

"The Highland gentlemen were mighty civil, dressed in their slash'd
short waistcoats, a trousing (which is breechen and stockings of one
piece of striped stuff), with a plaid for a cloak and a blue bonnet.
They have a ponyard knife and a fork in one sheath, hanging at one side
of their belt, their pistol at the other, and their snuff-mull before,
with a great broadsword by their side.  Their attendance was very
numerous, all in belted plaids, girt like women's petticoats down to
the knee, their thighs and half of the leg all bare.  They had each
also their broadsword and poynard, and spake all Irish, an
unintelligible language to the English.  However, these poor creatures
hired themselves out for a shilling a day to drive cattle to England,
and to return home at their own charge.  There was no leaving anything
loose here but it would have been stolen."


The Michaelmas Market was shorn of its glory and its picturesque aspect
by the transference of the cattle tryst to Falkirk in 1770.  There was
occasional bloodshed at these gatherings, the peace being with
difficulty preserved by the authority of the Lord of Drummond, who
collected the customs of the fairs of Crieff and Foulis.  These customs
amounted, in 1734, to nearly L600 Scots.  The Lochaber axes carried by
the guardians of the peace may still be seen in the armoury at Drummond
Castle.  This last shred of baronial supervision--the ghost of the
ancient Stewardship--disappeared in 1831.  But perhaps the most
interesting memorial of the Crieff Michaelmas Tryst is a poem written
by one of the Highland drovers, whose appearance moved the compassion
of Macky, the tourist of 1723.  His name is Robert Doun or Donn.  He
had left his heart behind him in his native glen, as people will do,
drovers as well as others.  There is a ring of genuine poetry in the
verses in which he expresses his love-sickness--his desire to go upon
the wings of the wind as it whistles northward, northward:--

  "Easy is my bed--it is easy,
  But it is not to sleep that I incline.
  The wind whistles northwards, northwards,
  And my thoughts move with it.
  More pleasant were it to be with thee
  In the little glen of calves
  Than to be counting of droves
  In the enclosures of Crieff."

Mention of the name of Robert Doun brings up recollections of another
literary name--that of David Mallet, or Malloch, who is said to have
been born in Crieff.  He has the honour of being mentioned several
times in Boswell's _Life of Johnson_.  The latter had no great respect
for him, though, perhaps, he did not mean all he said in his famous
criticism of Lord Bolingbroke's philosophy, which Mallet published
after the author's death.  "Sir, he was a scoundrel and a coward--a
scoundrel, for charging a blunderbuss against religion and morality; a
coward, because he had no resolution to fire it off himself, but left
half-a-crown to a beggarly Scotchman to fire it off after his death."
It has been disputed whether Mallet, or Thomson of the "Seasons," wrote
"Rule Britannia."  I do not care to enter into it.  After all, David
Mallet was a lesser light in the literary firmament.  It more concerns
the literary honour of Crieff that John Cunningham, the historian of
the Church of Scotland, did his life-work here; and that in the year
1793, Rachel Barlas, daughter of the Secession minister of Crieff, went
to Comrie as wife of Samuel Gilfillan and became the mother of George
Gilfillan, late of Dundee, a man of fine gifts and of glowing
imagination--somewhat loosely controlled, who wrote much--too much; but
unfortunately left nothing worthy of the reputation he had among his
intimates.



[1] Vicars of Crieff at an earlier date were Bricius, who was a witness
to the reconciliation of Earl Robert and Innocent, Abbot of Inchaffray,
in the Church of Strogeth.  The entry is--"_Bricio persona de Creffe,
et Malisio filio ejus_," showing that celibacy was not the universal
clerical custom; and Nicholas, who in one charter, of date 1258, is
called "_Camerario Comitis_" (Malise); and in another, "_Meo filio_,"
by "_Malisius filius Gilberti quondam Comitis de Stratherne_."  Hence
he was a cousin of the Malise to whom he was "camerarius."




APPENDIX


[Transcriber's notes:

Several entries in this appendix refer to page numbers elsewhere in
this book.  Those page numbers are indicated by numbers enclosed in
curly braces, e.g. {99}.  They have been located where page breaks
occurred in the original book, in accordance with Project Gutenberg's
FAQ-V-99.  In the HTML version of this book, page numbers are placed in
the left margin.

In a number of the date ranges below, blank spaces represented missing
dates.  In this etext, to preserve formatting, missing dates are
represented with question marks.]



ROLL OF MINISTERS WITHIN THE PRESBYTERY OF AUCHTERARDER FROM THE
REFORMATION TO THE PRESENT TIME


By Rev. GEORGE D. MACNAUGHTAN, B.D., Ardoch


ARDOCH

(_Chapel opened for Worship, 25th March, 1781._)

1781-1788--DAVID SIMPSON, tr. to Tulliallan.

1788-1792--GEORGE ERSKINE, tr. to Monzie.

1793-1802--GBORGE LOGAN, tr. to Eastwood.

1803-1812--LAURENCE MILLER, tr. to Abdie.

1813-1822--THOMAS YOUNG, tr. to Gask.

1823-1833--JOHN MACFARLANE, tr. to Collessie.  Mr Macfarlane afterwards
joined the Free Church; received degree of D.D., and died Free Church
minister at Dalkeith in 1875.

1833-1839--ALEX. OSWALD LAIRD, tr. to Abbotshall.  Afterwards joined
Free Church; became minister of St. John's, Dundee; died in Crieff,
1891.

1840-1843--SAMUEL GRANT.  Seceded in 1843, afterwards tr. to Aberdeen.

1843-1844--Chapel vacant.

1844-1858--DAVID BONALLO, tr. to Blackford.

Ardoch erected into parish _quoad omnia_, 21st February, 1855.

1858-1864--JOHN ROBERT CAMPBELL, tr. to Monzievaird.

1865-1869--WILLIAM MAIR, A.M., tr. to Earlston; now D.D., and author of
"Digest of Church Laws."

1869-1874--CHARLES M'GREGOR, tr. to Dornoch.  Since minister of East
Church, Aberdeen; now of Lady Yester's, Edinburgh; also D.D.

1874-????--GEO. D. MACNAUGHTAN, B.D.



AUCHTERARDER

(_Before Reformation belonged to Abbey of Arbroath._)

1568-1585--JOHN HAMMYL, returned to Dunning.

1591-1593--PATRICK DAVIDSON, A.M.

1594-1599--JOHN CLERK, A.M.

1601-1607--ROBERT SINCLAIR, A.M., returned to Madderty.

1607-1617--JOHN MONTEATH, A.M., tr. to Monzie.

1617-1623--HENRY ROLLOCK, tr. to Kilconquhar.  Nephew of Principal
Pollock, Edinburgh.

163?-1649--JOHN GRAHAME, deposed as a Royalist.

16??-1658--JAMES DRUMMOND, A.M., tr. to Muthill.

1655-1680--ARCHD. DRUMMOND, A.M., died.

1680-1686--DAVID FREEBAIRN, A.M., tr. to Dunning.

1686-1688--JOHN RATTRAY, A.M.  Ousted for not praying for William and
Mary; died 1712.

1700-1705--JAMES MITCHELL, A.M., died July.

1709-1718--JOHN STEDMAN, A.M., died January.  Took part in drawing up
"Auchterarder Creed," and prepared Presbytery's defence before
Commission.

1718-1729--DAVID SHAW, A.M., died 28th September.

1730-1770--ROBERT DRUMMOND, died 15th September; son of John Drummond,
of Crieff.

1770-1781--JAMES CAMPBELL, A.M., died 1st January.

1781-1803--ANDREW DUNCAN, tr. to Ratho.

1803-1834--CHARLES STEWART, died 31st August.

1834-1843--Parish vacant pending settlement of "Auchterarder Case,"
Presbytery refusing, in obedience to Veto Act, to take Robert Young on
trials.

1843-1865--ROBERT YOUNG, died 14th September.  "His congregation
greatly increased in numbers, and many who had once been his bitter
opponents became his warmest supporters and best friends.  When the day
of his death came all mourned him with unfeigned grief."--_Presbytery
tribute to his memory_.

1865-????--WILLIAM GIBSON.  In 1871 Mr Gibson was judicially declared
to be insane, and the parish has since been served, in terms of the
Belhaven Act, by a series of ordained assistants.

1871-1878--WM. SIMPSON.  Appointed to Bonhill.

1878-1888--CHARLES SHORT, died 2nd June.

1888-????--ARCHIBALD JAMIESON, M.A.



ABERUTHVEN

(_Supplied with Readers from 1567-1591, but united to Auchterarder
before 1618._)



BLACKFORD

(_Formerly Strageyth._)

1574-1576--ALEX. GALL, tr. to Trinity-Gask.

1576-1589--WM. DRUMMOND.

1590-1591--WM. STRIUILING.

1592-1606--JAMES BRANDON, tr. to Muthill.  Protested against
introduction of Episcopacy.

1607-1613--ANDREW ALLAN, A.M.

1613-1651--JAMES GOVANE, A.M., died in August.

1660-1683--DAVID LITTLEJOHN, A.M., died in May.

1683-1689--DAVID MORAY, A.M.  Ousted at Revolution.

1697-1739--ARCHIBALD MONCRIEFF, A.M., died in August.

1738-1767--WILLIAM MONCRIEFF, A.M., died 9th December.  Succeeded in
1744 to the Baronetcy of Tullibole.  Parish vacant till 1771,
appointment of minister being delayed till his son was licensed.

1771-1775--Sir HENRY MONCRIEFF WELLWOOD, tr. to West Kirk (St.
Cuthbert's), Edinburgh.  Afterwards well-known Church leader.

1777-1815--JOHN STEVENSON, died 5th April.

1815-1861--JOHN CLARK, died 31st December.  A Moderate of the old
school, and a man of great shrewdness and humour, many of whose sayings
have lived.

1858-1889--DAVID BONALLO, died 27th August.  Translated from Ardoch as
assistant and successor to Mr Clark.

1890-????--JAMES MACGIBBON, B.D.



BLAIRINGONE

(_Chapel erected in 1838._)

1841-1843--ANDREW NOBLE.  Seceded.

1843-1848--Chapel vacant.

1849-1854--WM. FERGUSON, tr. to Fossoway.

1855-????--ALEX. M'WHANNEL.

Disjoined in 1856 to form part of new Presbytery of Kinross.



COMRIE

(_Conjoined with Comrie is old Parish of Tullichettle._)

1585-????--ALEX.  CHISHOLME, tr. to Lecropt.

1588-????--JOHN DAVIDSON, A.M., rem. to Muthill.

1598-1607--JOHN MONTEATH, A.M., tr. to Auchterarder.

1607-1614--GEORGE CALLUM or M'CALLUM, rem. to Balquhidder.

1618-1619--ANDREW YOUNG, died.

1635-1660--JAMES GRAHAME, A.M.  Suspended 1649-1651 for adhering to the
Engagement.

1656-1665--HUGH GORDON, A.M., tr. to Row.

1668-1689--JOHN PHILP, A.M.  Ousted at Revolution.

1693-1698--JOHN M'KERCHER, A.M., tr. to Dull.

1702-1709--JOHN M'CALLUM, tr. to Callander.

1711-1719--DUGALD CAMPBELL, tr. to Lismore and Appin.

1721-1722--PATRICK M'ADAM, A.M., died in March.

1723-1731--ANDREW MUSCHET, died.

1733-1742--AENEAS SHAW, tr. to Pettie.

1743-1780--ROBERT MENZIES, A.M., died 12th Nov.

1781-1801--HUGH M'DIARMID, died 4th November.

1802-1829--PATRICK M'ISAAC, died 25th January.

1829-1841--WM. MACKENZIE, tr. to Dunblane.  Took active part in
Non-Intrusion Controversy.  Seceded in 1843.  Became minister of North
Leith Free Church.  Died on voyage home from Australia, and was buried
in the Red Sea.

1841-1843--JAMES GARMENT, A.M.  Seceded.

1843-1875--JOHN M'DONALD, D.D., died 17th January.  "Left Church at
Comrie strong and flourishing, and his memory deeply stamped on hearts
of people.  Possessed of a clear and vigorous intellect, a ready
eloquence, and a good knowledge of ecclesiastical law and forms of
procedure, he always took an interest in Presbytery business, and was
recognised as one of the leaders of the Court."--_Pres. tribute_.

1875-????--JOHN MACPHERSON.  Formerly minister of Gaelic Church,
Greenock.



CRIEFF

1563-????--THOMAS DRUMMOND.

1592-1636--DAVID DRUMMOND, A.M.  Demitted.

1635-????--DAVID DRUMMOND, junr., A.M.; probably deposed.  Died in
1676, aged 64.

1658-1682--GILBERT MURRAY, A.M.  Demitted.

1682-1689--WILLIAM MURRAY, A.M.  Succeeded his father at Revolution;
read thanksgiving after Battle of Killiecrankie; was ousted.

1699-1754--JOHN DRUMMOND, died 26th July.  A good man, but no scholar.
No Dissent in his time except Episcopacy.

1755-1767--THOMAS STEWART, A.M.  Deposed for drunkenness.

1771-1813--ROBERT STIRLING, died 16th December.

1815-????--ALEX. M'INTYRE, died 15th November.  A disputed settlement,
which so affected the minister's health that he died the same year.

1816-1845--WILLIAM LAING, died 16th March.  A brother of Dr. David
Laing, the well-known antiquarian.

1840-1843--R. HORNE STEVENSON, tr. to St. George's, Edinburgh;
afterwards D.D. and Moderator of General Assembly of 1871.  Mr
Stevenson was assistant and successor to Mr Laing, and after his
translation, Mr Laing resumed the full duties of his office until his
death.

1845-1887--JOHN CUNNINGHAM, D.D., LL.D., resigned 16th May.  Author of
"Church History of Scotland" and other works.  Moderator of General
Assembly of 1886.  Resigned on his appointment as Principal of St.
Mary's College, St. Andrews.  Died September, 1893.

1887-1894--WILLIAM P. PATERSON, B.D., resigned 2nd November on
appointment as Professor of Systematic Theology in Aberdeen University.

1895-????--ANDREW CAMPBELL.



CRIEFF WEST

(_West Church, Crieff, opened for Worship in 1838._)

1839-1843--FINLAY MACALISTER.  Seceded.

1843-1848--Chapel closed.

For some years afterwards served by licentiates.

1856-1862--MATTHEW RODGER, tr. to St. Leonard's, St. Andrews.  Now D.D.

1862-1878--ARCHIBALD HART, A.M., resigned 6th June.

Crieff West was erected into parish _quoad sacra_ on 20th July, 1864.

1878-????--JOHN HUNTER, M.A.



DUNDURN

(_St. Fillans Chapel, opened for Worship, 1879._)

1879-1881--JAMES W. BLAKE, tr. to Temple.

1881-????--THOMAS ARMSTRONG.

Erected into parish _quoad sacra_, called Dundurn, on 15th March, 1895.



DUNNING

(_Church dedicated to S. Servanus._)

1562-1564--ANDREW SYMSON, tr. to Dunbar.  Became Protestant by reading
Sir David Lindsay's Poems.

1568-1594--JOHN HAMYLL.  Deposed for baptising an adulterous child.

1586-1607--JOHN EDMISTON.

1610-1651--GEORGE MUSCHIT, A.M., deposed.  Member of Glasgow Assembly,
1638.

1652-1668--ANDREW ROLLO, A.M., died in May.

1669-1672--ROBERT HUNTER, A.M., tr. to Bo'ness.

1673-1682--JAMES HUNTER, A.M., tr. to Stirling.

1682-1686--THOMAS CHRYSTIE, A.M., died in January.

1686-1689--DAVID FREEISAIRN, A.M.  Ousted at Revolution.  Afterwards
became Bishop of Scotch Episcopal Church, and latterly Primus.  Died
24th December, 1739.

1691-1716--WILLIAM REID, A.M., died 28th January.  Preached at
Auchterarder on 18th September, 1715, with pistol hanging at his
breast, while rebels in possession of town.  They afterwards burned
Dunning, the minister being just dead.  Thorn-tree planted in
commemoration.

1716-1725--LAUCHLAN M'INTOSH, A.M., tr. to Errol.

1728-1761--ANDREW SMYTH, died 20th February.

1761-1768--ALEXANDER SMYTH, died 20th February, Son of previous
minister.

1769-1782--LEWIS DUNBAR, tr. to Kinnoull.

1783-1812--JOHN BAIRD, died 7th August.

1813-1814--CHARLES WILKIE HARDY, died 6th February.  Son of Dr. Hardy,
Edinburgh.  Waylaid and hung by heels over a bridge, which hastened his
death.

1814-1818--JOHN GRIERSON, A.M., tr. to Dunblane.

1818-1860--JAMES RUSSELL, D.D., died 8th October.  A man of peculiar
temperament.

1848-1860--PATON JAMES GLOAG, tr. to Blantyre.  Assistant and successor
to Dr. Russell; afterwards D.D., minister of Galashiels, Moderator of
General Assembly of 1889.  Author of "Commentary on Acts of Apostles,"
and other works.

1861-1878--JOHN WILSON, D.D., died 1st March.  Author of "Index to Acts
of Assembly," "Presbytery of Perth," "Register of the Diocese of
Dunblane."  "A man emi-nently fitted to win affection and respect."

1878-????--PETER THOMSON, B.D.  Formerly minister of Kelvinhaugh,
Glasgow.  Author of "The Greek Tenses in New Testament."



FOSSOWAY AND TULLIBOLE

_Tullibole was supplied with Readers from 1567, and had as Ministers:--_

1576-1578--JOHN EDMONSTOUN, tr. to Crail.

1578-1580-3--THOMAS SWINTON, tr. to Muckhart.  Was united to Fossoway
about 1614, but had service every third Sabbath till 1729.


MINISTERS OF FOSSOWAY

1585-1588--ADAM MARSCHELL, removed to Glendevon.

1589-1590--RICHARD WRIGHT, tr. to Clackmannan.

1590-????-ALEX. WALLACE, A.M.

1607-1652--LAURENCE MERCER, A.M., died in October.

1647-1657--LAURENCE MERCER, jun., A.M.  Son of previous minister.

1659-1689--ALEX. RELAND, A.M.  Deposed for "gross immorality and
oppression."  In 1691 tried to intrude with malignants on kirk, but was
driven back.

1691-1715--WM. SPENCE, A.M., died 19th March.  Formerly minister of
Glendevon.

1712-1716--ALEX. BARTON, A.M., died 12th June.  Ordained assistant and
successor to Mr Spence.

1717-1742--ANDREW URE, died 7th April.  Got church built for united
parish in 1729.

1743-1778--JOHN STORER, died 8th June.

1780-1803--WILLIAM GRAHAM, died 14th February.

1803-1824--GEORGE GRAHAM, A.M., died 4th July.  Son of previous
minister.

1825-1845--PETER BRYDIE, died 30th October.  Seceded in 1843, but came
back.

1846-1852--DUNCAN CAMPBELL, tr. to Luss.  Latterly D.D.  Died March 23,
1896.

1852-1854--ALEX. COSENS, tr. to Broughton.

1854-????--WM. FERGUSON.

Parish disjoined in 1856 to form part of new Presbytery of Kinross.


FOWLIS-WESTER

1567-????--THOMAS MAKGIBBUN.

1574-????--WILLIAM MELROSS.

1576-1578--ANDREW YOUNG.

1586-1592--JAMES BURDOUN, tr. to Strageyth.

1593-1603-7--WM. BUCHANAN, A.M., tr. to Methven.

1607-????--JOHN YOUNG, A.M.

1619-1634--JAMES DRUMMOND, A.M., died in February.

1635-1645--JOHN FYFF.  Deposed 11th February.  A Royalist.

1646-1675--GEORGE MURRAY, A.M., died 11th April.  A Protester, all the
other members of Presbytery being Resolutioners.

1674-1689--JOHN DRUMMOND.  Ousted at Revolution for continuing to pray
for King James and keeping converse with the rebels.  Committed to
prison.  Died 6th February, 1695.

1697-1717--WILLIAM HEPBURNE, A.M., died 12th April.  Retired to
Stirling "with the ministers about" on the approach of Mar's army in
1715.

1718-1720--ALEX. TURCAN, A.M., died 18th April.

1721-1730--WILLIAM SIMSON, tr. to Dunblane.

1732-1767--ALEX. MURRAY, died 27th December.

1768-1816--JOHN MURRAY, died 10th August.

1817-1851--ALEX. MAXTONE, died 21st June.

1852-????--THOMAS HARDY.



GASK, OR FINDO-GASK

1572-1574--WILLIAM MELROSS, tr. to Fowlis.

1592-1633--ALEX. GALL or GAW.

1624-1635--JOHN FYFF, A.M., tr. to Fowlis.

1635-1649--WM. BANNATYNE, died.

1648-1688--ROBERT FREEBAIRN, A.M., died.

1676-1680--DAVID FREEBAIRN, A.M., tr. to Auchterarder.  Son of previous
minister.  Assistant and successor to father.

1680-1693--LAURENCE MERCER.  Deprived 10th February by Privy Council.
His father and grandfather were ministers of Fossoway.  Died 30th
January, 1720.

1703-1712--COLIN CAMPBELL, A.M., died in December.  As a merchant,
captured at sea, carried to New Spain, barbarously treated; released by
purchase.

1715-1740--WILLIAM HUNTER, died 27th July.

1741-1762--JOHN M'CLEISH, 12th March.

1763-1765--ALEX. COLVILL, tr. to Ormiston.

1766-1798--DAVID KEMP, A.M., died 22nd February.

1798-1802--PATRICK M'ISAAC, tr. to Comrie.

1803-1815--CHARLES ANDERSON, tr. to Closeburn.

1815-1822--ROBERT JOHN ROBERTSON, tr. to Forteviot.  Father of Right
Hon. J. P. B. Robertson, Lord President of Court of Session.

1823-1852--THOMAS YOUNG, died 5th September.

1853-????--JAMES MARTIN.



GLENDEVON

1588-1589--ADAM MARSCHELL.  Deposed 26th August as "ignorant of the
Holy Scriptures and without knowledge of the grounds of religion."

1591-1640--ANDREW KIRK, A.M.

1639-1652--ANDREW KIRK, junr., A.M., died in November.  Son of previous
minister.

1655-1660--JAMES GRAHAME.

1660-1663--MUNGO WEMYSS, A.M., tr. to Aberdalgie.

1664-1679--WILLIAM SPENCE, A.M., deposed by Bishop and Synod for
"disowning the present Government."  (See pp. 107-108, 195-207.)

1680-1681--ROBERT STIRLING, A.M.  Probably resigned on account of Test.

1682-1688--THOMAS HALL, A.M., tr. to St. Madoes.

1688-1689--ALEX. MELDRUM.  Ousted at Revolution.

1690-1691--WM. SPENCE, A.M., tr. to Fossoway.  Old minister returned.

1694-1709--GILBERT MELVILLE.  Resigned on account of indisposition, and
also of the improbability of his having any success by his ministry
among that people though he were in health.

1710-1718--ALEX. TURCAN, A.M., tr. to Fowlis-Wester.

1720-1751--DAVID STEVENSON, died 6th February.

1751-1756--JAMES REID, A.M., tr. to Trinity-Gask.

1757-1759--DAVID M'GIBBON, A.M., tr. to Buchanan.

1760-1764--JOHN ANDERSON.  Deposed 18th October for brawling,
immoderate anger, drunkenness, and indecent behaviour.  By one vote of
the Assembly, 1765, sentence affirmed as against suspension.  Died in
Stirling in 1794.

1765-1775--Parish vacant.  Patrick Crichton was presented, but
Presbytery found there was no call.  A new call in 1769 was signed
neither by heritor, elder, or head of family.  Presbytery were ordered
by Assembly to proceed with settlement, but ultimately Mr Crichton gave
up the presentation.

1775-1789--ROBERT MATHIE, died 29th March.

1790-1838--JOHN BROWN, died 16th November.  Was for many years Clerk of
Presbytery, and also Clerk to Synod of Perth and Stirling.

1839-1881--JOHN CUNNINGHAM, died 31st March.  In his earlier days Mr
Cunningham was celebrated as a tent preacher.

1881-????--EBENEZER BROWN SPEIRS, B.D.  Translator of Hegel's "Lectures
on the Philosophy of Religion: together with a work on the Proofs of
the Existence of God."



MADDERTY

1595-????--ROBERT SINCLAIR, A.M.

1620-1657--JOHN FREEBAIRN, A.M.

1659-1682--JAMES GRAHAME, A.M.

1681-1689--JAMES GRAHAME, jun., A.M.  Ousted at Revolution.  Son of
previous minister.  Requested by Kirk-Session in 1707 to give up
Communion cups and tokens.

1701-1736--ANDREW BRUGH, A.M., died 14th July.

1736-1741--Parish vacant.  Mr George Blaikie was presented, but had his
license taken from him by the Synod for "misrepresenting and impugning
the principles of the Church anent Patronage."  Reponed by Assembly in
1738.  Lord Dupplin was asked to waive his right of presentation "for
the relief of the church in this strait," but refused.  Ultimately Mr
Blaikie got an appointment in America, and the difficulty was solved.

1741-1783--ANDREW RAMSAY, died 19th October.

1784-1816--JAMES RAMSAY, died 3rd October.  Son of previous minister.
Discovered pit of marl in his glebe; was interdicted by the heritors
from working it, but received authority to do so from Court of Session.
Constructed also a machine for raising sit-fast stones from the ground.

1817-1829--JOHN EDWARD TOUCH, tr. to Kinnoull.

1830-1890--WILLIAM STODDART, D.D., died 2nd December.  Lived to the
great age of 97: and preached until within a few weeks of his death.

1891-????--JAMES BROWN, M.A.



MONZIE

1593-????--JOHN CLERK, A.M., tr. to Auchterarder.

1595-1601--PATRICK M'QUEINE.  Deprived.  "Sustained great trouble from
certain broken men and evil-disposed persons who burnt and destroyed
his house, gave him divers and sundry bloody wounds to the great
effusion of his blood, and leaving him for dead, so that he is now
altogether unable to use his ordinary calling of the ministry within
the kirk."

1599-????--JOHN CLERK, A.M.

1614-????--DAVID DRUMMOND (probably minister of Crieff, having charge
also of Monzie.)

1633-????--JOHN MONTEATH, A.M.

1637-1665--JAMES FORSYTH, A.M., tr. to Kinross.

1666-1689--JAMES DRUMMOND, A.M.  Ousted at Revolution.  Said to have
been a person of great learning.

{xxii}

1691-1705--WILLIAM CHALMER, tr. to Dunkeld.  Parishioners used to play
football on Sabbath morning.  Had great difficulty in inducing them to
go to church.

1710-1740--ARCHIBALD BOWIE, died 11th March.  Some parishioners joined
in Rebellion.

1742-1747--HENRY LUNDIE, tr. to Abercorn.

1749-1761--DONALD MUNRO, A.M., died 26th August.

1762-1785--ROBERT WALKER.  Resigned 6th December.  Was formerly
amanuensis to Ruddiman, the famous grammarian.  In 1774, inconsequence
of a fama, he left the parish of Monzie under an arrangement with the
Presbytery.  Parish was served by assistants.  Having obtained a living
in the Church of England, he resigned.  Died 28th February, 1818.

1786-1792--THOMAS BARTY, tr. to Newtyle.

1792-1794--GEORGE ERSKINE, died 26th April.

1794-1808--RALPH TAYLOR, died 6th October.

1809-1836--SAMUEL CAMERON, died 16th September.  New church opened by
him 24th July, 1831.

1836-1843--JOHN REID OMOND.  Seceded.  Afterwards D.D.; minister of
Gilmerton Free Church.  Died 4th July, 1892.

1843-1844--GEORGE BLAIR.  Resigned 5th November.  Afterwards held
important educational appointment in Canada.

1845-1846--GEO. HUTCHISON, tr. to Banchory-Ternan.  Afterwards D.D.,
and Moderator of General Assembly, 1887.

1847-1893--JAMES TAYLOR, A.M., died 23rd January, "An arrowy and
acceptable preacher in the prime of his manhood while his bow abode in
strength.  Genial critic, shrewd diviner of motive, and sagacious
counsellor."--_Pres. tribute_.

1893-????--HUGH M. JAMIESON.



MONZIEVAIRD AND STROWAN

(_Monzievaird Church dedicated to S. Servanus; Strowan Church dedicated
to S. Ronan.  Parishes long united._)

1623-1640--HENRY ANDERSON, A.M.

1642-1646--GEORGE MURRAY, A.M., tr. to Fowlis.

1648-1653--WM. WEMYSS, A.M., tr. to Dron.

1655-1680--JAMES ROW, A.M.; formerly of Muthill; got church built at
Enoch for united parishes in 1667.

1680-1685--GEORGE MITCHELL, A.M.

1685-1689--DAVID YOUNG, A.M.  Ousted at Revolution.

1692-1720--JOHN CAMPBELL, died 25th March.

1721-1729--WM. DUNCAN, died 27th March.

1730-1780--JAMES PORTEOUS, A.M., died 25th Nov.

1776-1778--WM. THOMSON, resigned 1st October.  Mr Thomson was assistant
and successor to Mr Porteous.  When he resigned he had received, he
said, "the offer of an office in the republic of letters."  He devoted
himself to literary pursuits; ultimately became a bookseller's hack,
and wrote a great number of works; became LL.D. of Glasgow in 1783;
died 16th March, 1817.

1781-1835--COLIN BAXTER, died 5th January.

1835-1843--JOHN FERGUSON.  Seceded.  Afterwards Free Church minister of
Bridge of Allan.

1843-1864--WM. ROBERTSON, died 9th June.  Author of two hymns--"A
little child the Saviour came" and "Thee God we praise"--in _Scottish
Hymnal_.

1864-1894--JOHN ROBERT CAMPBELL, died in October.

1895-????--ARTHUR GORDON, M.A.



MUCKART

1567-1572--JAMES PATOUN.  Promoted to Bishopric of Dunkeld; accused of
treason in 1580.

1583-????--THOMAS SWINTOUN.

1585-1591--JAMES COKBURNE.  Deposed for non-residence.

1586-????--WILLIAM PATOUN.

1588-1591--ANDREW KIRK, A.M., tr. to Glendevon.

1591-1592--ALEX. SYMSONE, A.M., tr. to Alva.

1594-1620--PATRICK DAVIDSON, A.M., died.

1622-1640--ALEX. FOTHERINGHAM, A.M., died in June.

1640-1642--DAVID DRUMMOND, A.M., tr. to Linlithgow.

1644-1656--JOHN GOVEAN, A.M., died in January.  Celebrated for his fine
penmanship.

1656-1660--JAMES FORSYTHE, tr. to Airth.

1662-1665--JAMES FORSYTHE, tr. to Bothkennar.  Son of minister of
Monzie.

1667-1677--DAVID MONCRIEFF, A.M., tr. to Aberdalgie.

1677-1697--ROBERT SHARP, A.M.  Deposed for contumacy.

1698-1701--JOHN GIB, A.M., tr. to Cleish.

1703-1717--ANDREW URE, tr. to Fossoway.

1718-1724--DAVID GUTHRIE, died 9th March.

1725-1732--ALEX. WARDROBE, tr. to Whitburn.

1734-1786--ARCHIBALD RENNIE, A.M., died 13th March.  A disputed
settlement.  Ordained by Committee of Commission of Assembly.  During
his long ministry he preached in church only the first Sunday; never
had an elder; never dispensed Lord's Supper; let manse, except
dining-room, which he used for service; was tenant of a farm, which he
much improved; and bought an estate.

1786-1830--ANDREW GIBSON, died 18th October.  Age 90.  Gathered again a
fair congregation.

1824-1825--ROBERT ALLAN, A.M., tr. to Little Dunkeld.

1831-1832--WILLIAM ROBERTSON, tr. to Logie.  Afterwards D.D. and
minister of New Greyfriars, Edinburgh.

1832-1843--JAMES THOMSON.  Seceded.

1843-????--ALEX. MOORHEAD FERGUSON.

Parish disjoined in 1836 to form part of new Presbytery of Kinross.



MUTHILL

1567-1574--ALEX. GALL, tr. to Strageyth.

1576-1585--ALEX. CHEISHOLME, tr. to Comrie.

1590-1607--JOHN DAVIDSON, A.M., died 7th April.  Protested against
introduction of Episcopacy in 1606.  Named as constant Moderator of
Presbytery.

1608-1627--JAMES BURDOUN.

1635-1645--JAMES ROW, A.M., deposed 12th February as a Royalist.
Afterwards became minister of Monzievaird.

164?-1649--ARCHIBALD DRUMMOND, A.M., deposed for acceding to a divisive
supplication; afterwards became minister of Auchterarder.

1656-1686--JAMES DRUMMOND, A.M.  Became D.D. in 1682; Bishop of Buchin
in 1684; and resigned Muthill in 1686.

1687-????--JAMES IRVINE, tr., probably to Lonmay.

1689-1693--JAMES INGLIS. Intruded by Earl of Perth, and finally ousted
by Privy Council for refusing to pray for William and Mary.

1702-????--WM. CHALMERS, minister of Monzie, was for a short time in
Muthill, but afterwards returned to Monzie.

1704-1754--WM. HALY, A.M., died 16th July.  Riot at his ordination.
Afterwards popular.  His curling-stones still exist, and are in
possession of Royal Caledonian Club.

1755-1766--JAMES SCOTT, died 6th July.

1767-1809--JOHN SCOTT, A.M., died 11th February.  Son of previous
minister.

1809-1826--JOHN RUSSELL, A.M., died 17th April.  Son of Burns' "Black
Russell," who had become minister of Stirling.  A popular preacher.
Present church built for him.

1826-1867--JAMES WALKER, A.M., died 21st December.

1868-????--JAMES RANKIN, D.D.  Formerly minister of Old West Church,
Greenock.  Author of "Character Studies in the Old Testament,"
"Handbook of the Church of Scotland," "The Creed in Scotland," "The
First Saints," and other works.



TRINITY-GASK AND KINKELL

(_Kinkell had Readers, and two Ministers._)

1584-1594--JOHN HAMMYL.  Deposed.

1637-1639--JOHN MURRAY, A.M., removed to Trinity-Gask, with which the
parish has ever since been united.


MINISTERS OF TRINITY-GASK

1576-1593--ALEX. GALL.  Formerly at Muthill and Strageyth.

1596-1608--WILLIAM OSWALD.

1639-1662--JOHN MURRAY, A.M., died in December.

1664-1673--JAMES BRUCE, A.M.

1674-1682--RICHARD DUNCAN, A.M.  Hanged at Crieff on a charge of child
murder, a reprieve arriving twenty minutes too late.  This is supposed
to be the historical fact underlying the well-known popular rhyme,
erroneously attributed to Little Dunkeld:--

  "O what a parish, sic a terrible parish,
    O what a parish is that o' Kinkell;
  They hae hangit the minister, drooned the precentor;
    Dang doon the steeple, an' drucken the bell."

The Churches of Trinity-Gask and Kinkell are on opposite sides of the
Earn, and the precentor is supposed to have been drowned in crossing
between them.  The Church of Kinkell is now a ruin, and has no steeple.
Its bell was recently discovered in the possession of a church in East
Lothian.

1683-1698--JAMES ROY, A.M., died in that year.  He and the minister of
Muckart were the only members of Presbytery who continued in their
charges after the Revolution.

1700-1718--JOHN MURRAY, A.M., died 22nd November.

1720-1755--PATRICK PROVAND, died 29th November.  The parish is
popularly known as Tarnty.  "Mr Provand, minister of Tarnty," was once
ushered into the presence of Lord Kinnoull by an English footman as "Mr
Providence, the minister of Eternity."

1756-1769--JAMES REID, A.M., died 24th August.

1770-1776--JOHN KEMP, tr. to New Greyfriars, Edinburgh.  Afterwards
D.D.; colleague in Tolbooth Church with Dr. Webster, and Secretary to
the Society for Propagating Christian Knowledge, in which capacity he
visited most of the Hebrides, founding schools.  A man of conciliatory
and engaging manners.  (See pp. 114-115.)

1777-1793--JOHN WRIGHT, tr. to Scone.

1794-1834--JAMES BRUGH, D.D., died 23rd July.  Changed spelling of his
name to Burgh.

1836-1866--ALEX. HILL GRAY, died 15th May.  Had a narrow escape of
being vetoed, but, there being some irregularity in the making up of
the roll of heads of families, his appointment was sustained.

1866-????--GEORGE WRIGHT KEMP.

_Note_.--The Information in above lists is largely derived from Dr. Hew
Scott's _Fasti Ecclesiae Scoticana_.  It has, however, been
supplemented and brought down to date.      G. D. M'N.



PRESBYTERY CLERKS

????-1657--LAURENCE MERCER, A.M., minister of Fossoway.

????-1677--WILLIAM WHYT.  "On May 8th, 1677, David Whyt, son to umql.
William Whyt, supplicated the Presbytery anent ye reste of ye fialls of
his deceast father as Clerk to ye Presbyterie, is heard, and those who
are deficient are ordered to bring payment against ye next day."

1677-1685--DAVID YOUNG, schoolmaster at Gask and Auchterarder, and
afterwards minister of Monzievaird.

1685-1693--LAURENCE MERCER, minister of Gask.  Writes a fantastic hand
very difficult to read.  Mr Mercer was ousted in 1693.  His last minute
is dated 7th September, 1687.  Probably for some years no records were
kept.

1703-1707--ANDREW URE, minister of Muckart.  Resigns 4th November, 1707.

1707-1711--JOHN DRUMMOND, minister of Crieff.  Intimates resignation
14th November 1710.

1711-1729--ARCHD. BOWIE, minister of Monzie, appointed 16th January,
1711, by plurality of votes as against Mr Ure, Muckart, and Mr Haly,
Muthill.  Held office till 24th April, 1729, when Mr Will. Simson was
chosen in his place, who, declining to do duty, Mr John M'Leish was
appointed to do it.

1729-1741--JOHN M'CLEISH.  Mr M'Cleish was a licentiate residing within
the bounds.  He seems to have resigned Clerkship on his appointment to
parish of Gask.

1741-1747--LACHLAN TAYLOR.

1747-1757--JAMES REID, A.M.  At time of his appointment a divinity
student; was afterwards minister of Glendevon; resigned Clerkship soon
after his translation to Trinity-Gask.

1757-1759--DAVID M'GIBBON, minister of Glendevon.  Appointed
unanimously 24th April, 1757.  Resigned 27th September on his
translation to Buchanan.

1759-1768--ALEX. SMYTH, minister of Dunning, appointed unanimously 6th
November, 1759; died 20th February, 1768.  "The salary and occasional
perquisites were continued during the Presbytery's pleasure with the
sisters of the deceast, and Mr Robert Walker, minister of Monzie,
accepted the office on these terms."

1768-1775--ROBERT WALKER, minister of Monzie, appointed 5th April,
1768.  Getting into trouble (see p. 22 (xxii), App.) he had to leave
the parish of Monzie, and on 23rd November, 1773, resigned the
Clerkship.  On 1st February, 1774, he requested to be continued, and
stated that "one of your number, whose capacity is unquestionable, has
generously consented to take charge of your papers and records."  The
request was granted, and the person referred to, Mr John Kemp,
Trinity-Gask, acted as Clerk till 12th September, 1775, when he was
thanked for the care and attention with which he had discharged the
duties of that office.

1775-1776--DAVID DAVIDSON, assistant at Monzie, appointed 12th
September, 1775, "during the pleasure of the Presbytery and his own
good behaviour."  One of Mr Walker's assistants.  Resigned 7th May,
1776, on being admitted as minister of Kippen.

1776-1784--ALEX. COLDSTREAM, schoolmaster of Crieff, appointed
unanimously 7th May, 1776.  He never seems to have recorded a single
minute of Presbytery in the register, but to have left them all in
scroll.  On 7th August, 1784, a motion was made by a member of
Presbytery that, considering the many proofs of indolence and
incapacity which their Clerk has given in the above business of Mr
Lawson, and other matters belonging to his office, that he be no longer
continued therein.  Consideration of this motion was delayed till next
meeting (2nd Nov., 1784), when it was unanimously agreed to.

1784-1792--ANDREW DUNCAN, minister of Auchterarder, appointed 2nd
November, 1784.  On 3rd July, 1792, he intimated to the Presbytery
that, having now completed the register of the Presbytery, which had
been ten years behind the minute-book, and brought it up to the present
date, the doing of which was one object of his undertaking the
Clerkship, he now begged to resign that office.

1792-1819--JOHN BROWN, minister of Glendevon, appointed 3rd July, 1792.
Held office for long period of twenty-seven years.  Was also for many
years Clerk of Synod.  Resigned (8th June, 1819) the Presbytery
Clerkship, thanking them for "the support and assistance they had
always given him in the execution of his duty as their Clerk."  At same
time he nominated as his successor, Mr Robert John Robertson, minister
of Gask, "a gentleman whose candour, fidelity, and talents much
recommend him to the notice of all that know him, and qualify him
particularly to the office of Clerk of the Presbytery."

1819-1822--ROBERT JOHN ROBERTSON, minister of Gask, appointed
unanimously on 8th June, 1819; resigned 2nd July, 1822, on his
translation to Forteviot.

1822-1829--JOHN EDWARD TOUCH, minister of Madderty, appointed
unanimously 2nd July, 1822; resigned 1st September, 1829, on his
translation to Kinnoull, and was thanked for his "attention, fidelity,
diligence, and accuracy."

1829-1833--JOHN MACFARLANE, minister of Ardoch Chapel, appointed by a
majority on 1st September, 1829, as against Mr Maxtone, minister of
Fowlis.  Resigned 5th March, 1833, on his appointment to Collessie.

1833-1843--JAMES THOMSON, minister of Muckart, appointed unanimously
5th March, 1833; resigned 4th April, 1843, when interdict was served on
Presbytery prohibiting _quoad sacra_ ministers and elders from voting,
"whereupon Mr Thomson, the Clerk, resigned his Clerkship, to which
resolution he adhered, notwithstanding the earnest remonstrances of
several brethren.  Mr Stevenson, assistant and successor in the parish
of Crieff, was then appointed interim Clerk, and to him Mr Thomson
delivered such papers as he was then possessed of, consisting of scroll
and rough copy of minutes and a small parcel of documents."

1843--R. HORNE STEVENSON, assistant and successor in the parish of
Crieff, appointed in above circumstances; resigned 26th Sep., 1843, on
his translation to St. George's, Edinburgh.

1843-1864--WILLIAM ROBERTSON, minister of Monzievaird, appointed
unanimously 26th Sept., 1843.  Died 9th June, 1864.  "He discharged the
duties of Presbytery Clerk for a period of upwards of twenty years.
For these duties he was peculiarly well qualified by his extensive
acquaintance with the laws and constitution of the Church, by his
masterly habits of business, and by the urbanity and kindness of his
disposition.  And these duties he discharged with a zeal and an ability
which entitle his memory to the lasting gratitude of the
Presbytery."--_Pres. tribute_.

_Note_.--Mr Robertson, the Presbytery Clerk, being personally concerned
in a case, Mr A. G. Reid, solicitor, Auchterarder, was appointed to act
from 16th October, 1850, to 4th November, 1851, as interim Clerk of
Presbytery.

1864-1878--JOHN WILSON, D.D., minister of Dunning, appointed
unanimously 5th July, 1864.  Was also Clerk of Synod.  Died 1st March.
"His appointment as Clerk of Presbytery fourteen years ago brought him
into closer connection with its members, and by his uniform courtesy,
his friendliness, his tact in managing business, and his accurate and
extensive knowledge of the forms of procedure in ecclesiastical courts,
he rendered most valuable service to the Church."--_Pres. tribute_.

1878-????--GEO. D. MACNAUGHTAN, B.D., minister of Ardoch, appointed
unanimously (2nd April, 1878), on motion of Dr Cunningham, minister of
Crieff, seconded by Mr Bonallo, minister of Blackford.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Chronicles of Strathearn, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLES OF STRATHEARN ***

***** This file should be named 26342.txt or 26342.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/3/4/26342/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
