The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Cookery Blue Book, by Society for
Christian Work of the First Unitarian Church, San Francisco, California


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Cookery Blue Book


Author: Society for Christian Work of the First Unitarian Church, San
Francisco, California



Release Date: August 20, 2008  [eBook #26374]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COOKERY BLUE BOOK***


E-text prepared by Julia Miller and the Project Gutenberg Online
Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from digial material
generously made available by Internet Archive
(http://www.archive.org/index.php)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Intenet Archive. See
      http://www.archive.org/details/cookerybluebook00firsrich


Transcriber's Note

      Obvious typographical errors have been corrected. A list of
      corrections is found at the end of the text.

      Inconsistencies in spelling and hyphenation have been retained.
      A list of inconsistently spelled and hyphenated words is found
      at the end of the text.

      Oe ligatures have been expanded.

      Text enclosed between equal signs was in bold face in the
      original (=bold=).





THE COOKERY BLUE BOOK

Prepared by the

SOCIETY FOR CHRISTIAN WORK
OF THE
FIRST UNITARIAN CHURCH, SAN FRANCISCO, CAL.

"Tried and True"







San Francisco
C. A. Murdock & Co., Printers
1891




    _The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit;
    The clock hath struck twelve upon the bell;
    My mistress made it one upon my cheek--
    She is so hot, because the meat is cold;
    Methinks your man, like mine, should be your clock,
    And strike you home without a messenger.
    My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
    Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner--
    My mistress and her sister wait for you._

    _--Comedy of Errors._




THE

COOKERY BLUE BOOK




SOUPS.


=Bouillon Soup.=

4 pounds of round of beef cut into dice pieces. Trim off all fatty skin.
4 quarts water; 1 teaspoonful celery seed; 4 large onions; 6 large
carrots; bunch of parsley; 6 blades of mace; 16 whole cloves, salt and
pepper to taste.

Pour on the water, and let it simmer six hours, skimming carefully, for
if any grease is allowed to go back into the soup it is impossible to
make it clear. Scrape the carrots, stick 4 whole cloves into each onion,
and put them in the soup; then add the celery seed, parsley, mace,
pepper and salt. Let this boil till the vegetables are tender, then
strain through a cloth, pouring the soup through first, then putting the
meat in it to drain, never squeezing or pressing it.

If you wish to color it, you can put in a dessertspoon of burnt sugar.
It can be nicely flavored by adding some walnut catsup, together with
mushroom and a very little Worcestershire.


=Beef Soup.=

Boil trimmings of roast beef and beef-steak bones for three hours. Cool
and skim off fat; add half a salt spoon of pepper, 2 teaspoonfuls of
salt, 3 potatoes, pared and cut up, 1/2 a carrot, 1/2 an onion, 3 gumbo
pods, half a bay leaf and a little chopped parsley. Add a few drops of
caramel and serve hot. Strain, if preferred thin.


=Tomato Soup without Stock.=

1 dozen tomatoes cut up and enough water to cover them; a salt spoon of
mustard, salt and 2 dozen cloves. Stew thoroughly and strain. Rub
together 2 heaping tablespoons of flour and a piece of butter the size
of an egg. Put this in the strained liquor and boil. This makes soup for
six persons.


=Milk Tomato Soup.=

Boil 1 can of tomatoes very soft in 1 quart of water; strain, and add 1
pint of milk, 1 teaspoonful of soda, small piece of butter, a shake of
mace, and salt to taste. Let it scald, not boil, and add 2 rolled
crackers.


=Bisque Soup.=

2 large onions sliced, 1 can tomatoes. Boil together half an hour or
longer, then put through colander and add 1 quart beef stock, salt and
pepper. Let this boil together a few moments. Whip 1 cup cream with the
yolks of 4 eggs and 1 tablespoon of corn starch or flour; add this to
the stock, boil up, and serve at once.


=Mock Bisque Soup.=

1 quart tomatoes, 3 pints milk, 1 large tablespoonful flour, butter size
of an egg, pepper and salt to taste, a scant teaspoonful of soda. Put
the tomato on to stew and the milk in a double kettle to boil, reserving
half a cup to mix with flour. Mix the flour smoothly with the cold milk
and cook ten minutes.

To the tomato add the soda, stir well, and rub through a strainer that
is fine enough to keep back the seeds. Add butter, salt and pepper to
the milk and then the tomato. Serve immediately.


=Bean Soup.=

1 coffee cup of brown beans soaked over night; boil in a gallon of water
with a piece of salt pork 3 inches square (a little beef is good, also)
several hours, until beans are soft; strain, and add a small bit of
butter, the juice of 1 lemon and a small cup of sherry wine.


=Black Bean Soup.=

1 pint of beans soaked over night; 2 quarts water and boil five or six
hours, adding water as it boils away; when soft, strain out the skins,
season with salt and pepper to taste. When ready for the table add a
large spoonful of sherry wine, 2 boiled eggs, sliced, and 1 lemon,
sliced very thin. Do not cook it any after these ingredients are added.


=Split Pea Soup.=

1 gallon water, 1 quart peas, soaked over night; 1/4 pound salt pork cut
in bits; 1 pound lean beef cut the same. Boil slowly two hours, or until
the water is reduced one-half. Pour in a colander and press the peas
through; return to the kettle and add a small amount of celery chopped
fine. Fry three or four slices of bread quite brown in butter--cut in
squares when served.


=Grandmother Sawtelle's Pea Soup.=

Soak a quart of dried peas over night. In the morning put them on to
boil with fragments of fresh meat; also cloves, allspice, pepper and
salt. Let boil until soft, then strain through a colander. Have some
pieces of bread or crackers inch square, and put them into the oven to
dry without browning; a pint of bread to a quart of peas. Take 2/3 of a
cup of melted butter and put the bread in it; stir until the bread and
butter are well mixed, then put into the peas and it is done. If the
peas do not boil easily add a little saleratus.


=Green Pea Soup.=

Boil the pods first, then remove and boil peas in same water until soft
enough to mash easily. Add a quart of milk, and thickening made of a
tablespoonful of butter and 1 of flour. Boil a few minutes and serve.


=Celery Soup (for six persons).=

Boil a small cup of rice till tender, in 3 pints of milk (or 2 pints of
milk and 1 of cream); rub through a sieve, add 1 quart of veal stock,
salt, cayenne and 3 heads of celery grated fine.


=Cream of Celery Soup.=

4 teacups of chopped celery, 1 quart of milk; boil celery soft (saving
water it is boiled in); rub celery through fine sieve; mix celery and
milk. Take 1 heaping tablespoonful of flour, 1 even tablespoonful of
butter, 1 scant teaspoonful of salt. If desired, can boil celery in the
morning, then about half an hour before dinner take milk, flour, butter,
salt and celery and boil together, stirring constantly so it will cook
evenly. When the consistency of cream, it is ready for use.


=Ox-tail Soup.=

1 ox-tail, 2 pounds lean beef, 4 carrots, 3 onions and thyme. Cut tail
into pieces and fry brown in butter. Slice onions and 2 carrots, and
when you remove the tail from the pan put these in and brown also; then
tie them in a thin cloth with the thyme and put in the soup pot. Lay the
tail in and then the meat cut into small pieces. Grate over them the
remaining 2 carrots, and add 4 quarts of water, with salt and pepper.
Boil four to six hours. Strain five minutes before serving and thicken
with 2 tablespoonfuls of browned flour. Boil ten minutes longer.


=Mushroom Soup.=

1 pint of white stock, 2 tablespoonfuls butter, 1/4 teaspoon of pepper,
and 1 teaspoon of salt, 1 tablespoonful corn starch, 1 pint of milk;
heat milk. Mix butter and corn starch to cream, and add hot milk and
then stock. Boil 1 pound of mushrooms until soft, and then strain. Have
them ready and add to the soup, letting it stand to thicken. It is
improved by a little whipped cream added before serving.


=Soupe a l'Ognon.=

Put into a saucepan butter size of a pigeon's egg; add 1 pint of soup
stock. When very hot add 3 onions, sliced thin, then a full 1/2 teacup
of flour, stirring constantly that it may not burn. Add 1 pint boiling
water, pepper and salt, and let boil one minute, then placing on back of
range till ready to serve, when add 1 quart of boiling milk and 3 mashed
boiled potatoes. Gradually add to the potatoes a little of the soup till
smooth and thin enough to put into the soup kettle. Stir all well, then
strain. Put diamond-shaped pieces of toasted bread in bottom of tureen
and pour soup over it.


=Potato Soup.=

Boil and mash fine 4 large mealy potatoes; add 1 egg, a piece of butter
size of an egg, a teaspoonful of salt, 1 teaspoonful celery salt. Boil 1
pint of water and 1 pint of milk together and pour on potatoes boiling
hot. Stir it well, strain and serve.


=Asparagus (white) Soup.=

Cut off the hard, green stems from two bunches of asparagus and put them
in 2 quarts and a pint of water, with 2 pounds of veal (the knuckle is
the best). Boil in a closely covered pot three hours, till the meat is
in rags and the asparagus dissolved. Strain the liquor and return to the
pot with the remaining half of the asparagus heads. Let this boil for
twenty minutes more and add, before taking up, 2/3 of a teacup of sweet
cream, in which has been stirred a dessertspoonful of corn starch. When
it has fairly boiled up, serve with small squares of toast in the
tureen. Season with salt and pepper.


=Soup a la Minute (for six persons).=

Cut 4 ounces of fat salt pork in dice and set it on the fire in a
saucepan; stir, and when it is turning rather brown, add 1 onion
chopped, and 1/2 a medium-sized carrot sliced. When they are partly
fried, add 2 pounds of lean beef cut in small dice, and let fry five
minutes. Then pour in it about 3 pints of boiling water, salt and
pepper, and boil gently for three-quarters of an hour.


=Caramel, for Coloring Soups.=

Melt 1 cup white sugar in a saucepan till it is dark; add slowly 1 cup
cold water, stirring briskly, and boil till it thickens. Keep in
large-mouthed bottle.

[Illustration]




BREAKFAST DISHES.


=Baked Omelet--No. 1.=

5 eggs, 1/2 cup of milk, 1/2 teaspoon corn starch, pepper and salt. Beat
the whites and yolks of the eggs separately and very stiff; stir lightly
together and add other ingredients. Bake in a buttered pudding-dish and
serve immediately.


=Baked Omelet--No. 2.=

1/2 cup of milk boiled. Stir in the well-beaten yolks of 6 eggs till
thick. Add a dessertspoon of butter and salt to taste. After removing
from the fire, add whites of 6 eggs, well-beaten. Bake ten minutes in an
oven heated as for cake.


=Bread Omelet.=

Bread crumbs and parsley rubbed fine; a little chopped onion; 3 eggs
beaten lightly. Add a cup of milk, pepper, salt and a little nutmeg,
with a tablespoonful of butter. Bake in a moderate oven.


=Baked Eggs.=

Separate the whites from the yolks keeping each yolk separate. Salt the
whites, while beating to a stiff froth, then spread on a platter. Place
the yolks at regular distances apart in cavities made in the beaten
whites, and bake in a moderate oven till brown.


=Eggs (au miron) with Asparagus.=

Cut off the green part of the asparagus the size of peas, and scald in
hot water a few minutes, then put in the saucepan with a little butter,
small bunch of parsley and young onions tied together (so that it can be
removed before breaking the eggs on the asparagus). Add a little flour,
water, salt, pepper and a little sugar, stewing together till the water
is evaporated. Then put in a baking-dish and break some eggs over the
top. Put a little salt, pepper and nutmeg over the eggs and cook in the
oven, but not long enough to let the eggs get hard. Serve immediately.


=Corn Omelet.=

Take the well-filled ears of corn, cut the kernels down the center,
being careful not to loosen them from the cob; then takeout the pulp by
pressing downward with a knife. To 3 tablespoons of corn pulp add the
well-beaten yolks of 3 eggs and a little salt. Beat the whites of the
eggs to a stiff froth, mix with the corn, and put in a hot pan with a
little butter. Cover, and place where it will not burn. When done, fold
over and serve on a hot dish.


=Bananas (as a breakfast dish).=

Slice bananas lengthwise; put them in a buttered pan and brown in oven;
or they can be dipped in butter and fried; or sliced and served cold
with cream.


=Baked Peppers.=

Cut off tops; take the seeds out and fill with sausage meat. Bake forty
minutes.


=Baked Beans.=

Soak 1 quart of pea beans over night in cold water. In morning drain and
place in earthen bean-pot with 1 teaspoon salt, 1/2 of pepper, 2 of
sugar, 1 pound fat pork, scored; fill the pot with warm water and bake
in a moderate oven all day, as water evaporates adding sufficient to
keep them moist. They cannot be baked too long.


=Fish-balls.=

1 cup of raw salt fish; 1 pint of potatoes; 1 teaspoonful butter; 1 egg
well beaten; a little pepper. Wash and pick the fish in small pieces
free from bones. Pare the potatoes and cut in small pieces. Put both
together in a stew-pan and cover with boiling water, and boil until the
potatoes are soft. Drain off the water, mash and beat till very light.
When a little cool, add the egg and fry in very hot lard.


=Potatoes with Cheese.=

The potatoes are boiled and cut in small pieces, covered with milk or
cream. Put bread crumbs and cheese over the top. Add butter and bake
till brown.


=Vermicelli (as a breakfast dish).=

To 3 pints of bubbling, salted water, add 1 pint of the best vermicelli;
boil briskly ten minutes, drain off all the water and serve hot with
butter and cream.




FISH.


=Fish a la Creme.=

3 pounds of sturgeon or any solid white fish boiled until tender. Remove
bone, mince fine, and season with salt, pepper, wine and lemon juice. 1
quart milk, boiled with two good-sized onions until they are in shreds.
Rub to a cream 1/2 pound butter and two large tablespoonfuls of flour.
Strain the boiling milk with this and return to the stew-pan and boil
again, taking care to stir to prevent lumps and burning. Grate the rind
of one lemon, with juice and one tumbler of wine and mix thoroughly
through the fish. Take one loaf of bread, removing all crust, and pass
through the colander. Have dish very hot, putting fish and crumbs in
layers, bringing crumbs on top. Place in hot oven for a few minutes. A
nice lunch dish.


=A Norwegian Fish Dish.=

Take a fresh codfish weighing about 4 pounds; do not wash it, but wipe
with a soft cloth wrung out in cold water. Scrape all the flesh from
skin and bone; and put the head, bones and skin on to boil, and when
thoroughly cooked, strain. Take equal parts of scraped fish and chopped
suet, one tablespoon of salt and pound to a paste. Add 2 eggs, 2
tablespoonfuls of flour, a little mace and ginger. Boil some cream, and
when cold, gradually add enough to make a soft batter. Try a little of
this in the boiling stock to see if the consistency is right. Then put
in a buttered, breaded mould and cook two hours. If some of the batter
is left, form in balls and cook in the fish stock and serve as soup.


=Finnan haddies (from Delmonico's).=

1/2 pound of fish picked up and braized in butter and cooked in the
following sauce: 1 cup of cream over hard boiled egg cut in squares; the
yolk of 1 raw egg; a tablespoonful of Edan cheese, a little flour to
thicken; a little pepper and Worcestershire sauce. Serve on toast.


=Stuffed Smelt.=

Ingredients of stuffing: 1/4 cup of melted butter; 1 cup of bread
crumbs, 1 teaspoonful of chopped onion; 1/4 spoon of salt; 1/4 spoon of
pepper and a few herbs. Bone the smelt, stuff and sew up. Roll in melted
butter and fine bread crumbs. Bake about fifteen minutes.

SAUCE.--1/2 cup butter worked to a cream; yolks of 3 eggs beaten in one
by one; juice of 1/2 a lemon; 1/2 teaspoonful salt, 1/4 teaspoon pepper
and 1/2 cup boiling water. Beat and put on stove in a saucepan of
boiling water to thicken.


=Brown Fish Chowder.=

1 onion fried in butter. Cut any white fish in small pieces and fry in
this after first rolling the fish in flour. Take the fish out and lay on
brown paper. Put into a saucepan 2 tablespoonfuls dry flour and stir
until it is brown; then gradually stir in a quart of water. When this
has boiled, add the fish and seasoning.

[Illustration]




ENTREES.


=Chicken Terrapin--No. 1.=

Chop the meat of a cold chicken and 1 parboiled sweet-bread quite fine.
Make a cream sauce, with 1 cup of sweet cream, a quarter of a cup of
butter and 2 tablespoonfuls of flour. Put in the chicken and
sweet-breads. Keep it hot in a double boiler and just before serving add
the yolks of 2 eggs and a wine-glass of sherry wine.


=Chicken Terrapin No. 2.=

Cut a cold boiled chicken in small squares, removing all the skin. Put
into a skillet with 1/2 pint of cream and 1/4 pound of butter, rolled in
1 tablespoonful of flour, seasoned with salt and red pepper. Have ready
3 hard boiled eggs chopped fine. When the chicken has reached a boil,
stir in a large glass of sherry with the egg, and serve hot.


=Chicken Terrapin--No. 3.=

Boil chicken in salted water. 1 quart of cold cooked chicken cut into
dice; cooked livers of 1 or 2 chickens; 3 hard-boiled eggs; yolks of 2
raw eggs; 1 cup of chicken stock; 1 cup cream; slight grating of nutmeg;
1/3 teaspoon pepper; 1 level teaspoon salt; 4 tablespoons sherry; 3
tablespoons butter; 2 tablespoons flour; 1 teaspoon lemon juice. Chop
hard-boiled eggs and add to chicken; sprinkle with salt, pepper and
nutmeg. Add flour to melted butter and stock and stir for three minutes.
Add cream after reserving 4 tablespoonfuls. Stir one minute. Add chicken
mixture and let it simmer for ten minutes. Beat yolks well and add
cream; pour into mixture and stir one minute. Remove from fire, and add
wine and lemon juice.


=Chicken for Lunch.=

Cut up 2 chickens; fry each piece quickly in bacon fat to a nice brown
(not cooking them). Then stew them slowly with gumbo, a little pork,
celery and 1/2 an onion till tender. Thicken with brown flour and dish,
garnishing with parsley and sliced hard-boiled eggs.


=Pressed Chicken (a nice luncheon dish).=

Boil a chicken, in as little water as possible, till the bones slip out
and the gristly portions are soft. Remove the skin, pick the meat apart,
and mix the dark and white meat. Remove the fat, and season the liquor
highly with salt and pepper; also with celery, salt and lemon juice, if
you desire. Boil down to 1 cup, and mix with the meat. Butter a mould
and decorate the bottom and sides with slices of hard-boiled eggs; also
with thin slices of tongue or ham cut in fancy shapes. Pack the meat in
and set away to cool with a weight on the meat. When ready to serve, dip
mould in warm water and turn out carefully. Garnish with parsley, strips
of lettuce or celery leaves and radishes or beets. The eggs and tongue
can be dispensed with if a plain dish is desired.


=Beef Loaf.=

3-1/2 pounds fine chopped beef; 1/2 pound pork; 3 eggs; 1 large spoonful
of salt; 1 teaspoon pepper; 1/2 teaspoon nutmeg; 4 large spoonfuls milk;
10 soda crackers rolled fine, saving out 1 to rub on the top. Put bits
of butter over the top. Press the meat several times with your hand to
make into a thin loaf. Bake in a quick oven one hour, putting water in
pan. It requires no basting.


=Beef Roll.=

Lean beef chopped fine; 1/2 cup bread crumbs; a slice of onion chopped;
chopped parsley; the yolk of 1 egg; a little butter and lemon juice. Mix
all thoroughly. Form in an oblong loaf, put in pan and bake half hour in
a hot oven, basting two or three times with melted butter. Served with a
brown sauce.


=To Fry. Soft-shelled Crabs.=

Use them only when very fresh, as the shells harden after twenty-four
hours. Cut the ends of the small legs off; take off the gills and tucks;
wash and drain well upon a cloth. A few minutes before serving dip them
one after another in 2 eggs beaten as for an omelet; then in crumbs of
rolled cracker made very fine and fry them in very hot lard; not too
many at a time. Serve hot, with a garnish of parsley and pieces of
lemon.


=Deviled Crab.=

Pick the meat from one large crab and chop a little. Add 2 green
peppers, chopped fine, and mix with cracker crumbs. Add sufficient soup
stock to moisten and season to taste. Clean the shell and put in 1 layer
of the ingredients. Add pieces of butter, then another layer, and so on,
till shell is full. Then bake fifteen minutes, and serve.


=Crab Creole (for four persons).=

1 crab; 1 good-sized onion; 1/2 can of tomatoes; 1 Chili pepper or pinch
of cayenne; butter the size of a walnut; 2 tablespoonfuls of water; 1/2
cup of cream; salt and pepper, and 1 tablespoonful of corn starch. Shred
up crab, not too fine, cut up onion and chili pepper and put in a pan
with the 2 tablespoonfuls of water. Boil briskly fifteen minutes; then
add 1/2 can of tomatoes. Boil ten minutes, or until soft. Strain, put
juice back on fire. Add the butter, pepper and salt, and thicken with 1
tablespoonful of corn starch. Add crab and cream. When all is hot, serve
with toast.


=Canapie Lorenzo.=

One-third New York cheese, one-third dessicated soft-shell crab,
one-sixth green peppers chopped very fine. Make in pates about the size
of a hand and bake brown.


=Crab Cutlets.=

Pick up the meat of 2 crabs, seasoning with salt, pepper, a pinch of
mustard and a good tablespoon of Worcestershire sauce. Put in a saucepan
a piece of butter twice the size of an egg; when melted stir in 2
tablespoons of flour, and add a cup of rich cream, stirring constantly.
Mix in the prepared crab and set aside to cool. Then mould into cutlets,
which you roll in egg and bread crumbs. Stick the claws you have saved
into the cutlets, and fry. Serve with or without parsley and slices of
lime.


=Shrimp Stew.=

Slice 3 onions and 3 tomatoes, and fry till well done. Rub together 1
tablespoonful flour and a piece of butter, egg-size. Add red pepper,
salt and 1 cup of cream. Put this in saucepan, with onions and 1 pint of
shrimps. Cook ten minutes, and serve on toast.


=Terrapin Stew.=

Boil according to size thirty or forty minutes, so that the upper shell
will separate from the lower easily. Take "gall-bag" from liver, which
is always found on the right lobe. Avoid breaking, as it will give a
bitter taste and spoil the dish. Strip the skin from the claws, cut off
the nails and skin the head. Throw nothing away but the "gall-bag." Cut
all into small pieces; stew slowly in sherry wine closely covered, with
a goodly supply of butter and red pepper, for one hour and a half. Salt
to taste. If they have no eggs in them, add 2 or 3 eggs, hard-boiled,
for each terrapin and the juice of 1 lemon, skinning another to lay on
top. When about to take from the fire, thicken with a little flour.
Serve on hot toast, well-buttered, over which sprinkle a finely chopped
egg.


=Baked Oysters in the Shells.=

Take 50 small Eastern oysters with their liquor and a piece of butter.
Drain the oysters very carefully and strain the liquor. Thicken with an
ounce of butter mixed with an ounce of flour. Stir, and boil five
minutes. Finish with the yolks of 3 eggs. Add a little salt, some white
and red pepper and grated nutmeg. Boil a few minutes longer, stirring
constantly. Then remove from the fire. Add the oysters and juice of a
lemon, and mix well with the sauce. Have ready some large, deep,
well-shaped oyster-shells slightly buttered; fill these with the
prepared oysters, sprinkle rolled cracker crumbs over; put a piece of
butter on top of each; arrange in a pan; brown slightly in a pretty hot
oven (about ten minutes), and serve.


=Curried Oysters.=

Strain juice of oysters and cook alone till edges curl. Cook 1
tablespoonful chopped onion and 1 tablespoonful butter five minutes. Mix
1 tablespoonful curry powder, 2 tablespoonsfuls flour and stir into
butter. Add 1 pint sweet milk gradually, stirring constantly in
saucepan. Mix oysters with the sauce. Pour over small slices of hot
buttered toast and serve immediately.


=Fancy Roast of Oysters.=

Remove oysters from liquor and have them free from grit or shell. Scald
1 pint of oyster liquor, and when boiling hot put in the oysters and let
them cook two or three minutes. Strain the liquor and put the oysters on
pieces of toast. Arrange on a dish and set over steam to keep hot. Blend
together 2 teaspoonfuls of flour and 1/2 cup of butter, moistening it
with oyster liquor. When well mixed, put into the hot liquor and let
boil a few minutes, stirring well. Strain over the oysters, and serve
hot with lemons.


=Sweet-breads.=

Clean and parboil the sweet breads; cut them in slices and dip in melted
butter. Roll them in grated cheese; dip in beaten egg; roll in bread
crumbs and fry in hot fat. Serve with tomato sauce.


=Veal Loaf.=

3 pounds of veal cutlets and a small piece of salt pork, all chopped
fine together; a tea-cup of rolled crackers moistened a very little with
water; salt, pepper and 1 egg. Add summer savory, if you like. Put in a
bread-pan and bake one and a-half hours. Serve in slices when cold.


=Meat Salad.=

Chop fine 2 pounds of cold corned beef, then take 2/3 of a cup of
vinegar, 1 tablespoonful of sugar and 1 egg. Beat all together, pour
into a pan and let boil; then pour into a dish to mould. Serve cold.


=Welsh Rare-bit--No. 1.=

1 pound of fresh cheese, cut in small pieces; in chafing-dish add 1 cup
of milk (or cup of Bass' ale), 4 teaspoonfuls butter, 4 small teaspoons
of mustard, 2 of salt and a little pepper. Stir it well, and cook until
it thickens (not curdle). Serve on toast.


=Welsh Rare-bit--No. 2.=

1 egg, 1/2 a cup of milk; 1 cup of grated cheese, salt, cayenne pepper
and mustard to taste. Heat the milk in a double boiler; melt the cheese.
Add the egg, and pour all over squares of toast.


=Cheese Sticks--No. 1.=

1 cup of grated cheese; 1 cup of flour; a little cayenne pepper; butter
same as for pastry. Roll thin; cut in narrow strips, and bake a light
brown in a quick oven. (Serve with salad.)


=Cheese Sticks--No. 2.=

3 ounces of butter; 3 ounces of flour; 3 ounces of moist, rich cheese.
Mix together and mould into a paste. Roll out and cut into strips about
one-half inch wide and five long. Bake in a quick oven. A very nice
relish.

[Illustration]




MEATS.


=Boiled Ham.=

Put a ham weighing 14 pounds in a large kettle and half cover with cold
water and cook slowly. When the water boils, add a quart of sour white
wine and cook about five hours, or until tender. Put the ham in a baking
pan and trim off the under side nicely, and take off the skin. Cover an
inch thick with currant jelly, put a cup of sherry in the pan and put
into a pretty hot oven. Let the fire go down; baste very often at first,
that the wine may penetrate the jelly, and bake a half hour or more.


=Calf's-head Stew.=

1 head, 2 bay leaves, 1 teaspoonful thyme, 6 quarts of water, 2 large
carrots, 1 sweet marjoram, 3 onions, 1 handful salt, 1 teaspoonful
pepper. Simmer 4 hours, skimming when necessary. Take out meat, strain
broth and cut tongue in small pieces. 2 large teaspoonfuls of butter in
pan, 3 of flour, and cook until brown. Juice of 1 lemon, 3 hard-boiled
eggs, chopped, 1/2 lemon, sliced, wine and red pepper to taste. When
very hot, serve.


=Chops and Tomato Sauce.=

Fry some pieces of pork in the spider, then cut up and fry a few onions.
Into this pour some peeled and cut-up tomatoes; stir till all cooked to
pieces and then strain. Thicken with a little flour. Broil chops, place
on a hot platter and pour the sauce over them. For 3 pounds chops, 1/4
pound pork, about 3 onions, and 6 or 8 tomatoes are required. A few
cloves and a little chili pepper are considered by some an addition.


=Kidney Stew.=

2 beef kidneys cut in small pieces. Pour cold water over, and as it
boils pour off and repeat. The third time let it simmer slowly for two
hours. Add 2 onions, chopped fine, and cook one hour. A few minutes
before serving add sherry wine. Thicken with flour and serve on hot
toast. This may be varied by adding curry; both are excellent.


=Sheep's Tongues.=

Boil them in soup stock until tender, with a seasoning of salt, pepper
and a bouquet of herbs. (1 or 2 cloves, 1 or 2 small onions, 1 bay leaf,
sprig of parsley, some whole black pepper tied in a little white bag and
removed after an hour.) When done add to the stock some browned flour
and butter, tomato juice to taste, and a little lime juice. Garnish with
triangles of toast around the dish.


=Spanish Receipt for Cooking Tongue.=

Soak a fresh tongue over night. In the morning take the skin off by
boiling water. Mix together 1 large spoon of lard, 1 quart raw beans,
chopped fine, with the lard, 2 or 3 onions, chopped not very fine, and a
little parsley. Fry all together for a little while; then add to this 1
cup of stock, 1 cup of wine, a head of garlic, pepper, salt, cinnamon,
and 3 laurel leaves. Then put a paper over top of saucepan and put on
cover very tight. Cook for two or three hours over a slow fire; then
strain the same through a colander. Add to the strained sauce 1 or 2
spoonfuls of brown flour to thicken. Put over the fire a little while,
and then pour over the tongue.


=Chestnut Stuffing.=

Shell 1 pint of large chestnuts; pour on boiling water and remove the
inner skin. Boil in salted water, or stock, until soft. Mash fine and
mix with them 1 cup of fine rolled crackers. Season with 1 teaspoonful
of salt, 1 salt spoon of pepper, and 1 teaspoonful of chopped parsley.
Moisten with 1/3 cup of melted butter. This stuffing is especially nice
for quail.


=Stuffing for Turkeys.=

5 Boston crackers, rolled, piece of salt pork size of an egg, chopped
fine. Add 1/2 pint of milk and season with salt and pepper. (Add sage if
you wish.) Let it scald, then beat 3 eggs and stir in. Add milk till it
is the consistency of batter fritters, put in the turkey and bake
slowly, basting frequently.

[Illustration]




SALADS.


=Boiled Salad Dressing.=

3 eggs, 3 tablespoons dry mustard, 1 teacup of oil or cream, 1/2 cup
vinegar, salt to taste. Mix eggs and mustard to a cream, then add oil
drop by drop, vinegar drop by drop, salt to taste. Put on stove and stir
all the time, and let it scarcely come to a boil. When cold, bottle and
keep in a cold place.

By beating all the ingredients well together with an egg-beater it is as
creamy as when oil is added drop by drop.


=Dressing for Cold Slaw.=

Yolks of 1 or 2 eggs, 3 tablespoons vinegar, 1 teaspoon salt, 1 of
mustard, butter size of an egg. Cook like custard.


=Clayton's Celebrated Salad Dressing.=

Take 3 tablespoonfuls of mustard, mixed quite stiff. Pour on this slowly
1/4 of a pint of best olive oil, stirring rapidly till thick. Then add 3
eggs, and after mixing slightly pour in slowly the remaining 3/4 of a
pint of oil, stirring rapidly till the mixture forms a thick batter.
Next take 1 teacup of best wine vinegar and juice of 1 lemon, a small
teaspoonful of salt and 1 of white sugar. Stir until the ingredients are
well mixed. When bottled and tightly corked, this will remain good for
months.


=Salad Dressing.=

1/2 salt spoon pepper, 1 of salt, 1 teaspoonful mixed mustard, 1
tablespoonful powdered sugar, 3 tablespoons of best olive oil, 3
tablespoons cream, 2 tablespoons vinegar, 1 hard-boiled egg.


=Tomato Salad.=

Scald and peel tomatoes and cut holes in the top of each. Make a rich
salad dressing, into which stir some cold peas, beans and beets, finely
chopped. Stuff the tomatoes with this, and pour dressing over. Garnish
the dish with fine lettuce leaves.

[Illustration]




VEGETABLES.


=Baked Cream Potatoes.=

Cut raw potatoes in very thin slices and put a layer of them in a
buttered earthen dish. Cover the layer with pieces of butter, and season
well with pepper and salt. Then put another layer and season in same
manner, so proceeding till the dish is full. Over all pour a pint of
cream or rich milk, and set in the oven to bake a half hour. This is a
very nice lunch dish.


=Escalloped Potatoes.=

Take some cold sliced potatoes, butter your baking dish, put a layer of
potatoes, dredge over flour, put on bits of butter, salt and pepper.
When your dish is full, pour over rich milk and bake brown. Serve hot.


=Potatoes in Cases.=

Bake potatoes of equal size, and when done and still hot, cut off a
small piece from each potato. Remove the inside carefully, leaving the
skin unbroken. Wash the potato and season generously with butter, pepper
and salt. Return it with spoon to the potato skin, allowing it to
protrude about an inch above the skin. When enough skins are filled use
a fork to make the potatoes rough above the skin. Put them in a quick
oven to color the tops.


=Stewed Carrots (French style).=

Take 2 bunches French carrots, clean and trim; put in a saucepan with
salt, pepper, 1 teacup of water, 2 tablespoons of butter, 8 lumps of
sugar, cover and boil for half an hour. Then remove the lid and place
where they will simmer slowly till all the water has cooked away,
leaving nothing but the butter.


=Stuffed Artichokes.=

Boil artichokes till soft. When cold, scrape leaves and cut out the
hearts. Chop and mix in 1 tablespoonful Worcestershire sauce, 1 egg, 1/4
cup butter, pinch of salt, red and black pepper. Roll into balls and put
into heart of the artichoke. Put a piece of butter on top of each and
bake fifteen minutes with a hot fire. This receipt is for twelve
artichokes. If you wish, bread crumbs can be added to the mixture.


=Boiled Artichokes.=

First clean, then soak in cold water fifteen minutes. Then put in
boiling water till soft, testing them by pulling off leaves.


=New England Corn Pudding.=

Take 2 dozen ears of green corn well-filled, but young; grate or pound
the corn, and add 1 pounded soda cracker and a little salt. Bake two
hours in a moderate oven, and a rich crust will form. Serve with butter.


=Celery Root.=

Pare and boil till tender in salted water. Thicken the liquor with flour
and cream, or milk, and pour over toast. Stewed celery and mushrooms
are served in the same manner.


=Stuffed Tomatoes--No. 1.=

Cut off a small piece of the top; squeeze out the seeds and water.
Remove the meat of the tomato with a spoon, without breaking or injuring
the shape. Fry an onion cut fine, then put in your stuffing (sausage
meat, chicken, veal or beef hashed fine), salt, pepper, parsley and a
little green pepper, cut fine. To this add all the meat of the tomato
you removed with the spoon. When well mixed and cooked fill each with
the dressing, on top sprinkling toasted bread crumbs and a piece of
butter. Bake in tins.

If you use sausage meat as stuffing add a little bread soaked in water
and squeezed hard, so that it will readily mix with the meat.


=Stuffed Tomatoes--No. 2.=

Take nice, smooth tomatoes and remove part of the insides. Chop 1 small
onion, 2 green peppers and some of the tomato that was removed. Add
cracker crumbs and soup stock to moisten. Fill the tomatoes, adding a
small piece of butter to each one, and bake from ten to fifteen minutes.


=Squash and Corn (Spanish style).=

3 small summer squashes, 3 ears of corn. Chop squash and cut corn from
cobs. Put in a saucepan a spoonful of lard or butter, and when very hot
an onion; fry a little and add the corn and squash, 1 tomato, 1 green
pepper cut small and salt to taste. Cover closely, and stir frequently
to prevent burning.


=Stuffed Peppers--No. 1.=

Cut off the tops and remove the seeds. Cut in small pieces 8 or 10
tomatoes and cook with a little butter and onion until tender. Add some
rice boiled in water or stock (or bread crumbs), and a little salt, then
mix with the tomatoes. Add a little chopped celery, fill the peppers,
and put a little butter over the top of each. Cook in the oven twenty
minutes and serve at once. If the peppers are boiled a few minutes
first, they will retain their bright green color.


=Stuffed Peppers--No. 2.=

Crumb 4 slices of bread and wet with 1/2 cup soup stock, small piece of
butter, pinch of salt, a dash of pepper, seeds of the pepper and a
tablespoonful of the chopped rind. Place in baking plate with very
little water, and bake fifteen minutes in a quick oven. This mixture
will fill six peppers.

[Illustration]




BREAD.


=Brown Bread--No. 1.=

2 cups Indian meal, 2 cups rye meal, 1 cup flour, 1 cup molasses, 2
teaspoonfuls saleratus and sour milk enough to make it the consistency
of Indian cake. Put some of the saleratus in the molasses and stir till
it foams. Put the remainder in the sour milk. Boil three hours. Remove
from the pan, place on a tin and bake fifteen minutes, to dry off the
steam.


=Brown Bread--No. 2.=

3 cups corn meal, 3 cups of Graham meal, 2/3 cup syrup, 1 teaspoonful
soda, and salt to taste. Sufficient milk to make a thin batter. Boil
three hours.


=Brown Bread--No. 3.=

2 cups Indian meal, 1 cup rye meal, 1 cup molasses, 1 cup sour milk, 2
cups sweet milk, pinch of soda, and salt to taste. Steam four hours.


=Muffins--No. 1.=

2 eggs, well beaten, 2 teaspoonfuls sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls butter, 2 cups
milk, 4 cups flour, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder, pinch of salt (baking
powder and salt sifted with flour). Bake in a quick oven.


=Muffins--No. 2.=

1-1/2 cups flour, scant cup milk, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, 1/2
teaspoon soda, 1 tablespoon butter melted, but not oily, 1 tablespoon
sugar, 1 egg. Add butter the last thing.


=Raised Muffins.=

1 pint milk, scalded, and a small piece of butter. When cool, add a
little salt, 1 tablespoon sugar, 1/2 cake compressed yeast, 1 egg, and
sufficient flour to make a stiff batter. When raised bake in muffin
rings.


=English Muffins.=

4 cups flour, 2 teaspoonfuls sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls butter, 1 cup boiled
milk, 1/2 cup liquid yeast. Set to rise over night; in the morning roll
out three-fourths of an inch thick; cut with biscuit-cutter, and allow
time to rise again; then cook on a griddle on top of stove, turning as
hot cakes. It improves them to flour the board with corn meal.


=Corn Bread--No. 1.=

2-1/2 cups flour, 1/2 cup meal, 1 cup milk, 3 eggs, beaten separately, 2
tablespoons butter before melting, 3 teaspoons baking powder, 2 heaping
tablespoons sugar, a little salt.


=Corn Bread--No. 2.=

1 cup corn meal, 1/2 cup flour, 1 spoon sugar, 1 spoon salt, 1 small
spoon soda, 2 small spoons cream of tartar, 1 egg, enough milk to make a
thin batter. Add melted butter at the last.


=Corn Meal Muffins.=

1 pint milk, 1/2 pint Indian meal, 4 eggs, 1 tablespoonful butter, salt,
and 1 teaspoonful sugar. Pour the milk boiling on the meal. When cool
add the butter melted, salt, sugar and yolks of eggs; lastly, the
whites, well beaten. Bake in a well-heated oven.


=Rice Corn Bread.=

1 cup of mashed boiled rice, 1 cup of corn meal, 2 eggs, well beaten,
1/2 teaspoon of salt, 1 teaspoon of butter, 1 teaspoon of baking powder,
sufficient milk to make a thin batter.


=Rice Bread.=

1 pint rice flour, 1 pint milk, 2 eggs, 2 tablespoons wheat flour, 1-1/2
butter and 1-1/2 teaspoons baking powder. Bake in shallow pans from
twenty minutes to half-hour.


=Breakfast Gems.=

1 egg, 1 scant cup milk, 1 scant cup flour, 1/2 teaspoon baking powder.
Beat the white of the egg to a stiff froth and stir in last. Bake in
long gem pans, having them very hot before putting mixture in.


=Coffee Cake.=

2 cups flour, pinch of salt, 1/2 cake compressed yeast. Make a sponge
and rise till morning, then add 2 eggs, 1 cup sugar, a little melted
butter, 1 cup flour. Set to rise till 11:30 o'clock. Sprinkle sugar and
cinnamon on top, and bake.


=Parker House Rolls.=

2 quarts of flour, make a hole in the center, and put in a small
teaspoonful of salt, 1 tablespoonful sugar, 1 tablespoonful butter, 1
pint of milk boiled, but cold, 1/2 cup yeast, and let rise over night.
In the morning knead fifteen minutes, let rise again, roll thin, cut
round, put a little butter on one-half, double over and bake.


=French Rolls.=

1 pint of scalded milk, let cool, then add 2/3 cup of yeast, 1/2 cup
sugar, 2 quarts flour, small piece of butter, worked into the flour.
Pour the milk into center of flour, and let stand over night; then
knead, letting it rise very light; then knead again, and mould, letting
it rise again, and bake.


=Graham Rolls.=

2 cups Graham flour, 1 tablespoon white sugar, 1 teaspoon soda and 2 of
cream of tartar. Mix all together, and to it add cold water; make thin
and bake in a gem baker, which has been already heated and greased. Bake
in a hot oven.


=Buns.=

4 cups flour, 1/2 cup sugar, sifted together, pinch of salt; make a hole
in flour and drop in 1 egg, 1 cup milk, 1/2 cake compressed yeast,
melted butter, the size of an egg. Raise until morning. When mixed over
add a handful of currants, and set to rise until 10:30. Roll soft, cut
with biscuit-cutter, and raise again till 11:45. After baking ten
minutes, rub the top with sugar and water.


=Waffles.=

2 cups sifted flour, 1-1/2 cups milk, 2 eggs, 2 tablespoons melted
butter, 1 teaspoon baking powder.


=Apple Biscuit.=

2 cups flour, 2 teaspoons baking powder, 1 of salt, 1 tablespoon lard, 1
of sugar, 1 egg. Break the egg into the flour. Add sufficient milk to
make a stiff batter, and pour into a shallow pan. Pare and slice apples,
covering the top of the batter with them. When almost done, sprinkle
sugar over them.


=Hominy Cake.=

1 pint cold hominy, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon rice flour, small piece of
butter. Bake in pans, like corn cake.


=Huckleberry Cake.=

4 cups flour, 1 of sugar, 2 eggs, 1 tablespoon butter, 2 teaspoons yeast
powder, 2 scant cups of milk. Stir in as many berries as the batter will
hold together, and bake in a pan. Canned berries are very good in this
way. Serve hot for lunch. To be eaten with butter.

[Illustration]




CAKE.


=Almond Drop Cakes.=

1 pound powdered sugar, 1/4 pound powdered almonds, 9 eggs (3 whites
left out), beaten separately, 2 grated lemon peels, 2 spoonfuls rose
water. Put rose water and sugar on top of each cake, after they are
dropped with a dessertspoon on the pans.


=Angel Cake.=

Whites of 11 eggs, 1-1/2 cups granulated sugar, 1 cup flour, 1 teaspoon
cream tartar, 1/2 teaspoon of almond or vanilla. Beat the eggs to a
froth; sift the sugar five times; sift the flour 4 times; add cream
tartar and sift again. Beat eggs and sugar together; add flavoring; then
flour; stir quickly and lightly; put in an unbuttered pan and bake 3/4
hour in moderate oven.


=Cream Cakes--No. 1.=

Boil in 1/2 pint of water 3/4 cup of butter; stir in while boiling 1-1/2
cups of flour. Remove from fire, let it stand five minutes, and then
stir in gradually 5 eggs, lightly beaten, and 1/2 teaspoon of soda. Drop
in pans half the size you want them, and bake fifteen or twenty minutes.


=Cream Cakes--No. 2.=

1 pint boiling water, 1 cup butter, 2 of sifted flour put in while water
and butter are boiling. Let this cool, then add 6 eggs, one at a time,
and beat in thoroughly, 1 tablespoon of milk with 1/3 teaspoon soda
dissolved in it.


=Cream Cakes--No. 3.=

Make a layer cake of 2 cups sugar, 1/2 cup butter, 3 eggs, 1/2 cup milk,
3 of flour, an even teaspoon baking powder. Bake in three layers. For
the cream take 1/2 pint milk, and when boiling stir in 2 even teaspoons
corn starch, dissolved in a little cold milk, 1 tablespoon sugar and 1
egg, stirring briskly a few moments. When cool, spread on the cake.
Flavor with vanilla or lemon.


=Cream Puffs.=

1 cup hot water, 1/2 cup butter. Boil water and butter together, and
stir in 1 cup dry flour while boiling. When cool add 3 eggs, not beaten.
Mix well, and drop by spoonfuls in buttered tins. Bake in a quick oven
twenty-five minutes. This makes fifteen puffs. When cool fill with
whipped cream.


=Ice Cream Cake.=

1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, a little more than 2/3 cup of milk, 4 even
cups of sifted flour, in which has been sifted 2 teaspoons of baking
powder; flavoring and the whites of 5 eggs beaten stiff, added last.
Cream the butter and sugar, add milk, then flour, with baking powder,
flavoring and whites of eggs, the cake well-beaten as each ingredient is
added. Bake in jelly-cake tins, two white layers, reserving enough to
make one layer colored with a little of Price's coloring, which will
make one pink layer. Put this between the two white layers, with a thin
frosting spread between, then frost the whole cake. By dividing the cake
before baking into three parts, keeping one white, adding the pink
coloring to another, and a heaping tablespoon of grated chocolate to the
third, you can have the three layers different, nice ice cream bricks.


=Chocolate Cake--No. 1.=

1 cup butter, 2 of sugar, 1 of milk, 2-1/2 of flour, 5 eggs, 2 teaspoons
baking powder, 1 cake of Baker's chocolate. Grate the chocolate and add
to the cake before the flour; flavor with vanilla, and bake in layers.

FILLING.--1 pound of sugar, 3 eggs, 1/2 cake of Baker's chocolate, 1 cup
grated cocoanut. Cover the top of cake with grated cocoanut.


=Chocolate Cake--No. 2.=

1-1/2 cups sugar, 1/2 of butter, 1/2 of milk, 1-3/4 of flour, 1/4 pound
of Baker's chocolate, 3 eggs, 2 teaspoons baking powder. Scrape the
chocolate fine and add 5 tablespoons of sugar to it (this in addition to
1-1/2 cups). Beat the butter to a cream. Gradually add sugar, beating
all the while. Add 3 tablespoons of boiling water to the chocolate and
sugar. Stir over the fire until smooth and glossy, then stir into the
beaten sugar and butter. Add to this mixture the eggs well beaten, then
the milk and flour in which the baking powder has been thoroughly mixed.
Bake twenty minutes in a moderate oven. This makes two loaves.


=Chocolate Cake--No. 3.=

1 cup butter, 2 of sugar, 1 of milk, 5 eggs (omitting whites of 2), 1
teaspoon cream tartar, 1/2 of soda, 3-1/2 cups flour.

FROSTING.--Whites of 2 eggs, 6 heaping tablespoons grated chocolate, 1
cup powdered sugar, 1 teaspoon vanilla. Frost while cake is hot. This
recipe makes two loaves.


=Chocolate Loaf Cake.=

1 cup sugar, 1 of milk, 2 of flour, 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon soda dissolved in
the milk. Melt 1/2 cup sugar, 1/2 of milk, yolk of 1 egg, 1/2 cake of
chocolate to a smooth cream and add to cake. Bake in a moderate oven.


=Chocolate Caramel Cake.=

2 cups sugar, 2/3 cup milk, 3 eggs, beaten separately, 2 tablespoons
butter, 2 cups flour, 2 teaspoons yeast powder, 1 teaspoon vanilla. Bake
in layers.

WHITE FILLING.--1-1/2 cups granulated sugar, 1/2 cup milk. Boil eight
minutes, then add 1 tablespoon flour stirred in 2 tablespoons cold water
and then boil five minutes longer. When cool beat to a cream.

CHOCOLATE CARAMEL FILLING.--The same as above, only 1/4 stick of Baker's
unsweetened chocolate. 1 teaspoon vanilla.


=Lemon or Orange Jelly Cake.=

1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 2/3 cup milk, 4 eggs, 3 cups sifted flour,
and 1 heaping teaspoon baking powder. Bake in four layers.


=Jelly--for Cake.=

1 small cup sugar, 1 egg. Grate the rind and use juice of 1 lemon or
orange, 1 tablespoon water, 1 teaspoon flour. Place the dish in a kettle
of boiling water and let it thicken. When cool spread between the cakes.
This is very nice for any layer cake.


=Apple Cake in Layers.=

1-1/2 cups sugar, 1/2 cup butter, 1/2 of milk, 2-1/2 flour, 3 eggs
(whites and yolks beaten separately), 2 teaspoons yeast powder.

FILLING.--2 apples, grated rind and juice of 1 lemon, 1 egg. Boil till
it thickens, and cool before using. Spread between layers.


=Sunshine Cake--No. 1.=

Whites of 6 eggs, yolks of 4, 1 cup of sugar, 3/4 flour, scant teaspoon
cream of tartar, salt, 2 teaspoons orange juice and grated rind. Sift
sugar and cream tartar together several times, then mix with well-beaten
whites, add beaten yolks, sift flour and salt several times, mix
altogether, put in orange and bake from forty to fifty minutes in a pan
with pipe in center. Do not look at it for at least twenty minutes. Do
not butter pan, nor remove from it till cold.


=Sunshine Cake--No. 2.=

Yolks of 11 eggs, 2 cups sugar, 1 of butter, 1 of milk, 1 teaspoon cream
of tartar, 1/2 of soda, 4 cups flour. Flavor to taste.


=A Delicious White Cake.=

1 pound sugar, 1 pound butter, 1 pound flour, a little baking powder,
whites of 20 eggs, and flavoring.


=White Cake.=

1/2 cup butter, 1/2 of milk, 1 of sugar, 2 of flour, 1 teaspoon yeast
powder, whites of 2 eggs, almond flavoring.


=Snow Cake--No. 1.=

Whites of 10 eggs, 2 jelly glasses of powdered sugar, 1 of flour, 1
teaspoon cream tartar.


=Snow Cake--No. 2.=

1 cup sugar, 1/2 of butter, 1/2 of milk, 1 teaspoon yeast powder, 2 cups
flour, vanilla flavoring. After being well mixed, stir in the whites of
4 eggs, and beat vigorously.


=Rose Cake.=

1 pound flour, 3/4 pound sugar, 1/2 pound butter, 1 cup rose water, 5
eggs, 1 teaspoon dry soda. Sift white sugar over cake when put in the
oven.


=Feather Cake.=

1 egg, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 cup sugar, 2 cups flour, 1/2 cup milk, 2
teaspoons baking powder.


=Delicious Cake.=

2 cups sifted sugar, 3/4 of butter, 5 eggs, beaten separately, 1/2 cup
of milk, 1 teaspoon baking powder in 2-1/2 cups sifted flour, 2
tablespoons brandy.


=Gold Cake.=

Yolks of 5 eggs and 1 whole egg, 2 cups sugar, 1 of butter, 2/3 cup
milk, 3 of flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, 1/2 of soda.


=Silver Cake.=

Whites of 5 eggs, 1-1/2 cups sugar, 1/2 cup butter, 3 even cups flour, 1
of milk, 1 teaspoon cream tartar, 1/2 of soda, flavor with vanilla. Beat
butter and sugar to a cream; beat whites to a stiff froth and add. Sift
cream tartar with flour and dissolve soda in milk. Stir in a little
flour before adding milk.


=Marble Cake.=

Whites of 6 eggs, 1-1/2 cups sugar, 3/4 cup butter, 1/3 cup milk and
1-3/4 cups flour, 1 teaspoon cream of tartar, 1/2 of soda. Flavor with
lemon.

DARK PART.--Yolks of 6 eggs, 1-1/2 cups brown sugar, 3/4 cup butter,
1-3/4 cups milk, 1 teaspoon cream tartar, 1/3 of soda, 1 teaspoon each
allspice, cinnamon and cloves. Mix lightly together, or bake in layers,
as you please.


=Cold Water Cake.=

2 cups sugar, 2 of flour, 1/2 cup butter, 1 of cold water, 2 eggs, 2
teaspoons cream of tartar, 1 of soda. Beat thoroughly. Bake in cups. To
be eaten with butter, hot.


=White Mountain Cake.=

1-1/2 cups butter, 1/2 of cream, 2 of sugar, 3 of flour and 4 eggs. Add
currants.


=Federal Cake.=

1 pound flour, 1 of sugar, 1/2 of butter, 4 eggs, 1 teacup cream, 1/2
wine-glass brandy, 1 of wine, 1 nutmeg, 1 pound raisins.


=Lincoln Cake.=

2 eggs, 2 cups sugar, 1/2 cup butter, 1 of milk, 3 of flour, 1 teaspoon
cream of tartar, 1/2 of soda. Flavor to taste.


=Harrison Cake.=

1 cup butter, 2 of brown sugar, 1 syrup, 1 milk, 4 eggs, 5 cups flour, 1
nutmeg, 1 teaspoon soda. Fruit to suit.


=Victoria Cake.=

1 cup butter, 2 of sugar, 4 of flour, 4 eggs, 1 cup sour milk, 1
teaspoon soda, 1 cup molasses, 1 pound currants, 1 of raisins, 1
wine-glass brandy, 1 nutmeg, 2 teaspoons of cloves, 2 of cinnamon, 1/2
pound citron.


=Pound Cake.=

1 pound flour, 1 of sugar, 11 ounces butter, 10 eggs, 1/2 teaspoon soda.


=Sponge Pound Cake.=

1 heaping cup sugar, 1 scant cup butter, 6 eggs leaving out whites of 2
for icing, 1-1/2 cups flour, 1-1/2 teaspoons baking powder. Flavoring.


=Aunt Sharlie's Sponge Cake.=

1 pound powdered loaf sugar, 7 eggs, beaten separately, juice and grated
peel of lemon, 1/2 pound dried flour sifted in at the last.


=Sponge Cake to Roll.=

4 eggs, 1 cup powdered sugar, 1 of flour, 1 teaspoon cream tartar, 1/2
teaspoon saleratus, 1 tablespoon cold water. Sift the sugar, flour and
cream tartar together; then add eggs, and stir together ten minutes; add
water, soda and flavoring, and bake in biscuit-pan. To make jelly roll,
lay on bread-board, spread with jelly and roll.


=Sponge Cake--No. 1.=

2 cups sugar, 4 eggs, 1 cup water, 2 of flour, 2 teaspoons yeast powder,
salt and flavoring.


=Sponge Cake--No. 2.=

1 cup sugar, 1 of flour, 4 eggs, 1 heaping teaspoon baking powder, 5
tablespoons water. Rub sugar and yolks together until very light and
creamy. Add water and 1/2 of the flour. After sifting baking powder and
flour twice, add remaining flour with beaten whites, and a pinch of
salt. Stir gently.


=1, 2, 3, 4 Cake.=

1 cup butter, 2 of sugar, 3 of flour, 4 eggs, 1 cup milk, 2 heaping
teaspoons baking powder, 1/2 teaspoon each of vanilla and lemon. Rub the
butter and sugar until very light and creamy; then add 2 eggs and beat
well; add 2 more and beat again; then sift in flour after having sifted
it with the baking powder. Stir in milk with the flour, and add
flavoring.


=Molasses Plum Cake.=

Scant 2/3 cup butter, 1 cup sugar, 1 of molasses, 1 of milk, 3 eggs, 4
cups flour, 1 teaspoon soda stirred into molasses, 1 teaspoon each of
cloves, nutmeg and cinnamon, 1 cup of stoned and chopped raisins.


=Dark Cake.=

1 cup sugar, 1 of butter, 1 of sour milk, 1 of molasses, 4 of flour, 1
teaspoon soda, 1 pound raisins. All kinds of spice. This cake will keep
a long time.


=Plain Spice Cake.=

1/2 cup butter, 1 of water or milk, 2 of brown sugar, 2 eggs, 3-1/2 cups
flour, 1-1/2 teaspoons yeast powder, 1 teaspoon cloves, 1 of cinnamon, 1
of allspice, and 1 cup of currants or raisins can be added, if desired.

=Fruit Cake--No. 1.=

1 pound citron, 2 of currants, 2 of raisins, 1 of flour, 1 of butter, 1
of sugar, 9 eggs, 1/2 teaspoon soda, 1/2 cup molasses, 1 teaspoon
cloves, 1 of nutmeg, 1 of mace, 1 of cinnamon, 1 of allspice, 2 of
lemon, wine-glass of brandy and 1 of sherry.


=Fruit Cake--No. 2.=

1 pound flour, 3/4 butter, 1/2 sugar, 2 of currants, 2 of raisins, 1/2
of citron, 1-1/2 cups molasses, wine-glass of brandy, 1 of wine, 1/2
teaspoon saleratus, 8 eggs. Bake in a slow oven three hours. Add spices
as desired.


=Snow Tea Cakes.=

3 tablespoons sugar, 3 cups milk, 2 eggs, 4 cups flour, 2 teaspoons
yeast powder. Bake in muffin-rings.


=Coffee Cake.=

2-1/2 cups flour, 1 of coffee, 1 of brown sugar, 1 of butter, 1 of
syrup, 6 eggs, 1 pound raisins, 2 cups currants, 3 tablespoons brandy, 2
of cinnamon, 1 of cloves, 1 of allspice, 1 grated nutmeg, 4 pieces
candied lemon or citron, 1 teaspoon soda. Steam two hours and bake
one-half hour.


=Hermits.=

2 cups sugar, 1 cup butter, 3 eggs, 1 tablespoon milk, 1 teaspoon soda
(dissolved in milk), a teaspoon each of cinnamon, cloves and allspice, 1
cup chopped raisins and currants, mixed, and as much cut citron as
desired. Mix with sufficient flour to roll. Roll very thin, cut as
cookies, and bake in a moderate oven. Excellent, and will keep a long
time.


=Fruit Cookies.=

1 cup sugar, 3/4 of butter, 2 eggs, 1/2 teaspoon soda, 1 cup chopped
raisins, all kinds of spice, 2 tablespoons pickled peach juice, flour
enough to roll out.


=Boston Cookies.=

1 cup butter, 1-1/2 powdered sugar, 2 eggs, 4 teaspoons milk, 4 cups
flour, 1 teaspoon of soda or saleratus, 1 of ginger. Make stiff enough
to roll thin.


=Scotch Cookies.=

Beat 2 cups of sugar with 1 cup of butter, 2 eggs, and 5 tablespoonfuls
of milk. Mix 3 teaspoonfuls of baking powder and 1 of cinnamon with 2
cups of flour, and add as much more flour as necessary to make stiff
enough to roll. Roll thin, cut out and bake quickly.


=Molasses Cookies.=

In 1 pint of New Orleans molasses melt a full cup of butter with a cup
of brown sugar. Stir in 1 tablespoon ginger, 1/2 teaspoon saleratus,
dissolved in a little hot water, and flour enough to roll out. Take
small pieces at a time to roll out.


=Rich Cookies.=

Yolks of 6 eggs, 1/2 roll butter, 1 cup bar sugar, 2-1/2 cups flour. Put
a little of the flour in a deep dish, then add some egg, some butter and
some sugar; then more flour, more egg and more sugar and butter until
the entire amount of ingredients have been used. Roll thin, flour pans
well and put in the cookies, which have been cut into forms and
feathered with whites of egg, sugar and grated almonds. Not too quick an
oven.


=Hearts and Rounds.=

1 cup butter, 2 cups sugar, 1 cup milk, 3 cups flour, 5 eggs, 2 even
teaspoons cream tartar, 1 of soda. Flavor with vanilla or lemon.


=Crullers.=

4 eggs, 5 large spoons melted butter, 4 of milk, 8 of sugar, 1 small
teaspoon soda in milk.


=Doughnuts.=

4 eggs, 2 cups sugar, 1 of milk, butter size of an egg, 2 teaspoons
yeast powder, a little salt. Season to taste, cinnamon and mace.


=Gingerbread.=

1-1/2 cups sugar, 1/4 pound butter, 1/2 cup sour cream, 1/2 teaspoon
soda, 1 teaspoon ginger, 2 eggs, well beaten, 2-1/2 cups flour.


=Sugar Gingerbread.=

1 cup butter, 2 of sugar, 1/2 cup milk, 1 teaspoon saleratus, 1 egg, 1
tablespoon ginger. Flour enough to roll very thin.


=Molasses Gingerbread.=

1 cup New Orleans molasses, 1 full teaspoon soda put in molasses, 3/4
cup melted butter or nice drippings, 1/3 cup milk, 1 egg, 2 teaspoons
ginger. Flour to stir, but not thick.


=Soft Gingerbread--No. 1.=

3-1/2 cups flour, well sifted, 2 teaspoons yeast powder, sifted in 2
teaspoons ginger, 1 cup molasses, 1 of brown sugar, 1/2 of butter, 1 of
milk, and 2 eggs, well beaten.


=Soft Gingerbread--No. 2.=

1-1/2 cups molasses, 1/2 cup butter, 1/2 cup sour milk, 1 egg, 1
teaspoon soda and 1/2 cup flour. Add ginger and a little salt.


=Bread Cake.=

3 cups light dough, 3 of brown sugar, 1 of butter, 3 eggs, spices, fruit
and citron, 1 teaspoon soda. Raising or not, as you wish.


=Pork Cake.=

1/2 pound salt pork, chopped very fine, 1/2 cup warm water, mix with the
pork. Heaping cup brown sugar, 1 of molasses, spice to taste, 1-1/2 cups
raisins, 2 of currants, 1/4 pound citron, 2 eggs, flour to make a
batter stiffer than ordinary cake, 2 teaspoons yeast powder, and bake in
buttered tins.


=Lemon Honey for Cake.=

Juice and grated rind of 1 lemon, small cup sugar, 1/3 of water, 2
well-beaten eggs, small piece of butter. Let boil till it thickens.


=Quick Icing.=

White of 1 egg, 1 heaping cup sugar, beat egg till it foams. Add sugar
and flavoring, and stir very thoroughly.

[Illustration]




PIES.


=Puff Paste.=

Equal quantities of butter and flour by weight, the butter to be washed.
The yolk of 1 egg. Divide butter in three or four parts and chill; chop
one portion into the flour, mix with ice water, and roll in the
remainder. Roll and fold several times. If it grows sticky, chill till
it hardens.


=Mock Mince Pie--No. 1.=

2 pounds powdered crackers, 1 cup molasses, 1 of cider, 1 of chopped
raisins, 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon salt, 1 of clove, 2 of cinnamon, 1 of mace,
1 of nutmeg. This quantity makes two pies. Bake forty minutes.


=Mock Mince Pie--No. 2.=

1 cup bread or cracker crumbs, 1 of raisins, 1 of vinegar, 1 of sugar, 1
of molasses, 1 of water, 1/2 of butter, 1 of currants. Spice to taste.


=Mince Meat.=

2 pounds lean beef, 1 of suet, 5 of apples, 2 of stoned raisins, 1 of
currants, 3/4 of citron cut fine, 2-1/2 of brown sugar, 3 tablespoons
cinnamon, 1 of mace, 1 of cloves, 1 of allspice, 1 of salt, 2 of nutmeg,
1 pint of sherry, 1 of brandy, 1 of cider, 1 bowl of currant jelly.


=Lemon Tarts.=

1 egg beaten stiff, add 1 cup sugar, and juice and rind of 1 lemon. Line
your patty pans with pastry, then put in the lemon mixture and bake.
This will make about six tarts. This same idea may be used, and in place
of lemon put any kind of jam (about a tablespoonful), and when cold add
whipped cream to the top.


=Rich Lemon Pie.=

The pie crust should be made and baked first. The filling consists of
juice and rind of 2 lemons, 6 eggs, 1/2 pound of sugar, 1/4 pound
butter, small glass of brandy, nutmeg. Cream, butter and sugar together;
add brandy, nutmeg, lemon, and then eggs. Take the whites of 2 more
eggs, beat very light and put on top. This will make one large pie.


=A Plain Orange or Lemon Pie.=

The grated rind and juice of 1 lemon or orange, 6 tablespoons sugar, 1
of flour, 1 cup milk, yolks of 4 eggs. Beat the whites to a stiff froth,
and mix into them 3 tablespoons sugar, which you put on pie after
baking, and return to oven for a delicate browning.

[Illustration]




CREAMS.


=Pineapple Cream.=

1 small can grated pineapple, 1 cup water, 1 of sugar. Let it come to a
boil. 1 package gelatine soaked in 1 cup cold water fifteen minutes,
then pour 2 cups boiling water on it. Put this with the pineapple and
boil with the juice of 2 lemons. Have ready the whites of 2 eggs beaten
stiff, and pour gradually in the boiling mixture. Serve with whipped
cream when cool. This should be made the day before using.


=Duchess Cream.=

1/2 pint tapioca soaked over night in 1/2 pint of cold water; in the
morning drain, and cover with boiling water and cook till clear,
stirring constantly. Remove from fire, add juice of 1 lemon, 1 cup
grated pineapple, 1 cup sugar and the beaten whites of 2 eggs. Serve
cold with cream.


=Russian Cream.=

1/2 box gelatine to 1 quart milk and 3 eggs. The milk, yolks of eggs and
gelatine are put together hot on stove, and just as it is taken off, the
whites are stirred in. Add flavoring and mold it.


=Spanish Cream.=

3/4 box of gelatine soaked soft in 1-1/2 pints milk; bring to a boil.
Stir in the beaten yolks of 3 eggs, 3 tablespoons sugar, then bring to a
boil again. Beat the whites to a stiff froth and stir in after removing
from the fire. Flavor with vanilla. Pour in a mold to cool, and serve
with cream.


=Lemon Cream.=

1 large lemon, 4 eggs, 4 tablespoons sugar, 3 of water. Beat yolks and
sugar, add juice and rind of lemon, and water. Let simmer till it
thickens. Beat whites of eggs stiff with 2 tablespoons of sugar, and
stir into the custard while warm.


=Banana Cream.=

Peel and wash bananas. Use equal parts of bananas and sweet cream. To 1
quart of the mixture allow 1/4 pound of sugar. Beat all together till
the cream is light. Some consider it an improvement to add a few drops
of vanilla, or the juice of canned pineapple.


=Coffee Bavarian Cream.=

1/2 pint rich cream whipped light, 1/2 package gelatine soaked in 1 cup
milk, 1 large cup strong coffee, 1 cup white sugar and whites of 2 eggs.
Soak the gelatine until perfectly soft, have the coffee boiling hot, and
turn over the gelatine and sugar. Strain and set away until partly
stiff. Beat the eggs to a stiff froth, and mix with the whipped cream;
add to the gelatine, mixing thoroughly. Mold and serve with whipped
cream.


=Bavarian Cream with Peaches.=

Cut 18 fine peaches, or a sufficient number of canned ones, into small
pieces, and boil with 1/2 pound of sugar. When reduced to a marmalade
press through a coarse sieve, then add 1/2 package dissolved gelatine,
and a tumbler of cream. Stir this well to make it smooth, and when about
set, add 1 pint of whipped cream, and pour into a mold. It makes a still
prettier dish to serve half or quarter of peaches, half frozen, around
the cream.


=Charlotte Russe.=

1 pint cream, whipped light, 1/2 ounce gelatine dissolved in 1 gill of
hot milk, whites of 2 eggs beaten to a stiff froth, 1 small teacup of
powdered sugar. Flavor with vanilla or little almond. Mix together the
cream, eggs, sugar and flavoring, and beat in the gelatine and milk when
quite cold. Line a mold with slices of sponge cake or lady fingers, and
fill with the mixture. Set upon the ice to cool.


=Champagne Jelly.=

1 box gelatine, 1 pint boiling water, 1/2 pint cold water, 1/2 pint
sherry, 1 lemon, 1 lime, 3/4 pound sugar, 1 teaspoon essence cinnamon.
Soak gelatine in cold water, add hot water, sugar, wine, lemon and lime,
and boil five minutes. Add 1 pint champagne and strain twice.


=Coffee Jelly.=

1/2 box gelatine soaked in cold coffee. When well dissolved, pour in a
pint of boiling coffee, sweeten to taste, and set aside to cool. When
quite cold and almost jellied, beat up till it becomes a light foam.
Pour into mold and place on ice. Serve with whipped cream.


[Illustration]




PUDDINGS.


=Burlington Pudding.=

Mix 1/2 cup of flour with a little cold milk and stir into 1 pint of
boiling milk. Remove from the fire, and add 1/2 cup sugar and 2 large
tablespoons of butter; also 6 eggs, the whites and yolks beaten
separately. Flavor with vanilla or lemon, and bake one-half hour in pan
of hot water. Serve with wine sauce.


=Fig Pudding.=

2 cups bread crumbs, 1 of currants, 1 of chopped raisins, 1 of figs, 1
of suet, 3 eggs, well-beaten, 2 cups milk, 1 of brown sugar. Steam four
hours.


=Pancake with Fruit.=

Take 4 eggs, a cup of cream or rich milk, and flour enough to make a
thin batter. Add a little fine sugar and nutmeg. Butter the griddle and
turn the batter on. Let it spread as large as a common dinner plate.
When done on one side, turn it, as a pancake. Have some nice preserves,
and spread over quickly. Roll the cake up, place on a flat dish, sift on
a little powdered sugar and cinnamon, a little butter, if you wish, and
serve hot. Be careful and not make the batter too thin.


=Strawberry Custard.=

1 cup sugar, 1 quart milk, yolks of 5 eggs, white of 1, and vanilla. Let
the milk boil, then add eggs and sugar, and let cool. Crush and strain 1
pint strawberries, 2 tablespoons sugar and whites of 4 eggs, beaten
stiff. Place the custard in glasses, about half full, then fill glasses
with strawberry juice and the whites of eggs, beaten together.


=Orange Float.=

1 quart of water, juice and pulp of 2 lemons and 1 coffee cup of sugar.
When boiling hot, add 4 teaspoons corn starch. Boil fifteen minutes,
stirring constantly. When cold, pour this over four or five oranges,
which have been sliced. Beat the whites of 3 eggs to a stiff froth,
sweeten and flavor, and place large spoonfuls over the top of the float.


=Kiss Pudding.=

1 quart milk, 3 tablespoons corn starch, yolks of 4 eggs, 1/2 cup sugar,
a little salt. Put part of milk, salt and sugar on to boil. Dissolve
corn starch in remainder of milk, stir into milk, and while boiling, add
the yolks. Flavor with vanilla.

FROSTING.--Whites of 4 eggs, 1/2 cup sugar, flavor with lemon, spread on
pudding, and put in oven to brown. Save a little frosting to moisten
top; then put grated cocoanut to give appearance of snow.


=Batter Pudding.=

1 pint of milk, scalded, stir in 1 tablespoon corn starch and 2 of
flour, mixed with a little cold milk, beat 4 eggs (yolks and whites
separately), and, when the batter is cold, stir in first yolks, then
whites, and bake three quarters of an hour.

SAUCE.--1 cup sugar, 1/2 of butter, beaten to a cream, put over
tea-kettle, and stir in 1/2 pint whipped cream, and flavor with brandy.


=Suet Pudding--No. 1.=

1 cup chopped suet, 1 of raisins, 1 of molasses, 1 of milk, 1/2 teaspoon
soda, and 1 of salt. Stir quite thick with flour, and boil in a bag
three hours. Serve with wine sauce.


=Suet Pudding--No. 2.=

1 pint powdered bread crumbs, 2 pints boiling milk, poured on to the
bread, 3 eggs, 1 cup suet, fruit to taste, 1 wine-glass of sherry or
brandy, and spice to taste. To be eaten with sauce.


=Suet Pudding--No. 3.=

2 cups chopped bread, 1/2 cup chopped suet, 1/2 cup molasses, 1 egg, 1
cup chopped raisins, 1 of milk, with 1/2 teaspoon soda dissolved in it,
1/2 teaspoon cloves, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, a little salt and mace. Boil
two hours in a pudding-boiler. To be eaten with hot or hard sauce.


=Poor Man's Pudding.=

1 cup suet, 1 of milk, 1 of molasses, 2 of raisins, 4 of flour, 1
teaspoon saleratus. Steam four hours. Serve with rich sauce.


=Poor Man's Rice Pudding.=

1 quart of milk, 1 tablespoon rice, 1 of sugar, 1/2 saltspoon of salt.
Bake slowly, stirring once or twice.


=Indian Pudding.=

1 pint milk, boiled, and stir in while boiling 2 tablespoons meal, with
a little salt and a piece of butter. Butter dish and bake. Before
baking, add 1 cup cold milk.


=Cracker Pudding.=

3 Boston crackers, rolled fine, 3 eggs, 3 tablespoons sugar. Salt and
spice to taste. Pour 1 quart of boiling milk on to the crackers. Add the
sugar, eggs and spice. Pour into a buttered dish. Bake one-half hour,
and serve with either hard or liquid sauce.


=Lemon Bread Pudding.=

1 quart milk, 2 coffee cups bread crumbs, 1 of white sugar, 1/2 cup
butter, 4 eggs, the juice and 1/2 the grated rind of 1 lemon. Soak the
bread in the milk, then add the beaten yolks with the butter and sugar,
rubbed to a cream; also the lemon. Bake in a buttered dish until firm
and slightly browned. Beat the whites to a stiff froth, with 3
tablespoons of powdered sugar, and flavor with lemon. Spread over the
pudding when baked, and brown slightly; then sift sugar over it. Eat
cold. Orange pudding may be made in the same way.


=Delmonico Pudding.=

1 quart milk, piece of butter size of a walnut, 3 tablespoons corn
starch dissolved in a little milk, yolks of 4 eggs, 6 tablespoons white
sugar. Boil all together. When done, place in a dish, and set in the
oven while beating the whites of eggs, to which add 3 tablespoons
powdered sugar. Flavor with vanilla. Spread the beaten whites of eggs
over the pudding, and return to oven, to slightly brown.


=English Plum Pudding--No. 1.=

1/2 pound of seeded raisins, same of currants, well washed and dried,
grated rind and juice of 2 oranges, 1/2 a nutmeg grated, 1 tablespoon
each of cinnamon, cloves and allspice, 1/2 a teaspoon of salt, 1/2 a
pound of sugar, 1/4 pound of citron, 1/2 pound of suet, 1/2 pound of
bread crumbs, 1/2 pound of flour, 1 teaspoon of baking powder and 6
well-beaten eggs. Chop the suet very fine, after removing the skin, and
put it, together with the flour and bread crumbs, into a large bowl;
then add the spices, oranges and sugar. Mix thoroughly. Beat the eggs
until very light, and add to the contents in the bowl and mix well
together. Stir in 1 pint of old English ale. Flour the raisins and
currants and add to the compound. Butter a tin pudding-mold, put in the
pudding, taking care to well secure the cover. Have ready a kettle of
boiling water. Place the mold in it, and keep boiling constantly five
hours.

SAUCE FOR THE PUDDING.--Beat the yolks of 2 eggs, with 1 cup of sugar
and 1/2 cup butter. Have ready 1 pint of boiling cream, a dessert-spoon
of corn starch, blended with a little cold milk. Add gradually to the
beaten batter and eggs. Put all on the fire, and stir constantly until
it boils. Add a wine-glass of sherry and 1 of brandy. Serve hot with
the pudding. A hard sauce used in connection with the hot one is a great
improvement.


=English Plum Pudding--No. 2.=

1 small loaf of bread, crumbed, 1/2 pound of raisins, the same of
currants, 1/2 pound of citron, 1 of beef suet, chopped fine, a little
salt, 3/4 pound sugar and a little nutmeg. Mix and let stand over night.
Beat 12 eggs, very light, and stir them in the mixture. Take enough milk
to slightly moisten the whole. Add a little salt and nutmeg and 3/4
glass of brandy. Boil five hours. Set on fire with brandy to serve, and
have a rich sauce.


=Plain Plum Pudding.=

6 butter crackers, rolled, 6 eggs, 3 pints of milk, 1 cup sugar, 1/4 cup
butter, 1 teaspoon mixed spice, 1 pound raisins. Bake in a deep
pudding-dish, in a moderate oven, three or four hours, stirring several
times the first hour, to keep the raisins from settling. Serve with hard
sauce.


=Snow Pudding.=

1 box gelatine, soaked in 1/2 tea-cup of cold water, then add 1 quart
boiling water. Stir till it is all dissolved. Add 4 cups white sugar and
the juice of 4 lemons. Strain and set away till cold; then add the
beaten whites, beating the whole thing half an hour, or until it is very
white. Place on ice. Use the 4 yolks and 1 pint milk, and make a custard
to eat with it.


=Tapioca Cream.=

Soak 4 tablespoons of tapioca over night in water enough to cover it,
scald 1 quart milk, beat the yolks of 3 eggs, add 1 cup sugar, and stir
this in with the tapioca, and the whole mixture thus formed into the
milk. Let it cook about twenty minutes. Remove from fire, and stir in
the whites of the eggs, having beaten them to a stiff froth. Add
flavoring, and serve cold. This pudding should be cooked in a vessel set
in hot water.


=Baked Apple Dumpling.=

1/2 pound flour, 1/4 pound lard, 1 teaspoon salt, 1 of yeast powder,
enough cold water to make a stiff dough. Roll-out pastry. Cut with
biscuit-cutter twice as many pieces as you have apples. Peel and core
the apples. Put one round of pastry on one end of the apple. Fill the
core-hole with sugar, cinnamon and a piece of butter. Put another round
of pastry on so that the edges meet. Bake slowly three-quarters of an
hour. This will make nine or ten dumplings.


=Apple Pudding.=

Boil 6 tart apples, after paring them as for sauce, remove from fire,
sweeten a little. Add a lump of butter, 1 cup cracker crumbs, stirred in
1 cup milk, yolks of 4 eggs, keeping whites for frosting, with 1/2 cup
sugar. Serve with hard sauce.


=Apple Souffle.=

1 pint steamed apples, 1 tablespoon melted butter, half a cup of sugar,
whites of 6 eggs, yolks of 3, and a slight grating of nutmeg. Stir into
the hot apple the butter, sugar and nutmeg and yolks of eggs,
well-heated. When this is cold, add the well-beaten whites to the
mixture. Butter a 3-pint dish and turn the souffle into it. Bake thirty
minutes in a hot oven. Serve immediately, with any kind of sauce.


=Apple Pan-dowdy.=

Pare, core and slice 5 apples, and put in a pudding-dish, with a little
water, and 1 cup sugar. Cover with pastry, and bake slowly, breaking the
cover into the apples at last.


=Apple Sago Pudding.=

Pare and core the apples, put sugar and cinnamon in the holes. Take as
many tablespoons of sago as you have apples. Mix it with a little cold
water and turn in as much boiling water as will fill the dish. Stir till
it thickens, then cover up for two hours, and let it thoroughly swell,
then pour it over the apples, and bake about three hours. Sugar and
cream for sauce.


=Sponge Pudding.=

Scald 1 pint of milk, boiling hot, add 1/2 cup butter; when melted, add
a smooth thickening made of 1 cup of flour, mixed with cold milk. Stir
until thick and smooth, being careful not to let it become lumpy. Remove
from fire, and when cold, add the yolks of 8 eggs, beaten very lightly;
lastly, the whites of the eggs, beaten to a stiff foam. Bake in a dish
standing in hot water.

SAUCE.--The yolks of 2 eggs, beaten in 1 cup of pulverized sugar to a
cream. Add the whites, and turn over the whole 4 tablespoons of boiling
cream or milk, and flour. Add wine, if you wish.


=Boston Thanksgiving Pudding.=

2 quarts of milk, 5 soda crackers, rolled fine, 5 eggs, 1 small cup of
butter, 1 pint of stoned raisins, 2 nutmegs, 1 large spoonful each of
ground cloves and cinnamon. Sweeten to taste. Bake slowly six hours the
day before using. Do not put the raisins in until it commences to
thicken, and stir occasionally the first two hours after the raisins are
in. Before serving the next day, set the tin in boiling hot water long
enough before dinner to have it hot. Cold sauce.


=Blackberry Pudding.=

Take baker's bread and cut away the crusts, butter, and slice rather
thick, lay 1 layer of bread and then cover with blackberries and some of
the juice (which has been stewed with a little sugar), then more bread
and more berries. Over the top throw a glass of wine. Serve with hard
sauce.


=Rennet Pudding.=

Buy a rennet from the butcher (it is the stomach of a very young calf).
Wash it thoroughly, and cut it in small pieces. Put it in a quart jar,
and fill with sherry wine. When wanted to use, heat a quart of milk to
blood-heat, and put it in the dish in which it is to remain. Stir in 1
tablespoon of the wine water, grate a little nutmeg over the top, and
put in a cold place. Very good for invalids, and makes a nice dessert,
with fresh berries.


=Chocolate Pudding.=

1 pint milk, 3 sticks grated chocolate, boil until thick, then set away
to cool, 5 eggs, whites and yolks beaten separately, 3 tablespoons
sugar, beat sugar light with the yolks, and to this add 1 cup cracker
flour, 1 teaspoon vanilla, and the whites, last. Put all this in the
chocolate, and let boil one and a half hours in a well-buttered form.
Serve with whipped cream.


=Apricot or Peach Pudding.=

Butter a pan thoroughly and dust well with cracker flour, and put a row
of apricots or peaches on the bottom of the pan. Take 4 eggs, beaten
together with a cup of powdered sugar. Beat in a pan of boiling water
twenty minutes. Then add 1 cup of flour, 1 lime or some lemon juice, and
1 teaspoon vanilla and a pinch of salt. Put this mixture over the
apricots or peaches, and bake three quarters of an hour.

[Illustration]




ICE CREAM.


=Ice Cream.=

2 quarts cream, 1 pound sugar; flavor with vanilla. Let stand in freezer
five minutes to become thoroughly cold. To make it extra light, beat the
whites of 2 eggs to a stiff froth, and add just before the cream is
frozen. This should freeze in twenty minutes, and will make one gallon
of cream.


=Banana Ice.=

6 bananas, 3 peaches, 3 lemons, 1 quart sugar, 1 quart boiling water.
Pour hot water over the sugar and lemon juice, and stir until it is
dissolved. When cool add peaches and bananas sliced thin, and let stand
two hours; then strain through fine sieve, so nothing is left but
liquid. Then freeze.


=Lalla Rookh.=

Cut in small pieces stale sponge cake or lady fingers, a few macaroons,
some French cherries and apricots (glace), and mix all together. Make a
custard of 1 quart milk and 6 eggs, and when cooked, reserve 1 cupful
for a sauce, and add to the remainder 1/4 ounce of gelatine. Put the
mixture of cake and fruit in an ice cream mold and strain the custard
over it, and place it in the freezer, as you would ice cream.

SAUCE.--Add to the cup of custard reserved 1/2 pint of whipped cream,
and vanilla to taste.




PRESERVES AND JAMS.


=Orange Marmalade--No. 1.=

To 1 dozen oranges use 4 lemons. Peel four oranges and boil the peel
until you can run a wisp through it. Peel the others and divide all into
sections; remove the seeds and stringy parts, and cut into small pieces.
Grate the yellow rind of 2 of the lemons and squeeze the juice of all,
which add to the orange pulp. When the orange peel is tender, remove the
white part with a sharp knife, and shred the yellow part very fine with
scissors. Add this to the mixture and weigh, and allow an equal weight
of sugar. Boil the pulp ten minutes, then add the sugar and boil thirty
minutes (a steady boil), stirring constantly, as it burns very easily.


=Orange Marmalade--No. 2.=

4 lemons, 1 dozen oranges, 2 pounds sugar, 1 quart water. Soak oranges
and lemons in water over night, previously slicing them in very thin,
small pieces. Cook till soft. After partially boiled away, put in the
sugar. This quantity makes twelve or fourteen glasses.


=Fig Jam--No. 1.=

2 pounds figs, 2 oranges and 2 lemons to each 2 pounds of fruit. Use the
juice of the oranges and lemons; also the finest of the pulp and the
rind of 1 orange, shredded, as for marmalade. Boil the figs, juice and
rind for half an hour, then add 1 pound sugar to each 2 pounds of figs,
and boil another half hour. Cover when hot.


=Fig Jam--No. 2.=

6 pounds figs, 3 of sugar, 2 lemons, sliced, 1/2 cup sliced green ginger
root. Boil three hours.


=Apricot Jam.=

Pour boiling water on fruit; peel and throw into cold water. Chop the
blanched nuts of the stones and add to the fruit (2 nuts to each pound).
Cook half an hour; add 3/4 pound sugar to 1 of fruit, and cook fifteen
minutes. Put in bowls or glasses, and seal air tight.


=Isabella Grape Jam.=

Boil grapes until tender, then put through a sieve. Add 3/4 pound sugar
to each pound of fruit. Then boil as for jelly.


=Currant Jelly.=

1 pound sugar to 1 pint juice. Heat sugar in oven while the juice comes
to a boil; add sugar, and boil four or five minutes.


=Pineapple Preserve.=

Pare and grate pineapples, 3/4 pound sugar to 1 pound fruit. Put fruit
and sugar on together, and when it comes to a boil let it cook twenty
minutes.


=Preserved Grapes.=

Eight pounds will make one dozen and a half tumblers. To the grapes put
an equal weight of sugar; then squeeze the pulp from the skin. Cook the
pulp a few minutes and rub through a wine sieve to separate the seeds.
Cook skins in the same water until soft (if you have no water left in
the kettle, add some); skim them out and put in sugar. When it begins to
cook put in pulp and skins, and cook slowly until they jelly. It should
form a moderately stiff jelly.


=Brandy Peaches.=

If possible procure "Morris White" peaches. Peel very carefully and
throw into cold water to keep them white. To 6 pounds of fruit allow the
same weight of sugar; make a syrup of 2 pounds of the sugar and cook
peaches very slowly until tender. Lay them on a platter to cool. Then
add the remainder of the sugar and make a rich syrup; remove from fire
and let it cool a little. Place the peaches in jars. To every 2 cups of
syrup add 1 of perfectly white brandy, and pour over the peaches.

[Illustration]




PICKLES.


=Cucumber Catsup.=

3 medium-sized cucumbers grated, but not peeled, 1 large onion grated, 1
tablespoon salt, 3 teaspoons white pepper, 1 tablespoon grated horse
radish, 1 pint vinegar. Bottle for use.


=Tomato Catsup--No. 1.=

1 gallon tomatoes strained through a sieve, 3 tablespoons salt, 3 of
ground mustard, 1 of allspice, 1 of cloves, 1 of red pepper. Simmer
slowly three or four hours. Let cool, then add 1 pint of vinegar and 1
bottle brandy. Bottle and seal tight.


=Tomato Catsup--No. 2.=

2 quarts skinned tomatoes, 2 tablespoons salt, 2 of black pepper, 1 of
allspice, 4 pods red pepper or a little cayenne, 2 tablespoons mustard.
Mix and rub these thoroughly together, and stew them slowly in 1 pint of
vinegar three hours. Then strain the liquor through a sieve and simmer
it down to one quart of catsup. Bottle and cork tight.


=Cucumber Pickles.=

Soak the cucumbers in strong brine over night; in the morning scald a
few at a time in a little vinegar, covering tight and stirring often. As
they are done, put in bottles, with one or two peppers in each one, and
pour over the following scalding vinegar and seal: To 3 quarts of
vinegar add 4 cups of sugar, 1 handful of white mustard seed, 1 of stick
cinnamon, half the quantity of whole cloves, and a small piece of alum.


=Sweet Pickled Figs.=

To 7 pounds of ripe figs make a syrup of 3 pounds sugar, 1 quart
vinegar, a small handful of whole cloves, and boil five minutes. Remove
and set away to cool. The second day the syrup must be drained off and
poured over figs boiling hot; let them stand two days more, drain off
syrup and heat again. Just before it boils put figs in and let all boil
up together. Put in air-tight jars. Sugar for sweet pickles should
always be rich brown sugar.


=Sweet Pickled Peaches.=

7 pounds peaches, 3 pounds brown sugar, 1 quart vinegar, 1 ounce
cinnamon; 3 cloves in each peach. Make the syrup and cook peaches till
tender; boil down syrup and pour over the peaches.


=Sweet Tomato Pickle.=

To 8 pounds of tomatoes, when skinned and cut in pieces, add 4 pounds
sugar. Boil slowly until thick, then add a scant quart of vinegar, 1
teaspoon each of ground mace, cloves and cinnamon, and boil slowly again
until thick.


=Watermelon Pickle (Sweet).=

Pare the melon, cutting away all of red portion; cut in fancy shapes.
Salt in weak salt and water over night. In the morning rinse in cold
water; add lump of alum as big as a small egg to 1 gallon cold water.
Put the melon in the cold water and after it comes to a boil, boil ten
minutes. To 7 pounds melon, 1 quart cider vinegar, 2 ounces cassia buds
or stick cinnamon, 1 ounce cloves, 3 pounds granulated sugar. Let this
boil, then add fruit, cook until clear and you think it is done; seal up
in jars and keep at least two weeks before using.


=Oil Pickles.=

100 small cucumbers, 3 pints small white onions. Slice all together and
put layers of cucumbers and onions, with salt between. Let stand two
hours, and drain off the brine; then add 1/4 cup each of white mustard
seed, white pepper and celery seed, 2 cups olive oil, and alum size of a
walnut, dissolved in vinegar. Cool with vinegar and put in jars.


=Vermont Pickles (Cucumbers).=

The first day make a brine strong enough to bear an egg, and pour
boiling hot on the pickles; cover and let them stand twenty-four hours.
The second day drain from the brine and make alum water boiling hot to
cover them well, allowing a piece of alum the size of an egg to every
hundred pickles. Cover tightly again for twenty-four hours. The third
day drain from the alum water and cover with boiling hot vinegar, in
which let them stand for one week. Then heat your vinegar boiling hot
again, and add the following spices, etc., to every hundred: 1
tablespoonful cloves, 1 of coriander seed, 1 of ginger root, 2 of
cinnamon, 2 of celery seed, 2 of mustard seed, 2 of whole pepper seed, 1
cup sugar, 1 of horse radish root, sliced fine. Put a layer of oak
leaves in the bottom of your firkin, or jar, then a layer of pickles and
spices, then leaves again, and so on until full, covering the top with
the leaves, and pouring the boiling vinegar over all. They will be ready
to use in two weeks, and will keep two years. The oak leaves are very
essential for their astringent qualities.


=Tomato Soy.=

Cut green tomatoes in slices, and to every 16 pounds add 4 quarts
vinegar, 5 pounds sugar, 1/2 pound white mustard seed, a teacup of flour
of mustard, mixed with a little vinegar, 1-1/2 pound onions, cut very
fine, 1/2 ounce of mace, 2 of cinnamon, 1 of allspice, 1/2 ounce of
cloves, 5 of salt, 1/4 pound of black pepper, 1/4 pound of celery seed.
Grind up all the spices except the celery and white mustard. Put all in
a kettle and boil for one hour and a half.


=Peach Chutney.=

6 pounds peaches, 2 of sugar, 1 of raisins, 1/2 of salt, 1/2 of green
ginger, 1/4 of mustard seed, 1/4 of red chilies, 2 quarts vinegar. Pare
and slice peaches; stew until soft in 1 quart vinegar. Boil sugar and
the other quart of vinegar into a syrup; add the seedless raisins
chopped fine; mustard seed washed, dried and crushed; when dry, chopped
chilies without the seeds, chopped ginger, salt and a little garlic.
Boil all together twenty minutes. A very fine sauce.


=Cucumber Sauce.=

Wash 3 medium-sized cucumbers; grate peel and all and pour off some of
the extra liquid. Add 1 tablespoon each of white pepper, salt and horse
radish; lastly add 1/2 pint of vinegar. This is very nice, and will keep
any length of time.

[Illustration]




GENTLEMEN'S CORNER.


=Champagne Punch.=

To the juice of 20 lemons add 1 pound powdered sugar. To every quart of
this solution add 1 quart rum, 1 of brandy, 1 of champagne. Dilute with
ice to suit the taste. This is extra fine.


=A Delicious Punch.=

1 bottle XXX brandy, 1 bottle port wine, 1 bottle Jamaica rum, 1 bottle
tea (oolong the best), juice of 8 lemons, rinds of 2, 1/2 bottle
curacao, 3 cups fine sugar, put lemons, rinds, sugar and tea together,
and strain; add to the liquor; bottle. The above is called the stock. To
each bottle of the stock add 3 bottles of soda and about 5 pounds of
ice. Imported liquors should be used. This is enough for twenty people.


=Fort McDowell Egg Nog.=

1 egg and about 1/2 pint of milk to each person. A teacup of sugar to
every quart of milk, and 1/2 pint of best brandy. Beat the yolk, add the
sugar, and beat till it is a froth like cake; then add the brandy, then
the beaten whites, then the milk. Whipped cream in place of the milk is
very nice, or half in half. The whites of the eggs should be well
beaten.


=Loyal Legion Punch.=

3 gallons whiskey, 1 pint Santa Croix rum, 1 pint cordial, 100 limes, 1
dozen oranges, sliced, 1 dozen lemons, sliced, 3 cans pine apples, 10
pounds sugar, 3 bottles champagne (added when served).

The above is for 100 persons. Smaller quantities in same proportion.


=State of Schuylkill Punch.=

(_A Punch of Colonial Days._)

1 quart of lemon or lime juice, 1 quart of brandy, 2 quarts of Jamaica
rum, 9 quarts of water and ice, 1/4 pint of peach brandy, 3-1/2 pounds
of sugar. Dissolve the sugar in a little water, add the lemon juice,
then the liquor and also 2 quarts of water and a large piece of ice. Let
this brew two hours or more.

This will make about 13 to 15 quarts. Smaller quantities in same
proportion.

[Illustration]




CANDIES AND NUTS.


=Almond Creams, Walnut Creams, Chocolate Creams.=

To the white of 1 egg add an equal quantity of cold water, stir in 1
pound confectioner's sugar, flavor with vanilla, and stir with the hand
until fine, then mold into small balls, and drop into melted chocolate.
For walnut creams, make cream as above, and mold into larger balls,
placing 1/2 an English walnut on either side. Also, for almond creams,
the same cream as above, and cover the blanched almonds with it, forming
them into balls and rolling them in granulated sugar.


=Chocolate Creams.=

1 cup water to 3 of white sugar, boil till it thickens when dropped in
cold water, put Baker's unsweetened chocolate in a bowl without water,
and place it in a pan of water upon the stove. When the sugar is ready
for removal, turn it upon a marble slab, stir till it becomes thick,
then knead till stiff enough to form into balls. Place on a plate till
cold. Drop the balls in the chocolate, and remove with a fork to a sheet
of buttered paper.


=Chocolate Caramels.=

1 cup molasses, 2 of sugar, 1 of milk, 1/4 pound chocolate. Boil twenty
minutes.


=Huyler's Caramels.=

1/2 package of Baker's unsweetened chocolate, 2 pounds brown sugar, 1
cup milk, 1 tablespoon butter, 1 of molasses. Boil till brittle. Pour in
pans and cut in squares.


=Molasses Candy.=

2-1/2 cups molasses, 1 of sugar, 1 tablespoon vinegar, a piece of butter
the size of a walnut. Boil twenty minutes briskly and constantly,
stirring it all the time. Pull until white.


=Cocoanut Candy.=

1/2 pound sugar, 2 tablespoons water, boil, 1/2 pound grated cocoanut.
Stir till boiled to a flake. Put in buttered tins, and cut in squares,
when cold.

=Cream Candy.=

1 pint granulated sugar, 1/2 pint water, 1 tablespoon vinegar. Boil as
molasses candy, but do not stir. Work in vanilla as you pull it.


=Nut Candy.=

2 cups sugar, 1/2 cup milk. Boil ten minutes, then beat till white,
adding nuts and vanilla. Spread on tins to cool. Cut in squares.


=Peppermints.=

3 cups sugar, 3/4 cup butter. Boil together seven or eight minutes.
Remove from the fire, and stir in 1/8 teaspoon cream tartar, 1/4 drachm
of oil of peppermint. Beat until cool enough to drop on buttered plates,
the size of a dollar.


=Vinegar Candy.=

2-1/2 cups sugar, 1-1/2 of water, 1/2 of vinegar. Do not stir. Cool
quickly and pull.


=Butter Scotch.=

1 cup molasses, 1 of brown sugar, 1/2 of butter. When nearly done, add a
little grated nutmeg, and if wished to be pulled, a pinch of soda.


=Corn Candy.=

Pop the corn, pick out all that is good, and pound it a little, just
enough to crack it. Boil about 2 teacups of molasses and a little sugar,
with a piece of butter, size of a walnut. Then (when the mixture is
boiled about as much as for candy), stir in the corn, and pour into
buttered tins.


=Orange Drops.=

Grate the rind of 1 orange and squeeze the juice, taking care to reject
the seeds. Add to this a pinch of tartaric acid, then stir in
confectioner's sugar till it is stiff enough to form in balls the size
of a small marble.


=Honey Candy.=

3 cups sugar, 1 of water, 3 tablespoons honey. Boil till fit for
pulling.


=Taffy--No. 1.=

1/2 pound chocolate, cut fine, 2 cups sugar, 2 of molasses, 1/2 cup
milk, piece of butter the size of an egg, flavoring. Boil twenty
minutes. Cool and mark off in squares just before it is cold.


=Taffy--No. 2.=

6 cups white sugar, 1 of vinegar, 1 of water. Boil one-half hour without
stirring. When done, stir in 1 tablespoon butter and 1 teaspoon soda,
dissolved in hot water. Season with vanilla, and pull.


=Everton Taffy.=

1-1/2 pounds brown sugar, 3 ounces butter, 1-1/2 tea-cups cold water.
Boil all together, with the rind of 1 lemon, adding juice, when done.


=Salted Almonds.=

First shell, then pour boiling water over them, remove skins, put in
baking-pan with small pieces of butter, stir frequently with spoon, just
before brown, sprinkle with salt, and when brown remove from oven.


=Salted Almonds, with Oil.=

First blanch the almonds, then throw them, a few at a time, into a
sauce-pan of boiling sweet-oil; as soon as brown enough, take them out
and put them on brown paper to absorb the surplus oil; sprinkle with
salt.




INDEX.


  BREAD--
    Apple Biscuit, 41
    Breakfast Gems, 39
    Brown Bread--No. 1, 37
      "    "     No. 2, 37
      "    "     No. 3, 37
    Buns, 40
    Coffee Cake, 39
    Corn Bread--No. 1, 38
      "    "    No. 2, 38
      "    "    (rice), 39
    Corn Meal Muffins, 39
    English Muffins, 38
    French Rolls, 40
    Graham Rolls, 40
    Hominy Cake, 41
    Huckleberry Cake, 41
    Muffins--No. 1, 37
       "     No. 2, 38
       "     (raised), 38
    Parker House Rolls, 40
    Rice Bread, 39
    Waffles, 41

  BREAKFAST DISHES--
    Bananas, 12
    Baked Beans, 13
      "   Eggs, 11
      "   Peppers, 12
    Eggs (au miron), with Asparagus, 12
    Fish Balls, 13
    Omelet, Baked--No. 1, 11
      "       "    No. 2, 11
      "     Bread, 11
      "     Corn, 12
    Potatoes, with Cheese, 13
    Vermicelli, 13

  CAKE--
    Almond Drop Cake, 43
    Angel Cake, 43
    Apple Cake (in layers), 47
    Bread Cake, 55
    Chocolate Cake--No. 1, 45
        "       "   No. 2, 45
        "       "   No. 3, 46
        "     Loaf Cake, 46
        "     Caramel Cake, 46
    Coffee Cake, 53
    Cold Water Cake, 49
    Cookies, Boston, 53
       "     Fruit, 53
       "     Molasses, 54
       "     Hearts and Rounds, 54
       "     Hermits, 53
       "     Rich, 54
       "     Scotch, 53
    Cream Cakes--No. 1, 43
      "     "    No. 2, 43
      "     "    No. 3, 44
      "    Puffs, 44
    Crullers, 54
    Dark Cake, 52
    Delicious Cake, 48
    Doughnuts, 54
    Feather Cake, 48
    Federal Cake, 50
    Fruit Cake--No. 1, 52
      "    "    No. 2, 52
    Gingerbread, 55
         "   Molasses, 55
         "   No. 1, 55
         "   No. 2, 55
         "   Sugar, 55
    Gold Cake, 49
    Harrison Cake, 50
    Ice Cream Cake, 44
    Jelly (for cake), 47
    Lemon Honey (for cake), 56
    Lemon or Orange Jelly Cake, 46
    Lincoln Cake, 50
    Marble Cake, 49
    Molasses Plum Cake, 51
    One, Two, Three, Four Cake, 51
    Plain Spice Cake, 52
    Pound Cake, 50
    Pound Sponge Cake, 50
    Pork Cake, 55
    Quick Icing (for cake), 56
    Rose Cake, 48
    Silver Cake, 49
    Snow Cake--No. 1, 48
      "    "   No. 2, 48
    Snow Tea Cakes, 52
    Sponge Cake--No. 1, 51
      "      "   No. 2, 51
    Sponge Cake, Aunt Sharlie's, 50
    Sponge Cake to roll, 51
    Sunshine Cake--No. 1, 47
        "      "   No. 2, 47
    Victoria Cake, 50
    White Cake, 48
    White Cake (a delicious), 48
    White Mountain Cake, 49

  CANDIES AND NUTS--
    Almond, Walnut or Chocolate Creams, 87
    Butter Scotch, 89
    Chocolate Creams, 87
    Caramels, Chocolate, 87
        "     Huyler's, 88
    Cocoanut Candy, 88
    Cream Candy, 88
    Corn Candy, 89
    Honey Candy, 89
    Molasses Candy, 88
    Nut Candy, 88
    Orange Drops, 89
    Peppermints, 88
    Taffy--No. 1, 90
      "    No. 2, 90
      "    Everton, 90
    Vinegar Candy, 89
    Salted Almonds, 90
    Salted Almonds (with oil), 90

  CREAMS--
    Banana Cream, 60
    Bavarian Cream with Peaches, 61
    Champagne Jelly, 61
    Charlotte Russe, 61
    Coffee Bavarian, 60
    Coffee Jelly, 61
    Duchess, 59
    Lemon, 60
    Pineapple, 59
    Russian, 59
    Spanish, 60

  ENTREES--
    Beef Loaf, 21
      "  Roll, 21
    Cheese Sticks--No. 1, 26
       "      "    No. 2, 26
    Chicken Terrapin--No. 1, 19
       "        "     No. 2, 19
       "        "     No. 3, 19
       "   for Lunch, 20
       "   (pressed), 20
    Canapie Lorenzo, 22
    Crab Creole, 22
      "  Cutlets, 22
      "  Deviled, 21
      "  to fry soft-shelled, 21
    Meat Salad, 25
    Oysters, baked in the shell, 23
    Oysters, Curried, 24
       "     Fancy Roast, 24
    Shrimp Stew, 23
    Sweet Breads, 25
    Terrapin Stew, 23
    Veal Loaf, 25
    Welsh Rare-bit--No. 1, 25
       "      "     No. 2, 25

  FISH--
    Brown Fish Chowder, 17
    Finnan Haddies, 16
    Fish a la Creme, 15
    Norwegian Fish Dish, 15
    Stuffed Smelt, 16

  ICE CREAM--
    Ice Cream, 73
    Banana, 73
    Lalla Rookh, 73

  MEATS--
    Boiled Ham, 27
    Calves Head Stew, 27
    Chops and Tomato Sauce, 27
    Kidney Stew, 28
    Sheep's Tongue, 28
    Spanish Recipe for Cooking Tongue, 28
    Chestnut Stuffing for Quail, 29
    Stuffings for Turkeys, 29

  PICKLES--
    Cucumber Catsup, 79
       "     Sauce, 83
       "     Pickles, 79
    Oil Pickles, 81
    Peach Chutney, 82
    Sweet Pickled Figs, 80
      "      "    Peaches, 80
      "      "    Tomatoes, 80
      "      "    Watermelon, 81
    Tomato Catsup--No. 1, 79
      "       "    No. 2, 79
    Tomato Soy, 82
    Vermont Pickles, 81

  PIES--
    Lemon or Orange (plain), 58
       "   (rich), 58
       "   Tarts, 58
    Mince Meat, 57
    Mock Mince Meat--No. 1, 57
      "    "    "    No. 2, 57
    Puff Paste, 57

  PRESERVES AND JAMS--
    Apricot Jam, 76
    Brandy Peaches, 77
    Currant Jelly, 76
    Fig Jam--No. 1, 75
     "   "   No. 2, 76
    Isabella Grape Jam, 76
    Orange Marmalade--No. 1, 75
    Orange Marmalade--No. 2, 75
    Pineapple Preserve, 76
    Preserved Grapes, 77

  PUDDINGS--
    Apple Dumpling (baked), 69
      "   Puddings, 69
      "   Pan-dowdy, 70
      "   Sago, 70
      "   Souffle, 69
    Apricot or Peach, 72
    Batter, 64
    Blackberry, 71
    Boston Thanksgiving, 71
    Burlington, 63
    Chocolate, 72
    Cracker, 66
    Delmonico, 66
    English Plum--No. 1, 67
      "       "   No. 2, 68
    Fig, 63
    Indian, 66
    Kiss, 64
    Lemon Bread, 66
    Orange Float, 64
    Pancake with Fruit, 63
    Plain Plum, 68
    Poor Man's, 65
    Poor Man's Rice, 66
    Rennet, 71
    Snow, 66
    Sponge, 70
    Strawberry Custard, 64
    Suet--No. 1, 65
     "    No. 2, 65
     "    No. 3, 65
    Tapioca Cream, 69

  PUNCHES--
    Champagne, 85
    Delicious, 85
    Fort McDowell Egg Nog, 85
    Loyal Legion, 86
    State of Schuylkill, 86

  SALADS--
    Boiled Salad Dressing, 31
    Clayton's Celebrated Salad Dressing, 31
    Dressing for Cold Slaw, 31
    Salad Dressing, 32
    Tomato Salad, 32

  SOUPS--
    Asparagus, 8
    Bean, 5
    Black Bean, 5
    Beef, 4
    Bisque, 4
    Bouillon, 3
    Caramel, for Coloring, 9
    Celery, 6
    Cream of Celery, 6
    Mock Bisque, 5
    Mushroom, 7
    Ox-Tail, 7
    Pea, Green, 6
    Pea, Grandmother Sawtelle's, 6
    Pea, Split, 5
    Potato, 8
    Soup a la Minute, 9
    Soupe a l'Ognon, 8
    Tomato, without stock, 4
       "    Milk, 4

  VEGETABLES--
    Artichokes, boiled, 34
        "       stuffed, 34
    Celery Root, 34
    Carrots, stewed, 34
    New England Corn Pudding, 34
    Potatoes in Cases, 33
       "     Baked Cream, 33
       "     Escalloped, 33
    Peppers, stuffed--No. 1, 36
      "         "     No. 2, 36
    Tomatoes, stuffed--No. 1, 35
    Tomatoes, stuffed--No. 2, 35
    Squash and Corn, 35

[Illustration]




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's Note


The following errors were corrected.

  Page Error
  19   chicken cut into dice changed to chicken cut into dice;
  19   3 hard-boiled eggs changed to 3 hard-boiled eggs;
  27   cook slowl.y. changed to cook slowly.
  33   it to protude changed to it to protrude
  45   FILLING changed to FILLING.
  46   FROSTING changed to FROSTING.
  46   FILLING.. changed to FILLING.
  93   Sheeps Tongue changed to Sheep's Tongue
  94   Souffle, changed to Souffle,

The following words were inconsistently spelled or hyphenated:

  dessert-spoon / dessertspoon
  sauce-pan / saucepan
  tea-cup / teacup
  tea-cups / teacups



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COOKERY BLUE BOOK***


******* This file should be named 26374.txt or 26374.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/3/7/26374



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

