The Project Gutenberg EBook of Fil and Filippa, by John Stuart Thomson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Fil and Filippa
       Story of Child Life in the Philippines

Author: John Stuart Thomson

Illustrator: Maud Petersham
             Miska Petersham

Release Date: August 24, 2008 [EBook #26414]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIL AND FILIPPA ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








                        Fil and Filippa

                      Story of Child Life
                       in the Philippines


                               By

                      John Stuart Thomson

                           Author of
                     "China Revolutionized"
                         "The Chinese"
                     "Bud and Bamboo" Etc.

                        Illustrations by

                    Maud and Miska Petersham


               The Macmillan Company, Publishers

                        New York MCMXXIX







                        Copyright, 1917,
                   By the Macmillan Company.

      Set up and electrotyped. Published September, 1917.

            PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA








                 DEDICATED TO MY LITTLE FRIEND

                         FRANCIS DORIS

                         BY THE AUTHOR






CONTENTS


    Chapter

    I.        Names.
    II.       Climate, Typhoons, Volcano
    III.      At Worship
    IV.       Houses
    V.        Cocoa and Coffee
    VI.       Hemp and Sugar
    VII.      The Coconut
    VIII.     Indigo; Mango; Guava; Durian
    IX.       The Forest
    X.        Minerals
    XI.       Water Buffalo
    XII.      Bats; Cattle; Horses; Cats; Monkeys
    XIII.     Flying Ants; Locusts
    XIV.      Boats and Fish
    XV.       Saw Mill; Mudsleighs; Wooden Plows
    XVI.      Umbrellas; Chairs; Milk-bottle; Milkman
    XVII.     Home Life
    XVIII.    Dress
    XIX.      The "Adios" Feast




PERSONS


    Fil, a Filipino boy.
    Filippa, his sister.
    Favra, her playmate.
    Moro, Fil's playmate, a Mohammedan.
    Fil's Father.
    Fil's Mother.
    The Padre-priest.
    The Guest.
    Driver of the Water Buffalo Cart.






FIL AND FILIPPA



CHAPTER I

NAMES


It took me over a month and a half to reach the summer islands that
I sought. In three weeks I had gone through the Panama Canal and
had reached San Francisco, and in four weeks more I had crossed the
world's widest, most peaceful, and bluest ocean, the Pacific.

There, like a string of pearls hanging from the golden Equator,
I found thousands of wonderful islands of all sizes, but only two
of them are very large. I found also my new and kind young friends:
Fil; his sister Filippa; Fil's boy playmate named Moro, who came
from the large southern island; their parents and friends; and the
good Padre. Each one of them was shorter and darker than I. Yet they
said to me: "The Stars and Stripes, now our flag also, makes us all
American brothers, which we will be always."

"But how is it that you are called Filipinos, and live in the
Philippine Islands?" I asked.

Fil smiled and said: "Though I believe you know without asking me,
I shall tell you to show that I know our romantic and interesting
history.

"Hundreds of years ago, many years before America became a nation,
the roving Spaniards discovered these islands, and named them the
Philip-pines, in honor of their king Philip. When the American Admiral
Dewey won these islands from Spain, our name was not changed.

"And our Christian names of Fil and Filippa have the same sound,
and almost the same meaning, as Philippines," added Filippa, her
eyes smiling from under her cloud of beautiful hair,--hair longer and
richer than an American girl's hair,--and eyes darker and deeper than
an American girl's eyes. Perhaps her brows were a little bit flatter,
and her nose was a little bit shorter and wider, than ours; but still
she was pretty, especially when she smiled, for she had beautiful
white teeth.

Then I turned to Fil's playmate, Moro, and asked him what his rolling
name could mean. Moro was even more eager and darker than Fil. He
replied, as he bravely touched his toy sword:

"I, too, am of the Malay race, but of a different religion from Fil. I
am a Mohammedan; that is, I reverence the same prophets whom the Turks
worship. I come from the southern islands of the Philippines. There we
spend most of our time roving in boats, and hunting over the hills. The
first white man who met us saw that we were as dark, and had the same
religion, as the tribes of Morocco in Africa. That perhaps is why I am
called Moro, the Mohammedan, whose father fears no man; nor shall I,
when I grow up."

"But we are all friends now under a new, friendly flag; and we preach
and practice love, instead of fear and fighting," I replied.

Filippa looked upon me with very happy eyes, when I said this; for a
girl seems to know wiser ways of settling quarrels than do boys. A boy
becomes excited; a girl thinks longer and acts more slowly. Certainly,
Filippa's gentle ways and the expression in her wonderfully deep eyes
had more power with Fil and Moro than would strife and force.

"Every name seems to have a pretty meaning in your Edenlike
Philippines," I remarked to Filippa's playmate, Favra.

"Yes," she replied, "the Padre (pa'drai), our pastor or cleric,
who knows so much, tells me that my name means the friendly one who
does favors."




CHAPTER II

CLIMATE, TYPHOONS, VOLCANO


Next day I met the Padre. He was seated on a cane chair under a clump
of whispering bamboos, which are giant grasses as tall and as strong
as trees.

We had hardly exchanged morning greetings, by saying "Buenos dias
(boo ai'nos de'as)," before we heard the children running along the
white shell path, between the parklike tropical woods.

"Every one awakens early in this wonderful climate, yet no one seems
to be fully awake," I said.

The good Padre replied: "We are situated so near the Equator that
the sun rises into full and bright daylight at once."

"I seem to half dream all day. Is it the balmy warm air, or the scents
of new flowers, or the equatorial sun?" I asked.

The Padre explained it by saying: "The sun throws more direct rays
here; and they pierce through thin hats, and especially through black
clothes. It is best to wear thick, white paper helmets. Moreover,
our climate is more damp than is America's climate.

"That is why you feel somewhat dreamy; and that is why everything in
Nature, such as trees, fruits, flowers, ferns, and even animals and
birds, grow so richly; and why the flowers shed influences and perfumes
on the air. It all appeals to the warmth, color, and dreaminess in
your happy imagination.

"You think of stories of Eden or Paradise perhaps, where one imagines
no hard winter, no bare trees or lawns, no whiteness. Everything is
more beautiful to look upon here. The birds and winds and rains drop
seeds; and at once lavish plants grow up. You will soon become used to
our warmer climate, because you will need to eat less meat and butter,
which is the fuel that keeps you warm. Instead you will eat more rice
and fruit, which will give you strength, without heating you."

At this moment, our little friend Moro pursed out his cheek and made
a sound like a howling siren or a storm.

"That noise reminds me of your awful typhoons. I passed through one of
those whirling storms, just as I approached these islands of beauty,"
I exclaimed. "Can you explain that great wonder?" I asked.

"It is God, the Creator's, magnificent but terrible act, such as you
read about in the Book of Job or in the Psalms," said the Padre, who
crossed himself and bowed in piety. The good children, except Moro,
all made the holy sign.

Then the wise Padre continued: "Like great characters, for a long
time gentle,--like peace which has covered the earth for years,--so,
in our still, summer seas, suddenly in September, everything seems to
contradict and be in rebellion, with a force unknown and unexpected
before,--a force all the greater, because it was accumulating quietly
for many months.

"The heat becomes unbearable. The winds arise and sweep all one way,
for a time. Then comes the black rain. The heavy typhoon soon begins
to howl and to turn in a circle for two or three days. The wheeling
storm moves from place to place, and finally dies down at sea."

Filippa inquired: "Why is such a circular storm of the Oriental
tropics, called a typhoon?"

The Padre explained: "It is a word that we have taken from the
Chinese, who live not many hours away from us, across the water to the
northwest. 'Tai' means great. 'Fung' or 'phoon,' means a wind. These
storms sweep all the way from the Philippine Islands, across the seas
to China. We like the expressive word which the Chinese have given
these wind storms."

"We have another natural wonder here, the volcano," said Favra.

"Yes," replied the Padre, "the Taal (Tae'al) and Mayon (Mae y[+o]n')
volcanoes once were smoking and fiery mountains, shaped like a
cone. Years ago fire and lava, which is molten rock that has cooled,
poured from their hot, pointed tops, ran down the sides, and destroyed
everything in their path."

"What is lava?" asked Fil.

The Padre replied: "Even a volcano produces some good. This melted
rock, when it becomes cold, forms a light, porous stone, which is
used for polishing. You use it in your bathroom, to rub ink off your
hands. Lava stone is easily ground into powder. When mixed with soap,
this ground lava becomes a useful cleaning and polishing powder."

"Nature is always useful, as well as grand and beautiful," remarked
Fil's father, who, dressed in a white silk suit and abaca hat, had
just then come up the path.

"Where did you get that hat?" I laughingly asked Fil's father.

"I'll tell you some other time. It is made from reeds, woven under
water to keep them damp and pliant. The hat, therefore, is light,
durable, and cool," he replied.




CHAPTER III

AT WORSHIP


When I arose next day and walked to the usual morning seat under the
bamboos, I found only Moro there.

"Where is everybody else?" I asked.

"At the Iglesia (ig lai se'a)," replied Moro.

I knew iglesia was the Philippine word for church; so I said to Moro:
"Let us go there too, and see what they are all doing."

After we had walked along the white shell paths, past the swaying
fisher boats, over an ancient stone bridge, beneath tall palms
and hanging vines and thick bananas, we beheld a wonderfully carved
doorway, with statues in the niches. Over the tree tops, rose a noble
white dome. From the open windows, the sweet singing of sacred music
came to our ears. It was the well-known Mass or communion music of
our own land, consisting of the beautiful strains of the Gloria, the
Sanctus, and the Benedictus. As we came nearer, the breeze wafted
us sweet incense from the altar, sandal and spice and flower and
cinnamon scents.

Though Moro was of a different faith, he took off his hat; so did
I. The short Filipino men were dressed in white. The sweet-looking
Filipino women were dressed in wide-striped skirts, and white waists,
with very large collars starched stiff. Over their heads were large
lace shawls called mantillas. They wore no hats, for they were very
proud to show their fine long hair, filled with gold and jeweled pins.

Every one dipped a finger in the water which was placed in a huge
shell near the door. Then they bowed before the cross on the altar,
which was shining at the end of the long aisle.

In the front seats, under the high dome, we could see Filippa, her
parents, and Favra. The colored light from the stained glass windows
fell down in rays and clouds of beauty upon the altar boys, who wore
robes of purple and white lace.

The music of the blue and gold organ was subdued to a velvet
whisper. Suddenly a boy arose behind the carved benches of the
choir. He sang in a voice as clear as a bird's:


    "Come, Holy Spirit, Come."


It was Fil who was singing. The censers were swinging. The organ began
to drown even Fil's clear voice. Then all the singers in the choir
arose and filled the great dome, the long cathedral aisles, and even
the palm grove outside the windows, with a great burst of sacred music:


    "Holy, Holy is the Lord."


It was all very solemn and very sweet. Far richer than in the homeland,
seemed the music, because of the greater natural beauty of the tropics.

Then our good friend, the Padre, arose, and spoke to his people,
about charity and missions and peace and the stranger within the
doors. He spoke so kindly that we all regretted war, and even hated
the name of war. He asked us to give gifts for the wounded and the
poor in other sad, colder, harder lands of hate and evil.

Then he extended his hands. A great blessing seemed to flow down from
the pulpit and even from the walls of the holy temple of peace, where
the white altar, the golden cross, and the colored windows shone out
as signs of purity and love.

When the service was dismissed, we all walked home together.

"When are you going to be a Christian, little Moro?" inquired the
kind Padre.

"I am a Mohammedan. My people come from the southern Philippines. We
worship one God, and Mohammed is his prophet. We make converts by
the sword of force, rather than by preaching," replied Moro, his eyes
looking strange and brave.

"Tell me more about your religion. I have heard it is peculiar,"
said Filippa.

"When we pray, we face Mecca, instead of Jerusalem or Rome. At Mecca
in Arabia is the Holy Book, which we call the Koran. There, also,
is the birthplace of Mohammed, our prophet. We believe in troops of
angels above, as well as in 'jinns,' or spirits, on earth, who are
ready to help us. We have no altars in our mosques or churches.

"Our mosques are immense, plain structures, with only large Arabic
letters of texts, painted on the walls and ceiling. Five times a day,
the Muezzin priest mounts the outside of the mosque tower, and calls
the faithful to prayer. Each Mohammedan carries his own praying
mat. After placing it on the tile floor beneath the thin pillars,
he kneels and bows upon his mat, facing Mecca, where our prophet was
born. We do not use music or organs."

All this Moro explained to us. What he told about his religion was
very different, very interesting, very new.

"There are good things in your religion," said the kind Padre, as he
placed his hand gently on Moro's dark head.

"You despise the use of intoxicating liquor. You teach the duty of
giving alms and of being charitable to the poor, the unfortunate, and
the sick. You teach that every one is his brother's keeper, and should
help his brother to succeed in life. You teach that cleanliness and
plain living are almost a part of religion. And we Christians agree
with you, Moro, in all these grand ideas; for I think that, with
all the sorrow now in the world, some of us have been too selfish,
too luxurious, as though we thought we would live forever, and had
no duty except to ourselves."

I, too, felt conscience-stricken for my homeland and for myself,
when I heard, in this odd and different quarter of our large world,
the Filipino Padre's true but kind moralizing over Moro's different
religion.

"The bells! Oh, the silver-sweet bells!" exclaimed Filippa's mother.

"The bells of love and peace," replied the Padre, as he glanced back
at the twin towers of his white Iglesia (church) that shone over the
grove of coconut palms.




CHAPTER IV

HOUSES


"What odd homes! toy houses toppling over from their stilts!" I
exclaimed, as we passed a remarkable village. All the buildings were
set up on poles, and had ladders for their dwellers to climb up to
the high doors. The houses looked as though the lower story had been
washed away, and only the second story remained. Over each window and
door projected a very neat eyebrow, so to speak, either to shed rain
or to keep out the sun.

"That is our famous nipa-thatch house used by the original Filipinos,"
said Moro. "I can explain all about it, for all Moros, and many
backward tribes, use these houses."

"Tell me everything," I urged.

"First," said Moro, "there is not one nail in a nipa-thatch
house. Perched high in the air on poles, as it is, you perhaps would
think our typhoons would blow it over, just like a light bandbox."

"So I would think," I replied.

"Well," laughed bright Moro, "let me ask you a question. What makes
a pole snap before the rush of a storm? What makes a brick wall give
way before a sudden wind? And why does a tree or a reed bear the
storm easily?"

"Because the tree and the reed are elastic enough to give a little,--to
bend instead of breaking," I answered.

"That is just it," again laughed my little Master Moro. "Our small nipa
hut, high in the air, sways a little, but rides out the storm. Every
pole, every beam, and every rafter of the frame, is all made of hollow
bamboo. Bamboo is stronger than steel, because it bends and gives,
and then springs back. There is no nail in the house. Every crosspiece
is tied with rattan, the same vine with which you make cane chairs;
so you know how strong and elastic it is."

"And of what are the sloping roofs and the side walls made?" I
inquired.

"Of the famous nipa palm," Moro replied. "It grows in swamps, often
near the sea. It looks like a gigantic fern. Its wide leaves we lap
one over another, and tie them to the bamboo frame by withes of tough
cogon grass."

"Are you not afraid of fire?" I asked.

Moro frankly said: "Yes, but as our house is so cheap, we can build a
new one easily. However, in this warm climate we cook in a separate
house, and we bathe out of doors. We do not smoke within our nipa
houses; it is too dangerous."

"Tell our friend from across the purple ocean how we use the bamboo
and the nipa plants, for other purposes besides building," remarked
little Fil.

Moro continued: "From the sap of the nipa palm, we distill
alcohol. From the hollow bamboo we make pipes for carrying water. We
boil the tender new shoots of bamboo, and eat them like celery. We
put a stopper into one joint of a hollowed bamboo, and use it for a
bottle. The pliant bamboo root we make into whips. We make bridges,
fences, window blinds, furniture, and carriages out of bamboo. We
even make blow guns and shoot our arrows at birds, through the
bamboo stalk."

"There are one hundred kinds of bamboo, and a thousand uses for the
plant," added Filippa.

"I should imagine that the bamboo is the skeleton or the framework,
and that the nipa is the skin of the Philippine structure," I remarked.

"That is the doctor's way of drawing a figure of speech," laughed
the Padre.




CHAPTER V

COCOA AND COFFEE


The next morning Filippa's mother refreshed us all with a cup of
fragrant cocoa, so that we might begin the day in good spirits. As
I was sipping it, the Padre remarked in good humor:

"Did you Americans seize the Philippines merely for a cup of cocoa?"

I replied laughingly: "This cup of cocoa is so good, that I certainly
would try to seize the Philippines for it."

Filippa's mother and father both bowed and said I was complimentary,
like a diplomat.

Then I continued: "I am glad the Philippines are now ours, and yours
too, because our money can help to develop the wonderful tropical
products which do not grow in our colder America. I wish you would
explain something about cocoa and coffee, which we prize very much
and which we send our ships a long way to secure."

Fil's father, who was a planter of wide acres, replied:

"The cocoa bean and the coconut are two very different plants. Do not
confuse them. The cocoa bean, out of which you grind cocoa powder and
chocolate for a drink, for bonbons, and for puddings, comes out of a
fruit shaped like a large red cucumber. This fruit grows on a tender
bush, which must be shaded by a thick banana palm. In each fruit are
twenty of these seeds, or cocoa beans.

"They have hard skins, and are very bitter and stimulating. When
eaten, they excite the heart, and thus make a person feel active
and alive. Soldiers and athletes eat them, to relieve fatigue. As
soon as the fruit is gathered, the beans must be dried in the sun,
or be roasted. The cocoa bean is very oily. To make cocoa, the oil is
extracted, when the beans are ground into a paste. To make chocolate,
the oil is not extracted."

"I never ate a cocoa bean which was sweet; but a chocolate-drop is
sweet," said Filippa, who had bought chocolate-drops in the candy
stores.

Her father explained: "We add sugar and vanilla, to the brown cocoa
bean paste."

"Just think of practically growing chocolate bonbons on a tree, beneath
the window of your nipa huts, in these wonderful Philippine Islands,"
I added, and every one smiled.

"It is really true, when one adds the sugar," remarked the Padre.

"Now tell me please about coffee, also," I begged.

Fil's father continued:

"The coffee comes from another low bush. You choose a hillside,
for, although the plant likes our heavy rains in the Philippines,
it does not like to keep its roots long in water. It wants to drain
them and to feel the warm sun. The leaves are long and glossy; the
blossoms are waxy white. The fragrance is richer than rose sweetened
with sugar. The fruit is like a scarlet cherry; each contains two
seeds. These two seeds are the coffee bean of commerce and of the
breakfast table. They are ground in a small mill, as you know."

"How were the beans first discovered?" I inquired.

Fil's father smiled and told this story: "One day a shepherd noticed
that his goats, which had eaten the cherries off a coffee bush,
danced about in high excitement as though they, instead of their
master, were going to a fiesta. Then the shepherd ate the berries,
too, and felt stimulated himself. That is how coffee in time came
to our breakfast table. Instead of eating the berry, we grind it and
steep it, and drink the liquor."

"But, father, the seeds are light colored, and not deep brown, when
you open the fruit," said Fil.

"I know," replied Fil's father. "We roast the seeds in an oven, to get
rid of the moisture and to preserve and ripen the stimulating oils."

"Thank you all;" I exclaimed, "now I will behold a whole tropical
story of geography and commerce, every time I look into a grocer's
window at home."




CHAPTER VI

HEMP AND SUGAR


"However, the richest products of our Philippine Islands are abaca
(ab'aca) and sugar," said the fatherly Padre next morning, when I
met him under the shade of the bamboos and the madre trees.

"I am sure you do not know what abaca is," laughed Filippa.

"I guess from its name that it may be a cousin of tobacco; it sounds
like it: abaca,--tobacco."

"Names are sometimes misleading," replied the Padre. "The manila hemp,
or abaca plant, is a nearer cousin of the banana palm. You cannot make
a sail or tie up a bag of potatoes, without using our manila hemp,
or abaca. It is the strongest fiber known; it does not weaken in
water. The great hawsers that are used to pull the great ships, are
made out of it. It all comes from the leaf of this Philippine palm."

"Wonderful and beautiful and useful islands," I confessed. "But how
do you make a leaf into a cord, a hawser, a sail, or a bag?"

The Padre continued: "This big plant with leaves taller than a man,
grows on a hill. We do not let it flower. The huge leaves are cut near
the root, and new leaves grow up at once. All through the leaf run
long tough ribs. We drag this over a big rough knife that is fastened
in a board; and thus we scrape away the soft pulp without breaking
the fiber. The wet fibers, we hang over a fence in the sun, to dry.

"Then we press the fibers all together, and ship them to you in big
heavy bales, in the bottom of a ship. You weave the bales of fiber into
bags, cloth, hawser ropes, canvas, tents, and cordage. We Filipinos,
also, split the fiber and weave it into many kinds of cloth. Sometimes
we mix silk or cotton with the abaca hemp."

"I am sure our friend would like to learn about sugar," remarked Fil,
who had a sweet tooth for candy.

Fil's father took up this part of the story, and said:

"Sugar of course comes from a sweet cane, which is grown on high
land. The cane is cut down. A pony or a water buffalo is harnessed to
a roller. We feed the ripened cane into the rollers. As the animal
drives this roller around, the sugar cane is pressed through. The
sweet juice is caught and put into kettles. This juice is heated
several times, and stirred, and purified by bone charcoal. The white
crystals separate from the dark molasses sirup. We sometimes feed
the molasses to cattle and pigs, to make them fat for market."

Fil's eyes looked very longingly as he listened to this tale of good
things; so I passed him a penny or two.

"Is not sugar made also from very sweet, dark beets?" I inquired.

"Not in these islands," replied the Padre. "We find that the sugar
cane gives a sweeter and a more nutritious product. The beet sugar
is made in Europe and in the western states of America."

"What do you do with the pressed sugar cane?" I inquired.

"We spread it out in the sun and dry it in large yards. It still
contains much sugar. We use it for fuel, to light the fires under
the kettles."

"What a waste!" I exclaimed. "You should use oil or gas for fuel, and
should press every drop of sugar out of that valuable cane. Waste not;
want not, is as good a maxim for a nation as for a boy."

"If you are always that serious, like a lecturer, the children may
not like you so well," remarked the gentle Padre.

"Not at all," replied Fil and Moro and Filippa and Favra, who perhaps
remembered the pennies I had given to them. Then I hummed as we went
home to have lunch, or "tiffin," as they call it:


    "All lectures and no candy or fun
    Make Moro and Fil dull boys."





CHAPTER VII

THE COCONUT TREE


Moro was always up to tricks. I noticed that he was whispering
something to Filippa who was laughing.

"Tell it out," demanded Filippa's mother.

"The bad boy said the coconut, which we are trying to break, is a
hairy monkey's head dried."

"Let me see it," I demanded.

Surely enough, there was plainly marked a monkey's eyes and mouth
and hair and nose.

"We'll soon settle this," said Fil, who dashed the coconut on a stone,
broke the hard shell, wasted half the sweet milk,--exposing the white,
fragrant meat.

"Did you know that the coconut furnishes cloth, mats, roofs, fuel,
soap oil, candy, puddings, cups, dyes, lamp oil, butter, candles, axle
grease, ropes, brushes, furniture, shade, food, drink, and liquor to
intoxicate," asked Filippa's mother, who was as wise as Fil's father.

"Please go slowly," I remarked, "for you are making me think that
these islands are Paradise; that you touch some button, and every
wish comes true, as in the fairy stories. In our country, a tree
furnishes only lumber; or sometimes nuts or sugar in addition, but
never over two things at once. Now you would have me believe that
one slim tree with only a tuft of leaves at the top, furnishes you
twenty useful and rich products. This is really too much to believe,
though I ask you to forgive me for being so frank."

Filippa's mother replied: "These are the gardens of the sunny Equator;
and you can, therefore, expect wonderful things. The rough covering
of the shell is woven into mats, brushes, ropes, and bags. The
fibers of the leaves make a fine cloth. The dried leaves make a
roof-thatch. The trunk makes foundation poles. The coconut itself
is fruit and drink. When the white meat is dried, it is shredded
for pastry and candy. When the coconut meat is pressed, the oil
extracted is used for fuel, light, hair pomades, butter, candles,
and grease. It is used also in making the best hand soaps; in fact,
it makes the only soap that can be used with salt sea water."

"Please let me tell all its other valuable qualities," said Fil.

"If you cut a coconut in half, you have two cups, or dishes. You can
draw the milk through a small hole, plug the hole, and use the shell
as a float. If you burn the shell, you can make a deep dye from the
ashes,--a dye that will not fade or wash out."

"I'll tell you more about it," Moro eagerly intruded. "The oddest use
for a smoothed half of a coconut shell, is to use it as a rat-guard,
to shed off rats from our strings of dried fruit hanging from the
roof. As the rat comes down the rattan rope, the halved coconut shell
tips, and down he falls from its smooth surface, to the floor, and
misses the hanging fruit.

"If you climb up the high coconut tree, and cut a hole in the flowering
stalk, the juice will run out. This is called the delicious 'tuba'
liquor, and we catch it in cups made from half of a coconut shell."

"And if you ferment and distill that liquor," said the Padre, "you
have the cocoa wine which is much used for medicine in America."

Filippa's mother then remarked: "I have seen coconut oil, placed
in a coconut shell, burning along a coconut wick, as a lamp, in a
house built out of coconut stems and leaves, under a coconut grove;
and the Filipino family were eating coconuts, and drinking coconut
'tuba' juice, at a table made from coconut stalks."

"That must have been in Coconutville, when a coconut clock was
striking, under a coconut moon," laughed Fil, who sometimes was full
of smart wit.

"But what I have said is exactly and solemnly true," replied his
gentle mother.

"I understand it now," I replied, "and I see how one coconut tree would
make me richer than a whole forest of poplar or oak trees at home."

Hungry Moro remarked: "I wish that this moment I had coconut shredded
over some Bebinka cakes."

"What are Bebinka cakes?" I inquired.

"They are pancakes made from fermented corn and rice dough,
mixed. Every Filipino is fond of them," explained Filippa's mother.




CHAPTER VIII

INDIGO, MANGO, GUAVA, DURIAN


"If you will remain in our sunnier Philippines, I'll tell you about
plants and flowers and fruits, that you have never even heard about,"
said sunny little Filippa, who herself was as beautiful as a flower,
and as soft to touch as a fruit.

"Tell about our indigo," suggested her brother Fil.

Filippa looked very wise, pointed to her indigo skirt, and continued:
"You get your dyes from the benzene of coal tar, but they do
not stand washing or sunlight, as well as our bright and strong
vegetable dyes. We take our indigo plant, and steep the leaves in
water for twelve hours, in a stone tank. Then Fil drains off the
yellow liquor. This soon turns green. Then blue sediment settles in
Nature's wonderful chemical way, under the strong sunlight. We drain
off the water, and cut the indigo cakes into cubes."

"Very well told," remarked Filippa's mother. "This is a dye which
will not fade. It lasts as long as the gown. Now, Moro, I would like
you to tell about mangoes and guavas and durians; for you are always
eating them."

Moro laughed, and began to throw sticks up into a tall tree.

"What are you doing? Why don't you answer?" I inquired.

"I'm trying to knock down a custard, one foot long and half a foot
deep," he replied.

"Such nonsense. Custards in my country are made out of eggs and are
baked in ovens," I said.

"Not this better kind," replied Moro, who brought down a huge fruit,
all covered with sharp spurs and spikes, sharper and harder than
rose-thorns.

"Nature has kept her rich custard guarded by spikes and by an awful
odor," remarked Fil's father, as he broke open the thick skin with
an ax.

"But it's worth the trouble," said Moro, who pointed out the heart
of the fruit, which truly was one solid, delicious natural custard,
one foot long,--enough for a whole Filipino family.

"The monkeys know how to open the spiked fruit better than you do,"
said Fil. "They throw them from the high branches. The fruit breaks
open on the ground. Then the wild monkeys race down the tree, and
eat up the custard durian. Who said that a monkey does not think?"

Everybody laughed at this odd but true tale of the remarkable
Philippines.

"I know something about guava, for I eat guava jelly with my turkey
and venison at home, but I never knew that it came from the far-away
Philippine Islands. Is it a root or a seed?" I inquired.

"Oh, no!" replied Moro. "It's a fruit taken from that low tree
over there. The flowers are white. The fruit, shaped like a pear,
is yellow."

"What makes the delightful jelly red?" I inquired.

"Perhaps the cooking, or the sugar that is added," suggested Fil's
mother.

"You have not yet told about mangoes. Please hand our friend one,"
said Filippa.

Moro climbed up and up a dizzy height, into an evergreen tree sixty
feet high. He brought down in his pockets, several fruits as large
as cucumbers, only the colors were red and yellow.

"Eat one. They are the most delicious and juicy fruit known in the
whole world,--just like wine," said Moro.

I bit eagerly into one, and at once threw it far away. Everybody
laughed at my strange action.

"Why, it's turpentine; it's paint," I said. "I didn't think you'd do
this to me, Moro."

"Swallow it anyway. That turpentine smell lasts only a second,"
explained Filippa.

I tried another mango, and found it to be the juiciest and sweetest
fruit that I ever ate, dripping wine, full of refreshment in a hot
climate, food and drink and medicine in one.

"What do you do with its large seed, as hard as iron?" I inquired.

"I'll show you," replied Moro.

The bright boy at once lighted a fire, and roasted the hard seed
in the ashes. Then he brushed and washed it clean; and handed it to
me, when it became somewhat cool, saying: "Eat it too; it is really
chocolate toast now."

And such I found it to be.

"Your mango then is a whole breakfast,--toast, drink, and fruit,"
I said.




CHAPTER IX

THE FOREST


When we all met next morning, again under the bamboo grove, the good
Padre said:

"If you were lost in your woods at home, you would soon wander and die;
but if you were lost here, you could live for years."

"Then let us go into such a forest of Eden," I replied, and held out
my hands to Fil and Filippa.

Away we went down the white shell road across the canal; and soon we
were lost among the many trees, palms, and vines.

The Padre pointed to the coconut tree and the nipa palm, and said:
"As we already have told you, they would afford you a house, food,
drink, light, and soap."

"What is this great hard tree?" I inquired.

The Padre explained: "That's the valuable mahogany. Thin strips of
it are polished, and used to cover the woodwork of your piano and
bureau at home."

"And this other wonderful, new tree?" I asked.

"That is the molave. It is so hard that sea worms and white ants
cannot bore into it. So it is good for boats, wharves, and frames
for big buildings," replied the Padre.

"Here is a pretty tree," remarked Filippa.

"You should think so," answered her father. "It is the lanete. Its wood
is so strong and pliable, that your violin was made from part of one."

"Here's a skipping rope," exclaimed Filippa.

"No, a boat rope," explained Fil.

"That is really the bejuco rattan vine," remarked the Padre, who
knew botany and the lore of nature. "It is three hundred feet long,
as long as a city block, if you pull it out of the jungle and away
from the tree tops, where it has climbed like a huge snake. We can
use it for bridge or carriage ropes, or we can divide the strands
and make cloth, or hats, or cord out of it."

"What gorgeous and sweet-scented flowers," exclaimed Filippa, pointing
to a great tree.

"That is the Ylang," said the Padre. "Our friend uses its perfume
on his handkerchief; but he did not know, perhaps, that the flower
grew in the far-away Philippines. It has the deepest fragrance of
any flower, whether on plant, bush, or tree."

"What can its strange name mean?" I inquired; for I seemed to have
no acquaintance with nature at all, in this wonderfully different land.

The Padre, who knew many languages, explained: "It is a Malay word
which means, 'The chief flower of all flowers'; and such I think
it really is. We capture the fragrance by distilling the flowers,
and mixing pure alcohol with the essence."

"If you were ill in the forest, and caught fever from the mosquitoes
and ants that stung you, the bark of this tree would cure you, just
as quinine does," continued the Padre.

"Is it the little quinine, or cinchona, tree?" I inquired.

"No, it is a sister tree. We call it 'Dita' in our language."

"I said our forests would house and feed you. Now I'll show you
how they would also clothe you. Please show me your handkerchief,
Filippa," said the Padre.

Filippa handed him a little square of linen cloth, so thin and watery
in color, or absence of color, that I could look through it.

"In your country, that little handkerchief would be worth twenty-five
dollars. It is woven from the very thin fibers drawn from pineapple
leaves, and is called Pina cloth, or Pina linen."

Filippa's mother added: "It is finer than silk or hemp linen. We make
our best shiny gowns and laces out of it. Because it is so fine,
it takes a long time to get enough threads to weave and work it
together. The time spent in making it, explains its great cost."

"I see now why Filippa is promised a Pina gown for our coming feast,
or fiesta day, that you kindly promise to give in my honor before I
go away. It certainly is a cloth fit for a queen," I replied.

"Oh! when will the feast day come?" Filippa eagerly inquired.

"Soon," laughed her mother.

"Here is a more wonderful tree, from the gum of which we make
automobile tires, rubber heels, elastic bands, hot water bags, rain
coats, rubber shoes, hose, and so on," exclaimed the Padre.

I looked; and surely enough, there was the identical rubber tree
which we see in florists' shops or in the greenhouse at home; only
this tree was larger. Its thick leaves were nearly as large as a hat.

"We cut a hole in the bark, and, when the yellow gum oozes out, we
boil it down thick, till it is dark colored. Then we mix it with chalk
and sulphur; and behold, afterwards we roll out your automobile tire,"
explained the wise Padre.

"Could you pull the rubber tree out as high as the stars, and would
it snap back again?" asked joking Moro.

"Stop your joking," replied Fil's mother. "You know very well that the
rubber tree itself is not pure gum, any more than the maple tree in
America is pure sugar. It is the gum of the rubber tree that becomes
the rubber."




CHAPTER X

MINERALS


"It is not only what towers above us, that makes our islands rich. Dig
at your feet, and you will find valuable minerals! Magellan, the
Spaniard, first discovered the Philippine Islands while he was on a
search for gold, though I think a rubber tree, or a bamboo, is more
valuable than gold," said the wise Padre.

"We get gold in two ways," explained Fil. "We wash it from scooped-up
gravel, and we break it out of rock with a hammer."

"And how do you melt your iron and copper?" I inquired.

"We dig coal, and use bamboo pipes and a bellows to make the draft. We
put the ore into a clay kettle, and melt the rock out of it. Then,
when the iron is pure, we heat it again until it is red, and beat it
with hammers into shapes. Thus we make it into wheels, spears, axes,
and so on," explained Fil, who had watched the workmen at their labors.

"I know little about practical, mechanical affairs; tell me more,"
urged Filippa.

"We have petroleum oil, just as America has; also, lead and paint
ores. We have burnt-out volcano hills, composed of sulphur down into
their deep hearts."

"That is like a very bad place, way down below, that I have read
about," interrupted Moro; and Fil's mother and the Padre shook their
fingers at him for joking.

Fil continued: "We have beautiful marble quarries, out of which we can
carve statues and table tops, and tops for seats. Our marble is full
of colored veins just like jewels. Then we also have gypsum mines,
which furnish both fertilizer for land, to make crops grow high,
and plaster of Paris, out of which we make pretty white statues."

"Wonderful!" I said, "I never thought of all this, when at home I
bought the lovely white statues of lions and birds, from the vendor
man with the basketful, on our street corner."




CHAPTER XI

WATER BUFFALO


We were all so tired when we came out of the wood to the canal, that
Fil's father told us to wait until a buffalo cart came down the white
shell road.

"A buffalo cart!" I exclaimed. "I'm afraid to ride in that. We used
to shoot buffaloes in our country, and the few now remaining we guard
behind iron fences in zoo gardens."

"Here he comes!" exclaimed Fil and Moro together.

"Boys, boys, be careful!" I cried.

"Let us frighten our guest," whispered Moro.

The buffalo sniffed at me, a stranger, and would have charged with his
head down; but the man who had a rope tied to a ring in the buffalo's
soft nose, pulled the animal back.

"Get down, you foolish boy!" I exclaimed.

But before I could stop him, brave little Moro had climbed up between
the fierce looking animal's thick, long, sweeping horns, which extended
from his large head back to his shoulders.

"Please get into the cart, everybody," Fil's father ordered, in
a hospitable manner, bowing and waving his arm. It was indeed a
high step.

The cart had solid wooden wheels, made out of one thick section that
had been cut from a mahogany tree. There was no iron rim around the
edge of the wheel. The sides of the cart, however, were light, as
they were made from bamboo posts with rattan vine woven between them.

The driver sat on the shafts, and directed the heavy animal, just as
much by words as by pulling the long rope.

"Why do you call these strong animals water buffaloes?" I asked Fil.

"Because, to escape the flies and the heat, the animal refuses to work
during the heat of the day, and rushes off into a stream, or into the
sea, to cover himself with mud and sand and water and weeds. All you
can see above the stirred-up water are his large eyes and two wicked
looking horns, which are as thick as a branch of a tree."

"What an odd tail he has, much like a mule's hairless tail. It looks
like a piece of hose-pipe," I exclaimed.

Moro, way up on the buffalo's neck, heard me and laughed: "He can't
reach me with his rubber tail."

"But I'll reach you, Sir, if you don't get down soon from your
dangerous perch," said Fil's father.

The Padre explained: "We sometimes call these animals carabao. We use
them for plowing, for drawing our sugar to market, for pressing our
hemp mill, for turning our water wheels and sugar rollers, for pulling
the huge logs of hardwood out of the thick forest. When the roads
are too muddy for wheeled carts, we make a mud sleigh with runners;
and the water buffalo with his thick hoofs pulls our loads of rice
bags through the ooze."

"And we eat him too, though his steaks are tougher than cow meat,"
laughed Fil.

"And we make taws and whips out of his thick hide to correct little
boys, if they have too much to say sometimes," remarked Fil's father,
who winked at me, showing that his words were more severe than were
his intentions or acts. Like the terrier, he just liked to frighten
people; his bark was worse than his bite, as the saying is.




CHAPTER XII

BATS; CATTLE; HORSES; CATS; MONKEYS


"Let us stop here," begged Fil.

The driver, who wore a mushroom-shaped bamboo hat, pulled the water
buffalo to a stop. All, except Filippa and Favra, got off at the
mouth of a cave.

"I won't go in or near it," exclaimed Filippa.

"Girls are afraid of real things, of imaginary noises, and even of
unreal shadows," jeered Fil.

"No wonder, if you refer to this damp cave," remarked Fil's mother.

Creeping up quietly to the entrance, Fil and Moro threw stones and
oranges and mangoes up to the echoing roof.

"Lie down quick," shouted Fil's father.

We had need to stoop, for there was a whirring in the roof of the
cave and over its mouth, like the sound of birds or aeroplanes.

"What are they, owls or eagles?" I exclaimed.

"Furry fruit-bats, as large as flying cats," laughed Fil, who was
proud of his secret cave and of his discovery.

"You don't really mean to say that those large flying things have fur,
and eat fruit?" I asked.

"Exactly," replied Fil's father. "These are the large Philippine
bats. The wings of some of them are three feet across. Ladies use
their fur to decorate gowns. The bats live on fruit, just as monkeys
do; only the bats eat at dusk, and sleep during the day. That is why
we caught them napping, by going to the cave in daylight."

"Wonderful country! Wonderful new kinds of life! I notice too that
your cattle have humps on their shoulders," I remarked.

"Yes," replied Fil's father, "our cattle, though smaller than yours,
have high humps on their shoulders. They are of the Indian and Chinese
breed; not of the English breed. But they are very good animals and
have beautiful soft eyes, which seem to cry and plead for pity. We
use them also to draw our carts."

"I notice that others of the Philippine animals are also of the
toy order; tiny but lovely specimens, like your spirited but small,
black horses," I remarked.

"Yes," said Fil's father, "our Malay horses, just like the Chinese
horses, are more like spirited little ponies. They have hard mouths,
but when they know you and are well treated, they obey well. Some day,
when you ride over the hills on one, you will see how sure-footed
they are on the trails; as safe as mountain goats. Your larger horses
would tumble over in those difficult places."

One of the disturbed bats had settled in a tree. He was clinging upside
down, with his wings folded over his eyes. Up the trunk of the tree,
the oddest kind of a cat was climbing after it.

"That cat should be a fisherman," I exclaimed in a joking manner.

"Yes," answered Fil, "some of our yellow cats have odd, hooked tails,
just like monkey tails."

"Maybe they once hung from tree branches by their tails, along with
the furry monkeys," suggested Moro, who often thought of the odd side
of things.

"What a gripping tale you are telling," added Fil, who indulged in
roguish puns.

"Well, our monkeys are as good for men to eat, as for cats," said Moro.

"Imagination has as much as taste to do with food; and, unless you call
my next stewed monkey dish, deer or lamb, I won't eat it," I remarked.

Fil and Moro laughed and winked; for they had planned this true but
strange story to make me feel uncomfortable for a minute.




CHAPTER XIII

FLYING ANTS AND LOCUSTS


We all climbed back into the buffalo-wagon, to go homeward. On the
way, we passed a house which had collapsed in the middle, as though
a great weight had broken its backbone.

"A blind, flying ant did that," said Fil.

"Now, Fil, you really think I'm from the backwoods; you wish me to
believe impossible tales," I replied.

"Not a bit of it," said Fil. "A flying white ant broke the thick
beams of that big building, just as though a mountain fell on it,
or as if an earthquake had rent it."

"Why, then, did they not stop the ants, the silly, lazy people?" I
exclaimed.

"Because they couldn't see or hear them," said Fil. "You see,
it happens in this way. Our deadly white ant flies in a cloud of
ants. When he reaches a house, he bores inside; then he is happy. He
feels his way. He does not need to see. He just follows his nose,
so to speak.

"His sense of smell, perhaps, draws him to the lumber of the house
on which he lives. He does not like air. So, when he reaches a beam,
he and all the other brother ants eat out the heart of it; but they
do not break the shell, which is painted. The people in the house do
not know anything about this, for the ants of course make no noise,
and the painted outside surface of the beam is unbroken.

"Suddenly there is a strain during a typhoon, or a jar is caused by
some person walking overhead; and down comes the whole house, like
a person whose bones suddenly give way and become powder. The ants
have escaped, because they have eaten the whole beam and have gone
elsewhere for food."

"Can't you catch and destroy such awful pests?" I asked.

"Oh, yes! It's great fun," replied Filippa. We place a pail of water in
a dark place, and light a candle which floats on a saucer. The ants fly
to the light. Their wings are burnt off; and, silly, half-blind things,
they all get drowned or wet, so that we can gather and destroy them."

"They can nip you, too," said Moro, who was slapping at something on
his hand.

"Some people in the Philippines eat insects--the locusts. They fry them
in coconut oil. Did you ever hear of such a wonder?" asked Filippa.

"Come to think of it, yes; for in the Bible it says that the food
of John the Baptist, the great prophet, was locusts and wild honey,
when he was in distress in the wilderness."

"What does _locust_ mean?" asked the wise Padre. Nobody seemed to know.

"It means leaping," said the Padre.

"That's how we catch them," said Fil. "Before their wings grow, they
jump. We dig deep ditches and chase them by beating drums, for they
dislike noise. They jump and fall into the ditch, which, however, is
too high for them to jump out of. Then we pour on oil and burn them."

"If we didn't, they'd eat up all our crops," remarked the Padre.

"I know a bird that catches them. I've seen it," said Fil, whose eyes
were very sharp, like a boy scout in the woods.

"What kind of a bird?" inquired Filippa, who loved bird pets.

"A kind of Chinese ground-lark. It has large eyes and a long bill,
and its feathers are spotted," replied Fil.




CHAPTER XIV

BOATS AND FISH


We were passing over the bridge that carried the road over an arm of
the sea,--the purple sea, which had a white foam-edge.

I noticed a boat moving against the tide. It had no engine, no sails,
no rowers at the oarlocks. Only one man was on deck, leaning on a
long pole. He walked slowly from the front to the back of the boat,
still leaning on the long pole.

"Here's another wonder of your marvelous Philippines--a boat moving
without exerting power," I exclaimed.

Fil looked at Moro and smiled. I saw that they both pitied my ignorance
in a strange land. Then Fil said kindly:

"Don't you see the man walking steadily along the running board,
from the front to the back of the boat? Well, he is pushing on a long
pole, and that power moves the boat against the tide. The pole reaches
down to the bottom, through the shallow water. If the boat is loaded,
and if the cargo is very heavy, two men push on each pole. The pole
is a thick bamboo stick."

"I also notice a curved deck or covering, laid over the boats," I said.

"Yes, that is a roof, or thatch, made out of nipa palm leaves tied
on to bamboo sticks," Fil explained.

"Please look!" said sweet little Filippa. "Out there on the purple
ocean is a more wonderful boat still."

I looked. Oddest of sights! A boat shaped like a long leaf was scudding
before the wind. The one sail seemed to pull the boat over from the
wind. No one was really in the boat. But sitting far out, on a bamboo
out-rigger, high into the wind-side, above the water, a sailor was
balancing the boat and holding the sail by a long rope. Only on one
side of the boat was there a bamboo pole fixed lengthways. It did not
seem to be a well-balanced boat, yet it sailed along at a great speed;
and risky as the sport seemed, the sailor sat perfectly safe on his
high and dangerous looking perch, above the water.

"What kind of boat is that?" I asked.

"An out-rigger boat. Some people call it a dug-out boat," replied
Filippa.

"I'll tell you more about it," added Fil. "The boat itself is half of
a solid log, hollowed out by fire and axe and knife. It is chipped
and scraped smooth on the outside, and the ends are pointed. If the
wind dies down, the sailor has to paddle the heavy boat home. Then
he sits over on the side opposite the out-rigger, so as to balance
it. But when he has hoisted sail, he sits on the out-rigger, as the
sail balances the boat on the sailing side, opposite the wind. The
boat easily rolls over, because it has no sharp keel going down into
the water. But it is swifter before the wind, just because it has no
keel to keep it back."

"Very clever are your Filipino sailors," I admitted. "Tell me if the
boats are used for other purposes than sport."

"Oh, yes," said quiet little Favra, Filippa's chum. "The sailors
fish in them and bring us home fish with names as wonderful as are
their colors."

"Tell me the names, please," I asked.

Favra slowly thought of three and replied: "The pompano, all silver,
gold, and purple, and as wide as it is long; the fighting barracuda,
so hard to bring in to the boat; and the leaping tuna, that jumps
out of the water and out of the boat perhaps."

Fil added: "Then there's the bonito, as big as a pig, though its name
jokingly means 'good little one'; the sail fish which lifts its fin
into the wind; and the garoupa."

"Wonderful names," I admitted.

"And all wonderfully good to eat," added Moro, who was often thinking
of dinners and feasts.




CHAPTER XV

SAW MILL; MUD SLEIGHS; WOODEN PLOWS


"At what are you going to earn your living when you grow up,
Fil?" asked the Padre, who was his teacher, when we all met again
under the whispering bamboos next morning.

Fil thought a minute, pursed his chest out like a pouter pigeon,
and replied to the great admiration of Filippa, who was a very
loyal sister:

"I shall be a Senator, or President."

"Come down from the clouds, Master Fil," replied his father;
"stop dreaming and say something practical. There can be only one
President and only a few score Senators. So if every one had your
aims, millions would starve. Yet millions are working happily, and
earning wages which buy them what they need, if their ideas are not
too selfish. They do not need to bow to wretched, cringing politics."

"At what do they work?" eagerly inquired Fil.

"Come and see," said Fil's father and the Padre together. We all
followed.

"Here's a lumber yard; let us go in," said Fil's father.

"That man on top of that huge, uplifted log will topple off, and that
man underneath will get his eyes filled with sawdust," I exclaimed.

"That's our way of sawing lumber," explained Fil's father. "We lift
up one end of the log. One man gets on top and the other man below;
and between them they pull up and down the heavy saw, until half of
the log all feathers out into many boards. Then they raise the other
end, and the men saw down to meet those first cuts, while board after
board falls down."

"Don't you have round saws of steel, driven by machinery?" I asked.

"Not always," said Fil's father. "The wages here are so low that
we can afford to hire men to do handwork. This gives many men work,
and keeps them from being idle and discontented."

"But here is one very round log which they are sawing across grain,
into round wheels; and they are boring one hole into the center,"
I exclaimed.

"They really are wheels for buffalo carts. Don't you remember your
ride the other day?" asked Fil.

I did remember the heavy, creaking wheel, made of one solid piece
of wood.

"They never need an iron rim," added Fil's father; "and so are not
as heavy as they look."

"Why, here's a low sleigh, being made out of bamboo poles, runners
and boards. Do you have winter here after all?" I asked.

"No, nothing but hottest summer always. But we have much rain, and
our roads are not all paved with rock," explained Fil's father. "If
we used those high wheels on the muddy roads, they would sink so far
down that the buffalo or bullock could not pull out the cart that
was loaded with rice or sugar."

"So you see, the sleigh slips more easily through the slippery mud,"
added Fil.

"But what if you fell off, a mile from a crossing?" I asked laughingly.

"Oh, he jokes too, and you don't check him," remarked Fil, who looked
at his father. Fil's father smiled.

"What is this tough, crooked elbow stick, fixed to a long pole?" I
inquired.

"A plow," answered Fil wisely:

"Don't joke. How can you have a plow wholly made of wood?" I asked.

"I'll tell you," said Fil. "You see our rice fields are flooded and
soft. We do not need a solid heavy steel plow, such as you need in
hard, dry land. The water buffalo, who loves to wade through the
flooded rice fields, easily pulls this bent stick, which plows up
the mud. Then we drain the field and plant the rice seedlings, and
flood the field again, because rice must grow in water."

"It is a peculiar but lovely Philippines that you live in ; so
different from our country, but perhaps even more charming," I added.




CHAPTER XVI

UMBRELLAS; CHAIRS; MILK-BOTTLE


"Please show us an umbrella shop," begged Filippa and Favra together;
for they had been whispering about what they would like to see.

"This way, then," said her father and the Padre.

We walked along several narrow streets, which had bamboo blinds hung
between the second stories, so as to keep out the strong sun.

When we came to a certain door space, which really had no hinged door,
Filippa's father moved aside the dangling ropes, made of glass and
bamboo beads, which hung across the entrance. This made a tinkling
noise, and attracted the workman to the front.

"We would like to see your umbrellas," explained Fil's father.

I thought the workman would show us silk or cloth ones, that would
roll up tight.

"Why, this one is very thick," I said.

"Lift it. It really is not heavy," explained Fil's father.

"How is it made?" I inquired.

"It is made out of split bamboos, which are spread out in a
circle. Oiled silk, or oiled hemp cloth, is pasted over the frame. It
all costs very little," explained Fil's father.

"But they are so thick, I could not put more than one in my umbrella
stand at home," I said.

"There you are joking again," laughed Fil, who added: "We Filipinos
hang our umbrella up on the veranda roof, where it is ornamental,
as well as useful when wanted."

"You see our umbrellas are made in pretty colors," explained Filippa,
who certainly showed that she would become a good housekeeper.

"Now, would you like to see a chair-shop, where they use no saw or
plane or nails?" asked Fil.

"It seems nonsense, because our chairs at home are sawn from oak logs;
and they are so filled with tacks and nails that they tear my clothes,"
I replied.

"Around this corner," said Fil, who was proud to lead the way.

Surely enough, Filipino workmen were tying lengths of bamboo poles
together, with tough rattan vine, for the frame of a chair. The back
was made of laced rattan and grasses. The seat was made of split
bamboo, round side up, and all was as smooth, restful, light, and
pliable as could be wished; and not a dangerous nail nor a saw used
to make it.

"You can throw these chairs about. They never break, because they
give way a little, like a spring. They are elastic, yet strong,"
explained Fil's father.

"And they cost only a few cents," added the Padre.

"We don't care when they burn up," remarked Fil, who received from
his father a stern look, and the order not to joke too much.

As we walked home, we passed a man who carried a bamboo over one
shoulder. At one end of the pole hung a thick piece of hollow
bamboo. At the other end of the pole hung an earthenware jug, tied
in a net of rattan. Behind him followed a herd of goats.

"Fresh milk and bottled milk for children," he cried.

"What is he, a curio seller?" I asked.

"No, a milkman," answered Fil. "The bamboo jug is a pint measure. The
earthen bottle holds the milk. And if you want fresh, warm milk for
the baby, he will milk it here from one of his nibbling goats, right
into the bamboo jug."

"Always fresh milk!" shouted the vendor, as with his fingers, he made
a snapping sound to call his herd of goats.

"Really, a walking dairy," I remarked.




CHAPTER XVII

HOME LIFE


We were all tired when we reached home. The Angelus bell was sounding
from the high white tower of the Iglesia. Every one stood still,
bowed, made the holy sign, and then said a quiet prayer.

After a late dinner, Fil and Filippa as usual kissed the hands of
their parents, bowed to them, and retired.

I thought how dutiful a custom this was, and I recalled how, in my
own country, too many rude, selfish children, full of conceit, have
little respect for their parents, and really attempt to order their
elders around. The Filipino boy seems to know his place, as a boy.

The grander Philippine houses, on the second floor, have a large hall
called the "caida" (ca e'da). Here every one meets to enjoy the feasts
or music. The kitchen and the bath-house are small separate buildings
in the yard, or "azotea" (a tho tai'a). Every one must bathe once a
day at least.

During the great heat of the day, after lunch, or "tiffin" as it is
called, everyone sleeps a restful hour or two. Therefore visiting
and dinners are carried on long into the night, when it is cooler.

To keep out the sun, instead of glass, opaque mussel shells are used
in the many little frames of the windows. This makes a pearly, soft
light, like moonshine in the house, even on the brightest, hottest day.

I noticed that women stood in the streams, and pounded clothes on
smooth, round rocks.

"That's our way of washing, out in nature's laundry," explained
Filippa's mother.

When Fil and Filippa were aroused each morning, I noticed that their
mother did not touch or shake them, and I ventured to ask why she
called so long and loud, even though she was standing over them. I
remarked that in our land, a father would soon shake his lazy boy
awake.

"You shock me," replied Fil's mother. "We in the Philippines believe
that it is most unlucky to disturb the sleeping spirit of a person
by a touch. When the spirit is ready to answer to the call, it is
ready to awake and come back into this world."

"Why, how superstitious!" I exclaimed, perhaps owing to my lack
of real manners; for good manners should allow for differences on
unimportant things.

"Not more superstitious than you are, when you refuse to pass under a
ladder, or to begin a voyage on a Friday," Fil's mother answered. Then
I realized that every person, every race, and every nation, and
every color of mankind have their faults as well as their virtues,
weak points as well as strong and good ones. There is something good
in even the worst of us; and, perhaps, something bad in the best of us!

"I can testify that you Filipinos surpass my people in one thing,"
I said.

"Thank you. What is it?" asked Fil's mother and father together.

"Respect for parents and poor relations," I answered. "Fil and Filippa
kiss your hand and bow, morning and night. You, though a father and
mother, are also as dutiful as children. You keep grandfather and
grandmother, and poor old relations around the home, where they can
always have a place to sleep, a kind hand near, and can get a bite to
eat anyway, and a tear of sympathy over their sick bed, at the last."

"By our religion, and by the warmth of our own hearts, we Filipinos
believe it to be a cruel sin to send our parents and relatives to
asylums. God gave us to them at the beginning of life, and God gives
them to us at the end of life," replied Fil's pious mother.

"What a very, very beautiful saying, and what a beautiful deed!" I
said.

Fil's grandmother was sitting in a corner of the room. I could see
a tear of joy stealing down her sweet old face.

We all now rose; saluted each other; and, as we retired for the night,
we each said "Adios" (a de os'), which means "good night" or "good-by,"
or really, "To God we commend you."




CHAPTER XVIII

DRESS


The next morning the washwoman was bringing in the clothes. Knowing
that I was a stranger, and would like to bring a true story home to
American boys and girls, Fil's mother asked me: "Would you like to
learn the names and kinds of our garments? You will notice that they
are very different from yours."

"Certainly I would. I live in a land where some people spend more
time over clothes than over learning, character, good deeds, or the
day's duty," I replied.

"This large flowing skirt of red, green, or white, is made of cotton,
or hemp; and sometimes a little silk may be mixed in. We like bright
colors, and a long train. No short, tight skirts in our styles,"
explained Filippa's mother.

"How sensible," I remarked.

"This loose waist or chemisette is sometimes white and sometimes
colored. It is made of jusi cloth, that is, cloth woven from banana
leaf fiber. You see it is softer, thinner, and cooler than your linen
or cotton."

"It is lovely," I acknowledged.

"Loose wide collars are in style with you now, but they have always
been in style here. We call it 'panuelo' (pa nu ai'lo). It is our
whitest, thinnest fiber, made from pineapple leaves, just like our
handkerchiefs that I told you about. You see we starch it. It hangs
down the back to a point, and it is very cool and dainty," explained
Filippa's mother.

"What wide sleeves!" I exclaimed.

"Yes, sinamei chemisettes, or waists, have very wide sleeves, but are
short to the elbow. We starch them out, so they will be cool and neat,"
replied Filippa's mother.

"I notice that Filippa's hair is worn plain," I remarked.

"Yes," replied her mother, "we brush the hair back plain; tie a knot or
leave it loose. We like jewelry, and we wear splendid lace mantillas,
or shawls, over the head."

"What odd slippers with no heels!" I exclaimed.

"Yes, we all like to have our feet ready to jump into mud or water,
for our roads are not yet good. These slippers are called 'chinelas'
(che nay'las). They have no heel and just a catch to put the toe
in. They have no laces. With them we slide along the ground. But we
cannot back up straight, or run last in them. If we wish to go back
we must turn around, so as to keep our chinelas on our toes. The
young people do not wear stockings in our warm climate, where one
lives close to Nature,--too close sometimes, when the snake bites."

"But taken all together, what a happy Eden this is for a boy or a
girl," I added.




CHAPTER XIX

THE "ADIOS" FEAST


Next day as we were walking down the road to the good-by feast,
I noticed a crowd gathered in a circle, and stooping over.

"What are they doing; digging gold?" I asked.

"No, they are making game-fowl fight," Moro replied. "They wager
money on which will be the winner and put the other to flight. The
boys and men get very much excited."

"This good-by feast in your honor, before you return home, is called
a 'fiesta' (fe ais'ta)," explained Filippa. "Father and mother and
Fil have spoken to the Padre, and the barrio-elders; and everything
is arranged."

"But what is a 'barrio'?" I inquired.

"It means a village, a ward," replied Filippa.

I could hear bands and orchestras gathering. Here and there were tall
bamboos bent over the paths, and from their arches hung banners and
colored paper lanterns.

Carromatos (car ro ma' tos), small carriages drawn by little black
ponies, were bringing people in. The men and boys were dressed in
white duck, as though they were going aboard yachts.

In front of the houses and the Iglesia (church) and convent were hung
flags, festoons, streamers, wreaths, and bunting.

Flowers and palm leaves were strewn along the path that the procession
would take.

Then we all started. The procession was led by the bands to the
Iglesia, where, from the high campanile tower, the church bells were
ringing. In the church the good Padre said a few words, and gave us
all his prayers and blessing.

While we were inside, evening had fallen. When we stepped out into the
square, we saw a fairy starry land. Some one had lighted not only the
lanterns and torches, but the larger southern stars of these tropical
islands were shining brightly overhead. Colored rockets were also
shot up into the night.

The barrio-saint--really, the small statue of the patron saint of
the village--was carried at the head of the procession.

Then to the music of the bands, we all marched home to the big upper
hall, and gathered around a wonderful table. Roast pig, chicken,
pheasant; mountains of rice and fruit; candied ginger and mango;
pickled chutney, which is sweet and sour at the same time and also
spiced; coconut and nipa wine; flowers as big as a hat and smelling
as sweet as a bottle of perfume! Sandalwood and spice-incense smoked
sweetly, and nearly hid the good Padre and Fil's father, who sat at
the head of the table.

The orchestra tinkled all kinds of drums, castanets, bells, fiddles;
many of them having strange shapes and shrill noises. Funny,
fat-cheeked boys were blowing the very life out of the flutes. All
were very happy!

"Not happy to see you leave, but trying to make you so happy that you
will not have time to entertain regrets to-night. We want to remember
your smiling face," said Fil's father.

Then the table was cleared and moved. The company all gathered around
the hall.

Suddenly a hush; then a clamorous call of the orchestra! Then another
hush--Filippa, dressed in silver spangle, and Fil, dressed in scarlet
and gold, suddenly rushed from opposite sides of the hall to do the
love-dance, in which the brave soldier woos and wins his sweetheart.

They came near each other. She seemed to be coy; to quarrel
sometimes; to beg; to promise. They whirled about; they executed
steps; they snapped castanets. The orchestra sang, whistled, snapped,
strummed. The music flowed in waltzes; it jerked in Castilian measures;
it whispered. It serenaded, while Fil carried a mandolin with a
ribbon. Filippa dropped her handkerchief: Fil gracefully picked it
up. He danced in pleading. He showed all the pretty steps he could
do. As a sign that the soldier had won his lady-love, Filippa at
last consented that he should return the handkerchief, crown her
proudly with it on her cloud of thick hair, and waltz away with her
triumphantly.

It was a pretty tableau. The orchestra broke out in loud and full
harmony, with now and then a wild Moro yell or shout, from the flutes
and drums.

How we applauded! Fil and Filippa had to bow their thanks many times,
from the side of the caida (hall).

Then there was another pause, after the Padre and Fil's father had
whispered.

Suddenly Moro ran out with a rush, to give a wild Mohammedan dance.

How strangely he was dressed! He wore tight red trousers, a red and
blue turban on his head, and a tight jeweled tunic, covered with pearl
buttons. His sash was green, dotted with purple spots. He had purple
parrot feathers at his waist and in his turban.

His feet were bare, as is the custom in his native wilds in the south
island. The round shield that he carried, glistened. He waved two
terrible kriss-knives, with jeweled handles. Over his shoulder he
carried a spear. How he drummed on that shield! He hurled his knives
into the air, and cleverly caught them before they fell. He seemed to
pursue a foe; to crouch like a boy scout; to listen; to follow the
track; to meet the foe; to battle for his life and country. At last
he seemed to conquer with a wild yell, just as he was hurled backward
and his shield was thrown aside. All this, while we held our breath
in excitement, he acted in his strange, barbaric dance, keeping time
with the wind-like, volcano-like music of his native Moro islands.

The fiesta and the dances were over at last. The dancers and the
guests departed.

Next morning, as we stood on the coconut wharf waiting for the boat
to come in, Fil perhaps noticed that I looked sad. I saw by his smile
that he was preparing one of his jokes to cheer me up.

"Father," said he, "may I take our friend back to America, so as to
see that he arrives all right?"

"Wait till you grow bigger," replied Fil's father.

"Then don't blame me if he gets lost," laughed little Fil, as he tried
to stand on his tiptoes, and lifted his hand high above his head,
so as to appear as tall as a man.

After all this courtesy, all this happy, laughing time, in these sunny
summer islands of the purple Philippine seas, it almost broke my heart,
as I left for home, to answer Fil, Filippa, their kind parents, Moro,
the good Padre, and little Favra who were calling from the wharf:
"Adios, amigo" (a de os' a me'go)--"To God we commend you, our friend."


                            THE END





            Printed in the United States of America.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Fil and Filippa, by John Stuart Thomson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIL AND FILIPPA ***

***** This file should be named 26414.txt or 26414.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/4/1/26414/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
