The Project Gutenberg EBook of Speeches of His Majesty Kamehameha IV. To
the Hawaiian Legislature, by Kamehameha IV

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Speeches of His Majesty Kamehameha IV. To the Hawaiian Legislature

Author: Kamehameha IV

Release Date: August 31, 2008 [EBook #26501]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPEECHES OF KAMEHAMEHA IV ***




Produced by Carla Foust and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)









Transcriber's note


Minor punctuation errors have been corrected without notice. Several
words were spelled in two different ways and not corrected; they
are listed at the end of this book. A few obvious typographical errors
have been corrected, and they are also listed at the end.




SPEECHES

OF HIS

MAJESTY KAMEHAMEHA IV.

TO THE

HAWAIIAN LEGISLATURE,

WITH HIS MAJESTY'S

REPLIES TO THE REPRESENTATIVES OF FOREIGN NATIONS AND TO
PUBLIC BODIES; ALSO WITH SUNDRY PROCLAMATIONS AND
OTHER DOCUMENTS RELATING TO HIS ADVENT TO
THE THRONE, ETC., WITH THE LAST PROCLAMATION
AND AN OBITUARY OF HIS
LATE MAJESTY

KING KAMEHAMEHA III.

PRINTED BY ORDER OF THE MINISTER OF FOREIGN
AFFAIRS.

HONOLULU:
PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRESS.
1861.




SPEECHES
OF HIS
MAJESTY KAMEHAMEHA IV.,
AND OTHER DOCUMENTS.




                                              DECEMBER 8, 1854.

_The last Public Proclamation made by His late Majesty King Kamehameha
III._


                             PROCLAMATION.

     Whereas, It has come to my knowledge from the highest official
     sources, that my Government has been recently threatened with
     overthrow by lawless violence; and whereas the representatives
     at my Court, of the United States, Great Britain and France,
     being cognizant of these threats, have offered me the prompt
     assistance of the Naval forces of their respective countries,
     I hereby publicly proclaim my acceptance of the aid thus
     proffered in support of my Sovereignty. My independence is
     more firmly established than ever before.

                                              KAMEHAMEHA.

        KEONI ANA.
        PALACE, 8th December, 1854.
           By the King and Kuhina Nui.

                                              R. C. WYLLIE.




                                              DECEMBER 15TH, 1854.

_Public Proclamation of the Succession To the Throne of His Majesty
Kamehameha IV._


                             PROCLAMATION.

     Whereas, It has pleased Almighty God to remove from this world
     our beloved Sovereign, His late Majesty, Kamehameha III.; and
     whereas, by the will of His late Majesty, and by the
     appointment and Proclamation of His Majesty and of the House
     of Nobles, His Royal Highness, Prince Liholiho, was declared
     to be His Majesty's Successor. Therefore, Public Proclamation
     is hereby made, that Prince Alexander Liholiho is KING of the
     Hawaiian Islands, under the style of KAMEHAMEHA IV. God
     preserve the King.

                                         KEONI ANA,
                                              Kuhina Nui.

        DECEMBER 15TH, 1854.




                                              DECEMBER 16TH, 1854.

_His Majesty's Address to His Privy Council of State in reply to their
Condolences over the Death of His late Majesty Kamehameha III._


     CHIEFS:--I have become by the Will of God, your Father, as I
     have been your Child. You must help me, for I stand in need of
     help.

     To you Ministers, and other high officers of State of Our late
     King, I return my sincere thanks for the expressions of
     condolence with which you have this morning comforted me. I
     request of you to continue your labors, in the several
     positions you have hitherto held, until when my grief shall
     have allowed me time for reflection, I make such new
     arrangements as shall seem proper.

     I thank the Members of this Council, in general for their
     condolence, who will, also, I hope, assist me with their
     advice, as though they had been appointed by myself.




                                              JANUARY 11, 1855.

_His Majesty's Address on the occasion of taking the Oath prescribed by
the Constitution. Extr. from =Polynesian=, Jan. 13, 1855._


     I solemnly swear, in the presence of Almighty God, to maintain
     the Constitution of the Kingdom whole and inviolate, and to
     govern in conformity with that and the laws.

Immediately afterwards, His Highness the Kuhina Nui repeated the words
"God preserve the King," which were re-echoed everywhere throughout the
Church with loud cheers; His Majesty's Royal Standard and the National
Ensign were hoisted and a royal salute fired from the fort.

Afterwards it pleased the King to make a solemn and eloquent address, in
native, to His subjects, which was received by them with great
enthusiasm, a translation of which is as follows:

     _Give ear Hawaii o Keawe! Maui o Kama! Oahu o Kuihewa! Kauai o
     Mano!_

     In the providence of God, and by the will of his late Majesty
     Kamehameha III., this day read in your hearing, I have been
     called to the high and responsible position of the Chief Ruler
     of this nation. I am deeply sensible of the importance and
     sacredness of the great trust committed to my hands, and in
     the discharge of this trust, I shall abide by the Constitution
     and laws which I have just sworn to maintain and support. It
     is not my wish to entertain you on the present occasion with
     pleasant promises for the future; but I trust that the close
     of my career will show that I have not been raised to the head
     of this nation to oppress and curse it, but on the contrary to
     cheer and bless it, and that when I come to my end, I may,
     like the beloved Chief whose funeral we yesterday celebrated,
     pass from earth amid the bitter lamentation of my people.

     The good, the generous, the kind hearted Kamehameha is now no
     more. Our great Chief has fallen! But though dead he still
     lives. He lives in the hearts of his people! He lives in the
     liberal, the just, and the beneficent measures which it was
     always his pleasure to adopt. His monuments rise to greet us
     on every side. They may be seen in the church, in the school
     house, and the hall of justice; in the security of our persons
     and property; in the peace, the law, the order and general
     prosperity that prevail throughout the islands. He was the
     friend of the Makaainana, the father of his people, and so
     long as a Hawaiian lives his memory will be cherished!

     By the death of Kamehameha III., the chain that carried us
     back to the ancient days of Kamehameha I. has been broken. He
     was the last child of that great Chieftain, but how unlike the
     father from whom he sprung. Kamehameha I. was born for the age
     in which he lived, the age of war and of conquest. Nobly did
     he fulfill the destiny for which he was created, that of
     reducing the islands from a state of anarchy and constant
     warfare to one of peace and unity under the rule of one king.
     With the accession of Kamehameha II. to the throne the tabus
     were broken, the wild orgies of heathenism abolished, the
     idols thrown drown, and in their place was set up the worship
     of the only living and true God. His was the era of the
     introduction of Christianity and all its peaceful influences.
     He was born to commence the great moral revolution which began
     with his reign, and he performed his cycle. The age of
     Kamehameha III. was that of progress and of liberty--of
     schools and of civilization. He gave us a Constitution and
     fixed laws; he secured the people in the title to their lands,
     and removed the last chain of oppression. He gave them a voice
     in his councils and in the making of the laws by which they
     are governed. He was a great national benefactor, and has left
     the impress of his mild and amiable disposition on the age for
     which he was born.

     To-day we begin a new era. Let it be one of increased
     civilization--one of decided progress, industry, temperance,
     morality, and all those virtues which mark a nation's advance.
     This is beyond doubt a critical period in the history of our
     country, but I see no reason to despair. We have seen the tomb
     close over our Sovereign, but it does not bury our hopes. If
     we are united as _one individual_ in seeking the peace, the
     prosperity and independence of our country, we shall not be
     overthrown. The importance of this unity is what I most wish
     to impress upon your minds. Let us be one and we shall not
     fall!

     On _my_ part I shall endeavor to give you a mild, and liberal
     government, but at the same time one sufficiently vigorous to
     maintain the laws, secure you in all your rights of persons
     and property, and not too feeble to withstand the assaults of
     faction. On _your_ part I shall expect you to contribute your
     best endeavors to aid me in maintaining the Constitution,
     supporting the laws, and upholding our Independence.

It further pleased His Majesty, in accordance with a suggestion made to
him, to make the following _impromptu_ remarks, in English, to
foreigners owing allegiance to him, and others residing in his
dominions:

     A few remarks addressed on this occasion, to you, the foreign
     portion of the assembly present, may not be inappropriate.

     You have all been witnesses this day to the solemn oath I have
     taken in the presence of Almighty God and this assembly, to
     preserve inviolate the Constitution. This is no idle ceremony.
     The Constitution which I have sworn to maintain has its
     foundation laid in the deep and immutable principles of
     Liberty, Justice and Equality, and by these, and none other, I
     hope to be guided in the administration of my Government. As
     the ruler of this people, I shall endeavor, with the blessing
     of God, to seek the welfare of my subjects, and at the same
     time to consult their wishes. In these endeavors I shall
     expect the hearty co-operation of all classes--foreigners as
     well as natives.

     His Majesty Kamehameha III., now no more, was preeminently the
     friend of the foreigner; and I am happy in knowing he enjoyed
     your confidence and affection. He opened his heart and hand
     with a royal liberality, and gave till he had little to bestow
     and you but little to ask. In this respect I cannot hope to
     equal him, but though I may fall far behind I shall follow in
     his footsteps.

     To be kind and generous to the foreigner, to trust and confide
     in him, is no new thing in the history of our race. It is an
     inheritance transmitted to us by our forefathers. The founder
     of our dynasty was ever glad to receive assistance and advice
     from foreigners. His successor, not deviating from the policy
     of his father, listened not only to the voice of a missionary,
     and turned with his people to the light of Christianity, but
     against the wishes of the nation left his native land to seek
     for advice and permanent protection at a foreign Court.
     Although he never returned alive, his visit shows plainly what
     were his feelings towards the people of foreign countries. I
     cannot fail to heed the example of my ancestors. I therefore
     say to the foreigner that he is welcome. He is welcome to our
     shores--welcome so long as he comes with the laudable motive
     of promoting his own interests and at the same time respecting
     those of his neighbor. But if he comes here with no more
     exalted motive than that of building up his own interests at
     the expense of the native--to seek our confidence only to
     betray it--with no higher ambition than that of overthrowing
     our Government, and introducing anarchy, confusion and
     bloodshed--then is he most unwelcome!

     The duties we owe to each other are reciprocal. For my part I
     shall use my best endeavors, in humble reliance on the Great
     Ruler of all, to give you a just, liberal and satisfactory
     Government. At the same time I shall expect you in return to
     assist me in sustaining the Peace, the Law, the Order and the
     Independence of my Kingdom.

The preceding is the address, as it was taken down at the time, by a
practised stenographer.

His Majesty afterwards, from the portico of the church, addressed, in
native, a crowd of several thousand, who had not been able to find room
in the church, and who had congregated in front thereof, outside the
military. The crowd listened in breathless silence, and when the King
concluded, cheered His Majesty most rapturously.

The whole solemn proceedings were conducted with admirable order, and
His Majesty throughout appeared calm, collected and dignified.




                                              JANUARY 6TH, 1855.

_Extract from the =Polynesian= of January 6, 1855._


                              OBITUARY.

                       [UNDER SPECIAL AUTHORITY.]

His late Majesty, Kauikeouli Kaleiopapa Kuakamanolani, Mahinalani,
Kalaninuiwaiakua, Keaweawealaokalani, whose royal style was Kamehameha
III., was born on the 17th March, 1813, in Keauhou, District of Kona,
Hawaii. His father was the renowned king and conqueror, Kamehameha I.
His mother was Keopuolani, daughter of Kiwaloa, son of Kalaiopuu, of
Kau, Hawaii. On the day before her death, while conversing with the
celebrated chief Kalaimoku, respecting her children, she said, "I wish
that my two children Kauikeouli, and Nahienaena (her daughter), should
know God and serve him, and be instructed in Christianity. I wish you to
take care of these my two children,--see that they walk in the right
way, counsel them, let them not associate with bad companions." But
after her death, the chief who had the immediate charge of the young
Prince's person was Kaikeoewa. When he retired to Lanai, Kaahumanu
placed the Prince under the immediate charge of Boki. The earliest
education which the infant Prince received, was at Kailua, from the Rev.
A. Thurston, and Thomas Hopu, a native who had been educated in the
United States. In Honolulu the Prince became the pupil of the Rev. Hiram
Bingham.

The young Prince had the misfortune to lose his father Kamehameha, on
the 8th of May, 1819, and his mother Keopuolani, on the 16th of
September, 1823. Towards the end of that year King Kamehameha II.
(Liholiho), embarked for England, where he died in 1824. The royal
remains were conveyed back to the islands in the British frigate
"Blonde," commanded by Lord Byron, in 1825. Soon afterwards, say in May,
1825, the reign of Kamehameha III. commenced, but under the political
guidance of a supreme ruler, or "Kuhina Nui," till March, 1833, when he
declared to the chiefs his wish to take into his own hands the lands for
which his father had toiled, the powers of life and death, and the
undivided sovereignty,--and confirmed Kinau (Kaahumanu II.) as his
"Kuhina Nui." He then took into his own hands the reins of sovereign
power, in the twentieth year of his age. How he has exercised that
power, during the twenty-one years that intervened between its
assumption and the 15th December last, when Death released him of all
royal and other earthly cares, it will be the duty of his future
biographer to show. His memory is, and must ever be, dear to his
subjects, for the free constitutions which he voluntarily granted to
them in 1840 and in 1852; for his support of religion and patronage of
education; for his conferring upon them, and upon foreigners, the right
to hold lands in fee simple, and for his willing abandonment of all the
arbitrary powers and right of universal seignorial land-lordship, which
he had inherited. There is scarcely in history, ancient or modern, any
king to whom so many public reforms and benefits can be ascribed, as the
achievements of only twenty-one years of his reign. Yet what king has
had to contend with so many difficulties, arising from ignorance,
prejudice, scanty revenue, inexperience and ineptitude, as his late
Majesty King Kamehameha III.? It was only in 1844 that His Majesty had
the assistance of a responsible legal counsellor, and of a Secretary of
State; only in 1845 that a proper separation of the departments of
government was attempted, and a cabinet formed. The political principles
then established by His Majesty were the following, viz:

     "That monarchy in the Sandwich Islands is indispensable to the
     preservation of the King, the chiefs and the natives. That it
     is the duty of the Ministers, in all their measures, to have a
     single eye to the preservation of the King, the chiefs and the
     natives.

     "That the existence of the King, chiefs and the natives, can
     only be preserved by having a government efficient for the
     administration of enlightened justice, both to natives and the
     subjects of foreign powers residing in the islands, and that
     chiefly through missionary efforts the natives have made such
     progress in education and knowledge, as to justify the belief
     that by further training, they may be rendered capable of
     conducting efficiently the affairs of government; but that
     they are not at present so far advanced.

     "That the best means of bringing them to that desired state,
     are the careful study of proper books, and the practical
     knowledge of business, to be acquired by ascending through the
     different gradations of office, under foreign ministers.

     "That such foreign ministers hold their commissions only by
     the grace of the King, and agree to surrender them at the will
     of His Majesty in favor of native subjects, whenever they
     become properly qualified.

     "That the King being recognized as Sovereign by Great Britain,
     France, the United States and Belgium, has to maintain his
     position and rank as such, and that all his ministers and
     officers are to assist him in doing so, by deporting
     themselves towards him with that respect and consideration to
     which all sovereigns are entitled; and to discharge their
     duties so as to do honor to his appointment and credit to
     themselves.

     "That it is the duty of the ministry to discourage all
     republican tendencies and specious attempts to degrade the
     King to the rank of a mere superior chief, as calculated to
     undermine his influence and authority, and place the islands
     in subjection to white men.

     "That the subjection of the islands to white men, would lead
     to the extinction of the native race.

     "That the ministers ought to promote the numerical increase of
     the natives, and their happiness, and wealth, by encouraging
     religion, education, the arts and sciences.

     "That the co-operation of Christian missionaries should be
     admitted towards these objects, but that they shall not
     interfere in the purely political concerns of the King's
     Government.

     "That equal rights and privileges should be allowed to all
     foreign nations.

     "That the revenue necessary to support the King's Government,
     religion, schools, and to reward public services, should be
     raised without such oppressive taxes as would oppress the
     natives, and shackle their industry.

     "That the faith of all treaties, conventions, contracts,
     engagements, and even promises, should be religiously
     observed.

     "That a constitution and code of laws be provided, adapted to
     the genius of the nation, to the climate and soil, and to the
     wealth, the manners, and the customs, and the numbers of the
     people."

These principles, so far as they could be applied to the good of his
people, were faithfully adhered to by the late King, as will be seen by
his recommendations to the Legislature, embodied in his speeches for the
last nine years, which have been published together. The annual reports
of his Ministers, and of his Chancellor and Chief Justice, best show
whether those principles have been _mere profession_, or have had an
_operative effect_, in promoting that progress which, for the last
_decade_ of his late Majesty's reign, has unquestionably surpassed that
of any other nation during the same period of time. All the reforms
effected have been achieved without the creation of a national debt, and
without one violent convulsion. The inference is irresistible, that
monarchs may spring from the Hawaiian race, capable of well performing
all the duties of constitutional sovereignty, and of fulfilling all the
requirements of the government of an enlightened, independent nation,
both in its internal and foreign relations.

Revolutionary violence, therefore, has no excuse except in the selfish
rapacity which prompts it. It cannot plead the example of any country
bordering on the Pacific, where life and property are more secure than
they have been here, under the reign of the late King; where foreigners
enjoy greater privileges, and where, like this Kingdom, foreign commerce
(excepting spirituous liquors) pays a contribution to the State of _only
5 per cent. ad valorem_.

In private life, the late King was mild, kind, affable, generous and
forgiving. He was never more happy than when free from the cares and
trappings of state. He could enjoy himself sociably with his friends,
who were much attached to him. Having associated much, while a boy, with
foreigners, he continued to the last to be fond of their company.
Without his personal influence, the law to allow them to hold lands in
fee simple could never have been enacted; neither could conflicting
claims to land have been settled and registered by that most useful
institution, the Board of Land Commissioners. It is hardly possible to
conceive any King more generally beloved than was his late Majesty; more
universally obeyed, or more completely sovereign in the essential
respect of independent sovereignty, that of governing his subjects free
from any influence or control coming from beyond the limits of his own
jurisdiction.

The sister of the late King, the Princess Nahienaena, died on the 30th
December, 1836.

On the 4th of February, 1837, the late King was married to Kalama,
daughter of Naihekukui, who has survived his Majesty, and is now the
Queen Dowager. The King had by her two children, Keaweaweula and
Keaweaweula 2d, who died in their infancy.

Being childless, the late King adopted as his son and heir ALEXANDER
LIHOLIHO, who was born on the 9th of February, 1834, and who now happily
reigns as KING KAMEHAMEHA IV.




                                              JANUARY 16, 1855.

_Replies made by His Majesty to the Congratulations of the
Representatives and Consuls of Foreign Nations and the Commanders of
Foreign Ships of War in port._


It pleased His Majesty to make the following replies:

To the Diplomatic Corps:

     GENTLEMEN:--You cannot desire your remarks to be more
     gratifying than I feel them to be. In reply, I thank you, and
     hope that the amicable feelings which have hitherto existed
     between the several countries you represent and my own, may
     never be impaired. For my part I shall lose no opportunity to
     improve and strengthen them. Gentlemen, I thank you.

To the Consular Corps:

     GENTLEMEN:--Your remarks are also very gratifying to me. The
     geographical position of my islands is indeed such as to point
     out plainly enough our policy--to make our ports what
     Providence destined them to be; places of safety, refuge and
     refreshment for the ships and merchants of all countries.
     Nothing more bespeaks the prosperity of a people than the
     extent of its intercourse with foreign countries. My utmost
     exertions shall be given to foster that intercourse between
     the countries, whose commercial interests here are placed in
     your hands, and my islands. This I shall do the more heartily
     from a pleasant remembrance of the harmony of our relations
     heretofore.

To the officers of men-of-war:

     GENTLEMEN:--The feelings expressed by you on this occasion
     afford me sincere pleasure. The ports of my islands will
     always be open to receive the vessels and ships of war of the
     three nations which you represent--the three greatest maritime
     powers of the earth--the three greatest supporters of the
     independence of my kingdom.




                                              JANUARY 16TH, 1855.

_Address made by His Majesty to His Ministers and High Officers of State
on receiving their Portfolios._


     GENTLEMEN:--On calling you to the high posts you respectively
     fill, I propose to make a few remarks, with the request that
     you will bear them constantly in mind. First, let me impress
     upon you the importance of unity of purpose and action, for I
     consider it impossible for the business of government to be
     effectively carried out, unless there exist a great unanimity
     of feeling among its officers. I have chosen you, because, I
     thought that being actuated by one common policy, your
     deliberations would be free from suspicious reserve, and your
     actions all tend to one end. In a Cabinet divided into
     factions, differing on fundamental points of policy, I could
     place no confidence; and should I find mine thus divided, I
     should feel it my duty to reorganize it. I am determined that
     my Government, if any power vested in me can attain that
     object, shall be respected for its honesty and efficiency.
     Unsupported by these two pillars, no kingdom is safe. I desire
     every part of the machinery of government to move in unison;
     to subserve the great purposes for which it was intended; and
     to be conducted with the strictest economy. Though young, with
     the help of God, I shall endeavor to be firm and faithful in
     the execution of the high trust devolved upon me, and never
     let my feelings, as a man, overcome my duties as a King. From
     all my counsellors I desire frank and faithful advice, and
     those who advise me honestly, have nothing to fear; while
     those who may abuse my confidence and advise me more from
     personal interests than regard for the public good, have
     nothing to hope.

     One word in regard to the nominations for office which
     according to law it becomes your duty to make, and I have
     done. Let your subordinates be recommended by at least these
     qualifications--honesty, temperance, industry and adaptation
     to the places they are to fill; and let them be men in whom
     you see good grounds for placing confidence.

     May success crown your efforts and after years approve my
     judgment in calling you to office.




                                              APRIL 7, 1855.

_His Majesty's Speech in English and Hawaiian at the Opening of the
Legislature, April 7, 1855._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--It has pleased the Almighty to
     gather to his forefathers my beloved Predecessor. This
     bereavement has been to me the source of the deepest sorrow;
     but my grief has been assuaged by the sympathy of this whole
     nation, in whom I see innumerable and ever-gathering proofs of
     the love and gratitude they bore their departed Chief.

     You meet this day in conformity with the Constitution he gave
     you. Had his suggestions, on the many occasions he addressed
     you from the place I now occupy, been matured by your
     deliberations, and carried into effect, there would, perhaps,
     be little for me to recommend, or for you to perform. The
     measures he initiated reflect lustre upon his name, and if by
     any endeavor of mine those measures shall be perfected, I
     shall consider it indeed an honor.

     In the exercise of my prerogative, I have availed myself of an
     Act passed during your last session, and since approved by me,
     by virtue of which I have separated the offices of Kuhina Nui
     and Minister of the Interior. To the former post I have called
     her Royal Highness, Princess Victoria Kamamalu. The Ministry
     of the Interior remains in the same hands as heretofore, as do
     the other portfolios of my Government; for, young and newly
     come to this responsible position, I have gladly availed
     myself of the wisdom and experience of the counsellors of our
     deceased King.

     I have instructed the high officers of my government to lay
     before you reports of their several departments.

     For a history of the Judiciary Department during the last
     year, and for certain changes proposed in our laws, I would
     refer you to the report of my Chancellor. His recommendations,
     especially those suggesting remedies for the great evils which
     are so speedily destroying our race, meet my most hearty
     approval, and are worthy of your serious consideration.

     I trust you will be able to devise such wise and salutary
     measures as shall effectually check licentiousness and
     intemperance.

     The doors of Justice are open to all, and so far as I am
     informed, its administration in the higher courts has been
     prompt, efficient and satisfactory. Of the inferior
     magistrates, there has been some complaint, no doubt in many
     instances with reason; but the character of district justices
     has greatly improved within the past few years, and it is to
     be hoped it will continue to improve. Weak as we are, and
     imperfect as our Government may be, it will not be doubted, I
     think, that there is no country in which there is more entire
     security for life, liberty, person and property.

     His Royal Highness, Prince Kamehameha, on whom has devolved
     the chief military command, will exhibit to you in his report,
     which is embodied in that of the Secretary at War, the plans
     he has in contemplation to render efficient the important
     service intrusted to his care. I have to request that you will
     give this subject the grave attention it deserves. His late
     Majesty urged the matter upon you frequently, but the
     appropriations have hitherto been insufficient for any
     permanent or efficient organization of that important
     department. I indulge a strong hope that you will remedy this
     deficiency, and place the Department of War upon a firm and
     better footing.

     Deeply imbued with a sense of the responsibility that rests
     upon my Government, not only to foster, but to lead the way in
     all that tends to the general good, I would invite your
     earnest attention to the recommendations that will be laid
     before you by my Minister of the Interior, and particularly to
     that portion of his report relating to the proposed
     improvements in the harbor of Honolulu. The facilities that
     would be afforded in the loading and unloading of vessels,
     native as well as foreign; the extra inducements that these
     new accommodations would hold out to those parties who
     contemplate making this port a place where ocean steamers may
     seek refreshments, and take in coal and water; the general
     impetus that would be given to trade by providing, at the
     water's edge, a site for the erection of warehouses; and the
     hundred other conveniences proper to a maritime city;--all
     these considerations prove to my mind the propriety of
     proceeding energetically with a work so national in its
     character that no part of the islands can fail to share in
     many of its advantages. To your wisdom it belongs to consider
     in what way the funds necessary to effect this great
     improvement may be best procured.

     It is gratifying to me, on commencing my reign, to be able to
     inform you, that my relations with all the great Powers,
     between whom and myself exist treaties of amity, are of the
     most satisfactory nature. I have received from all of them,
     assurances that leave no room to doubt that my rights and
     sovereignty will be respected. My policy, as regards all
     foreign nations, being that of peace, impartiality and
     neutrality, in the spirit of the Proclamation by the late
     King, of the 16th May last, and of the Resolutions of the
     Privy Council of the 15th June and 17th July, I have given to
     the President of the United States, at his request, my solemn
     adhesion to the rule, and to the principles establishing the
     rights of neutrals during war, contained in the Convention
     between his Majesty the Emperor of all the Russias, and the
     United States, concluded in Washington on the 22d July last.

     I have exchanged my ratification for that, by my great and
     good friend, His Majesty Oscar, King of Sweden and Norway, of
     the treaty concluded at my Court on the 1st day of July, 1852.

     I have ordered my Minister of Foreign Relations to inform you
     of all treaties with foreign nations negotiated under the late
     reign, of the progressive steps by which the sovereignty and
     independence of this Kingdom have become so generally
     acknowledged, and of the transactions generally of the
     Department under his charge.

     I have committed an important mission to the Honorable William
     L. Lee, Chancellor of the Kingdom and Chief Justice of the
     Supreme Court, and have accredited him as my Envoy
     Extraordinary and Minister Plenipotentiary, from which mission
     I anticipate important results for the benefit of you all,
     which will be made known to you hereafter. In the meanwhile, I
     recommend you to vote such a sum as, in your wisdom, you may
     deem adequate for the expenses of that mission.

     My Minister of Finance will submit, for your considerations,
     certain important measures relating to the National finances;
     and you cannot fail to be impressed with the necessity of
     devising some means of enlarging them. Without more extended
     means we must remain in the position of having the will,
     without the power, to stimulate agriculture and commerce, and
     to provide generally for the physical, mental and moral
     improvement of the nation. As a preparatory step towards
     increasing the sources of revenue, we must increase the
     revenue to be drawn from such sources as already exist. But,
     restricted as we are, by treaty, from exercising a right
     common to all free communities, we are unable to impose
     discriminating duties on foreign imports, which, whilst
     supplying the Treasury with additional means, would enhance
     the price of articles of luxury only. To regain the right of
     which we have, for the present, divested ourselves, it may be
     necessary that you reconsider the act by which the duty on
     spirituous liquors is now regulated. The Minister of Finance
     laid this subject before you last year in a clear and able
     manner, and his views have been confirmed by the experience of
     another year. Whether it would be wise to assist the revenue
     by a tax on property, is for you to determine.

     To foster education and widen every channel that leads to
     knowledge, is one of our most imperative duties. It will be
     for you to determine what obstacles, if any, exist, to the
     general enlightenment of my people. On this subject there will
     be submitted for your consideration, certain proposed changes
     in the Department of Public Instruction. It is of the highest
     importance, in my opinion, that education in the English
     language should become more general, for it is my firm
     conviction that unless my subjects become educated in this
     tongue, their hope of intellectual progress, and of meeting
     the foreigners on terms of equality, is a vain one.

     It is a melancholy fact that agriculture, as now practiced, is
     not a business of so prosperous and lucrative a nature as to
     induce men of means to engage in it; and capital is absolutely
     necessary to the successful production of our great staples,
     sugar, coffee and tobacco. I beg you, therefore, to consider
     whether there exist any restrictions, the removal of which
     would give new life to this important source of national
     prosperity, and tend to create a juster balance between our
     imports and exports. I need hardly mention the obligation that
     weighs upon you, to open wide our ports to commerce. Without
     commerce our agricultural produce might moulder in our
     warehouses; roads, and interisland communication almost cease
     to exist; the making of wharves become a work of
     supererogation, and the opening and closing of stores an idle
     ceremony. As the legislators of a young commercial nation, we
     should be liberal in our measures, and far-sighted in our
     views.

     A subject of deeper importance, in my opinion, than any I have
     hitherto mentioned, is that of the decrease of our population.
     It is a subject, in comparison with which all others sink into
     insignificance; for, our first and great duty is that of
     self-preservation. Our acts are in vain unless we can stay the
     wasting hand that is destroying our people. I feel a heavy,
     and special responsibility resting upon me in this matter; but
     it is one in which you all must share; nor shall we be
     acquitted by man, or our Maker, of a neglect of duty, if we
     fail to act speedily and effectually in the cause of those who
     are every day dying before our eyes.

     I think this decrease in our numbers may be stayed; and happy
     should I be if, during the first year of my reign, such laws
     should be passed as to effect this result. I would commend to
     your special consideration the subject of establishing public
     Hospitals; and it might, at first, perhaps, be wise to confine
     these hospitals to diseases of one class; and that the most
     fatal with which our population is afflicted.

     Intimately connected with this subject is that of preventing
     the introduction of fatal diseases and epidemics from abroad.
     Visited as we are by vessels from all parts of the world, this
     is no easy matter; but I trust your wisdom will devise some
     simple and practical remedy.

     It affords me unfeigned pleasure to be able to state that,
     according to the returns from most of the districts, the
     births during the past year have exceeded the deaths.

     It is to be regretted that the Chinese coolie emigrants, to
     whom has been given a trial of sufficient length for testing
     their fitness to supply our want of labor and population, have
     not realized the hopes of those who incurred the expense of
     their introduction. They are not so kind and tractable as it
     was anticipated they would be; and they seem to have no
     affinities, attractions or tendencies to blend with this, or
     any other race. In view of this failure it becomes a question
     of some moment whether a class of persons more nearly
     assimilated with the Hawaiian race, could not be induced to
     settle on our shores. It does not seem improbable that a
     portion of the inhabitants of other Polynesian groups might be
     disposed to come here, were suitable efforts made to lead them
     to such a step. In a few days they would speak our language
     with ease; they would be acclimated almost before they left
     the ships that conveyed them hither; and they might bring with
     them their wives, whose fecundity is said to be much greater
     than that of Hawaiian females. Such immigrants, besides
     supplying the present demand for labor, would pave the way for
     a future population of native born Hawaiians, between whom,
     and those of aboriginal parents, no distinguishable difference
     would exist.

     May the issue of your deliberations be crowned with those
     successful results which the will of the Almighty only can
     bestow.




                                              JUNE 16, 1855.

_His Majesty's Speech and Proclamation on the occasion of Dissolving the
Legislature._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--The Legislative Session of 1855
     is now about to close.

     For some of your acts I thank you in common with the meanest
     of my subjects, for they embrace the interests of all.

     Newly admitted elements of action have operated upon you, and
     given to certain of your measures a vitality that authorizes
     me to hope much for the future.

     For the relief you have given to the estate of my Predecessor,
     for the feeling of respect and love evinced by you in assuming
     with alacrity, the expenses of his obsequies; and for the
     loyalty you have shown towards me, and my family, I thank you.

     Mixed with many circumstances that will always make the
     session of 1855 pleasant to reflect upon, there is one that
     must overshadow it forever in the minds of us all. The death
     of His Excellency, A. Paki, has stamped this year, and,
     indeed, removed a pillar of the State. From your own feelings
     on the loss of that High Chief and staunch Hawaiian, you may
     judge of mine. May the Almighty have us in his keeping, and
     bless, and perpetuate the Hawaiian Nation.

     Nobles and Representatives, I regret that you have not been
     able to agree upon the details of the Appropriation Bill.

     Therefore, in the exercise of my constitutional prerogative in
     such a case, I feel it my duty to dissolve you, and you are
     hereby dissolved.


                          PROCLAMATION.

     TO ALL OUR LOYAL SUBJECTS, _Greeting_:

     We hereby Proclaim that We have this day dissolved the
     Legislature of Our Kingdom, by virtue of the power vested in
     Us by the Constitution. The exigency contemplated by that
     sacred instrument has arisen, by the disagreement of the two
     Houses on the Bill of Supplies, which are necessary to carry
     on Our Government; and furthermore, the House of
     Representatives framed an Appropriation Bill exceeding Our
     Revenues, as estimated by Our Minister of Finance, to the
     extent of about $200,000, which Bill We could not sanction.

     There seemed no prospect of agreement, inasmuch as the House
     of Nobles had made repeated efforts at conciliation with the
     House of Representatives, without success, and finally, the
     House of Representatives refused to confer with the House of
     Nobles respecting the said Appropriation Bill in its last
     stages, and We deemed it Our duty to exercise Our
     constitutional prerogative of dissolving the Legislature, and
     therefore there are no Representatives of the people in the
     Kingdom.

     Therefore, We further proclaim Our Will and Pleasure, that Our
     Loyal subjects, in all Our Islands, proceed immediately to
     elect new Representatives, according to law, on the 10th day
     of July next. And We convoke the Representatives who may be so
     elected, to meet in Parliament in Our City of Honolulu, on
     Monday, the 30th day of July, of this year, for the special
     and only purpose of voting the Supplies necessary to the
     administration of Our Government, without oppressing Our
     faithful Subjects with unreasonable taxes.

          Done in Our Palace of Honolulu, this sixteenth day of June,
             1855, and the first year of Our reign.
                                              KAMEHAMEHA.
        VICTORIA K. KAMAMALU.




                                              JULY 30, 1855.

_His Majesty's Speech at the Opening of the Extraordinary Session of the
Legislature._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--By virtue of the power which the
     Constitution declares to be vested in me, I have convoked you
     to this Extraordinary Session of the Legislature. Neither the
     late dissolution, nor, of course, this Session, would have
     occurred under any but extraordinary circumstances. The only
     public business of emergency left unfinished at the close of
     the late Session, was the passage of the Appropriation
     Bill--the most important measure of every Session. It is
     solely to pass the Bill I mention that you are now brought
     together. I trust that whilst your memories are so freshly
     charged with the circumstances that prevented unanimity
     between your two Houses in regard to the Bill of Supplies,
     upon which you were deliberating when lately I dissolved you,
     there will be a desire on the part of all to restrict the
     amount appropriated for the current year within the probable
     limits of the year's receipts. It is useless to make
     appropriations for appearance sake, knowing that they will
     not, because they cannot, be acted on. My desire therefore is,
     that you will reject at once, in your deliberations, every
     item that is not of immediate necessity, since the means at
     your disposal will barely suffice for those outlays that are
     indispensable. By acting on this suggestion you will save time
     and render less likely the recurrence of differences on
     questions not of public interest.

     Nobles and Representatives, I hope the Session now opened will
     be a very short one, and that you will all cordially unite in
     appropriating our small means to the best advantage for the
     general good.




                                              AUGUST 13, 1855.

_Messages from His Majesty to the House of Nobles and House of
Representatives, Proroguing the Extraordinary Session._


     NOBLES:--The Extraordinary Session to which I convoked you
     having terminated with the completion of the special business
     which I recommended to my Parliament, I now thank you for
     concurring with the Honorable Representatives of My People, in
     voting the supplies indispensable to the administration of My
     Government.

     I now free you from further attendance, and prorogue you till
     the Session of next year.

                                              KAMEHAMEHA.


     HONORABLE REPRESENTATIVES OF MY PEOPLE:--Having concluded the
     special business for which I convoked you to an Extraordinary
     Session, it only remains for me to thank you for the regard
     you have shown to the safety and welfare of my Kingdom in
     voting the supplies necessary to carry on the business of My
     Government, and to free you from further attendance in
     Parliament.

     I therefore prorogue you.

                                              KAMEHAMEHA.




                                              FEBRUARY 15, 1855.

_His Majesty's Letter to Her Majesty the Queen of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Ireland._[A]

     GREAT AND GOOD FRIEND:--Believing that Your Majesty takes a
     sincere interest in every thing which concerns the Hawaiian
     nation, I doubt not but that You will partake in my sorrow for
     the loss of my Predecessor, Kamehameha III., who died on the
     15th of December last.

     In accordance with the will of the late King, and the
     Constitution of my Realm, I have succeeded to the throne of my
     forefathers. My anxious endeavor will be to rule for the good
     of my subjects, and of all foreigners residing within my
     jurisdiction; and, in so doing, I shall rely, under God, upon
     the sympathy and good will of Your Majesty, and of the British
     nation.

                      Your Good Friend,
                (Signed,)                     KAMEHAMEHA.
          By the King.
                (Signed,)                     R. C. WYLLIE.

[Footnote A: The same letter, _mutatis mutandis_, was sent to their
Majesties the Emperor of the French, the Emperor of Russia, Kings of
Denmark, Prussia, Sweden and Norway, Presidents of the United States, of
Hamburg, Bremen, Chile, and Peru.]




                                              SEPTEMBER 18, 1855.

_Reply by His Majesty to the Address of Hon. D. L. Gregg, Commissioner
of the United States, on Presentation of the Letter of the President of
the United States, condoling with His Majesty on the Death of His
Predecessor, and congratulating Him on His Accession to the Throne._


     I trust it is almost unnecessary for me to assure you, Mr.
     Gregg, that the letter you have just delivered to me from the
     President of the Great American Republic could not have
     reached me through a more agreeable channel than the hands of
     the United States' Commissioner.

     I will not do my own feelings the injustice of attempting to
     disguise the fact that, at the present moment this
     communication from the Head of your Government, according to
     my appreciation of it, loses entirely its formal character,
     and appears to express only the sentiments of a Friend, who
     has proved himself worthy of that high name. The Treaty
     recently negotiated between my Envoy at Washington and Mr.
     Marcy, on the part of the Government of the United States, is
     indeed but one link in the chain that binds the two countries
     in relations of the most happy kind. But it is a convention of
     the greatest importance not only to those who are numbered
     among my subjects, but to every American citizen who has any
     interests upon these islands. I do not doubt but that its
     effect will be to call hither more of your enterprising
     countrymen, and direct towards the now partially developed
     resources of this archipelago, the attention of your
     judicious, but ever ready capitalists. Under this treaty we
     may expect to see American citizens raising the produce which
     American ships will carry to an American market. But their
     prosperity will be ours. Indeed, the mutual interests of the
     two countries are so interwoven in this regard, that it would
     be a difficult task to define a line between them.

     Whatever may be the future in store for these islands, it will
     be impossible for any Hawaiian while the nation exists to
     forget or undervalue the fostering care which your Great
     Country, as a Parent, has extended towards them; and among the
     names of individual Americans that will stand out prominently,
     I foresee a high place assigned to those of Mr. President
     Pierce, and the gentleman I have the pleasure to address.




                                              DECEMBER 10, 1855.


                      PROCLAMATION BY THE KING.

     We hereby proclaim Our pleasure that Tuesday, the first of
     January next, be kept as a day of solemn Thanksgiving to
     Almighty God for His numberless blessings to Our kingdom and
     people.

               (Signed,)                      KAMEHAMEHA.




                                              JANUARY 5, 1856.

_Notes of an Address by His Majesty, at the Formation of the Hawaiian
Agricultural Society, reported to the =Polynesian=._


In due course of time His Majesty addressed the meeting. The difficulty
of taking short-hand notes in English of what is being said in the
native dialect, the construction of which is peculiar, a sentence often
beginning at the end and ending in the middle, must be our apology for
doing so little justice to the eloquent language and sound common-sense
ideas expressed by the President.

After an opening sentence or two, the King spoke to the following
effect:

     Convinced of the importance of this undertaking, I consented
     to address you to-day. I should not however, have done so, had
     I not been fearful that a refusal on my part might have
     induced others of more information and better acquainted with
     the particular object we have united to foster, to decline in
     like manner. At the same time I cannot help thinking and
     hoping that my few remarks will be eclipsed by the weight and
     breadth of those of other speakers who are to stand before you
     on the closing day of this month and other specified days,
     according to a resolution passed at our last meeting.

We also caught the following sentence, which, although it may appear a
little disjointed here, was neatly introduced, and bore upon the
argument then being used:

     One of the greatest prospective advantages that we see in the
     assiduous pursuit of agriculture, is the reformation it would
     work amongst the people. It is not in the ranks of modern
     farmers that you must look for the most ignorant or the most
     immoral men. We all know that when an individual enters upon
     an undertaking of the mode to accomplish which he is ignorant,
     he applies for information where it may be found, having
     learnt that a man unqualified for his task must fail in it.
     Having acquired this much experience, and being solicitous for
     the prosperity and happiness of his children, he will on no
     account omit sending them to school, so that they may not be
     trammelled in after years by ignorance as their father was.
     Thus the rising generation is prepared for its work. The
     children find themselves on starting in life possessed of the
     information necessary to success, whereas their father had to
     struggle on his way in the midst of darkness and
     misapprehension. Suppose a step similar to the one I have
     described were made by the young people from one end of the
     islands to the other. Would not ignorance give way to
     intelligence? Would not darkness become light? Would not
     inexpertness succumb to proficiency? The general result could
     only be a largely increased sum of individual and national
     prosperity.

The King, who has of late been residing a few miles from Honolulu
superintending some agricultural operations of his own, we believe upon
the very spot which his great predecessor, Kamehameha I., cultivated
before him, spoke with animation of our natural advantages:

     Who ever heard of winter upon our shores? When was it so cold
     that the laborer could not go to his field. Where amongst us
     shall we find the numberless drawbacks which in less favored
     countries the working classes have to contend with? They have
     no place in our beautiful group, which rests on the swelling
     bosom of the Pacific like a water-lily. With a tranquil heaven
     above our heads, and a sun that keeps his jealous eye upon us
     every day, whilst his rays are so tempered that they never
     wither prematurely what they have warmed into life, we ought
     to be agriculturists in heart as well as practice.

The following sentence contains a truth to which thousands can testify:

     I wish to allude to a bad custom which prevails amongst us. I
     mean the foolish hospitality extended everywhere towards the
     lazy and good-for-nothing equally with those who are worthy of
     it. A young man, able bodied and fit for work, lies in the
     house upon which he confers the honor of a visit, whilst his
     friends go out to labor. When they come back they share with
     him their scanty meal, and he is not ashamed to eat of it. Is
     that as it should be? Is it not a thing which we ought to feel
     as a disgrace--a custom that reflects upon the heads of the
     old and the hearts of the young? I am well aware that the
     sharing of food with every stranger and visitor that comes
     along is dignified with the name of ancient Hawaiian
     hospitality. I now tell you it is not true hospitality. Can
     that hospitality be correct in theory or practice which sends
     old men and sick men to work under a hot sun, whilst lusty
     young people lie in the house playing at cards.

There is a very wholesome tone in this remark:

     At present we are a poor people, for the surplus produced by
     the few who work is consumed by the many who claim at their
     hands the rights of your boasted hospitality. Never close your
     doors on those who are hungry through sickness, misfortune, or
     the wrongs they have received; but on the other hand never
     help those who are too lazy to help themselves.

Another nail is most decidedly hit on the head in the following:

     I will allude to another bad feature in the native mind; I
     mean the idea in which too many of you indulge, that a fortune
     if not made in a day, ought to be acquired in a very short
     space of time. If a man does not get rich in the first few
     months of his endeavoring to do so, he suddenly relaxes in his
     exertions, subsides into his native indolence, and becomes a
     laughing stock to those whose ideas are in advance of his own.
     You say commonly, everything a foreigner touches he turns into
     money. But the fact is that if you worked and persevered as
     the foreigners do, then you would grow rich like them. There
     are three essentials to success in cultivating the soil. The
     first is a place to cultivate--the second, the hands to work
     with--and the third, perseverance. You have all your patches
     granted you by law; your hands are not tied either by natural
     or artificial bonds--but as cultivators you do not succeed,
     because you have no perseverance.

The concluding sentence was almost word for word as under:

     The great sources of poverty amongst Hawaiians are laziness
     and the want of perseverance. I know that what I now say is a
     matter of which you and I also have cause to be ashamed. But
     placed in the position I occupy, and as a Father to my people,
     I cannot hide the fact.

The King's address was listened to with great earnestness, and every now
and then we heard subdued expressions of _Oiaio no_ (True, true,) from
different parts of the house. At present we see no cause to doubt that
much good will result from the new society, and to those who interest
themselves in it we hope to see the honor given which they undoubtedly
deserve.




                                              MARCH 3, 1856.

_His Majesty's Remarks to the Hon. W. L. Lee, on his being officially
presented and resuming his Seat in the Privy Council, after his return
from the Embassy to the United States._


     I take great pleasure, Judge Lee, in your return to my
     islands, and I extend to you on behalf of myself and Chiefs a
     hearty welcome. Your valuable services in the United States
     have been such as to merit our warmest thanks and approval,
     and I trust the success of your mission may strengthen the
     friendly relations existing between the United States and my
     Kingdom. It is my desire that you should resume the duties of
     your department as head of the Judiciary, as soon as
     convenient, but that in so doing you should make your labors
     secondary to the improvement of your health.




                                              APRIL 5, 1856.

_His Majesty's Speech on the Occasion of the Opening of the Session of
the Hawaiian Legislature of 1856._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--I have convoked you to meet this
     day under the provision of our Constitution now in force,
     which provides for an Annual Session of the Legislative Body;
     and with humble thankfulness to the Ruler of Nations, I
     felicitate you upon the prosperity which has attended us, as a
     people, during the past year.

     I am happy to inform you that since your last meeting I have
     received from the Heads of nearly all the first class Powers
     of the present century, assurances of friendship, accompanied,
     in some instances, with promises of assistance should occasion
     require it. Never did I consider our hope of stability as a
     nation so well founded as they are at this moment.

     One of the most important features in my Foreign Relations
     during the past year, is that of the Mission upon which my
     Special Envoy, the Honorable William L. Lee, proceeded to
     Washington, where he was most cordially received, and whose
     exertions have been attended with the happiest results. They
     have opened, in the minds of our agriculturists and those who
     study the progress of our people as producers, hopes, which
     only need the confirmation of the Senate of the United States
     to become permanently realized, and greatly conducive to our
     prosperity.

     Negotiations have, for some time past, been in progress
     between my Ministers of Foreign Relations and Finance, and the
     Commissioner of the Emperor of France, for a new Treaty
     between that Sovereign and myself. For farther particulars
     regarding my Relations abroad, I refer you to the Report of my
     Minister of that Department.

     My Minister of War will furnish you a Report showing the
     appropriation, necessary to be made for the support of the
     Military during the ensuing year.

     The administration of Justice, during the past year,
     especially in the higher Courts of Judicature, has been such
     as to give general satisfaction.

     Respecting the business of the Judiciary Department, I would
     refer you to the Report of my Chancellor. The measures he
     proposes are worthy of being seriously deliberated upon, and I
     earnestly recommend to your early consideration that for the
     suppression of intoxication. It is painful to notice the
     increase of this evil in Honolulu, arising principally from
     the sale of cheap and noxious compounds. In connection with
     this subject, I would call your attention to the evil arising
     from the sale of opium to Chinese Coolies, which, unless
     speedily checked, I fear may spread among our own race.

     In the Report of my Minister of the Interior you will not fail
     to observe a valuable suggestion proposing a fundamental
     change in the appointment of the officers intrusted with the
     making and preserving of our public roads. It is to the effect
     that persons chosen for their ability be appointed by the
     executive, in lieu of the Superintendents elected at present
     by the tax payers of each district, a system the experience of
     several years has proved to be accompanied with many abuses.

     I recommend to your notice the several other points contained
     in that Report, especially that asking for an authorization to
     grant Title Deeds to persons who have proved their claims
     before the Land Commission, but received no Patents, in
     consequence of surveys not having been made of the Kuleanas to
     which they were entitled, and to Konohikis whose lands are
     described in the Book of Division, but who have not received
     their Awards. Also, the continuation of the Inter-island Mail
     Carrier service, and, above all, an appropriation for the
     purchase of a proper steamer, to assist intercourse between
     the Islands of this group, and encourage industry.

     You will perceive by the detailed Report of my Minister of
     Finance that the liabilities of my Treasury have been promptly
     discharged and the public credit fully sustained,
     notwithstanding the large expenditure made for important
     public improvements. The law for the more just and equal
     collection of Taxes, passed at your last Session, has operated
     favorably on the national finances, although I am of opinion
     that some alterations in its provisions would still further
     improve it.

     In addition to the ordinary expenses of the Government, you
     will see the necessity of appropriations sufficient to
     complete the public works already commenced, even though it
     should be necessary to resort to the loan authorized by the
     law of the last Session.

     My Minister of Finance has also called your attention to the
     important subject of a Usury law, which I commend to your
     favorable consideration.

     He has likewise alluded to a proposed mode of payment for the
     steamer before mentioned, which may, I trust, preclude all
     embarrassment to my Treasury.

     You cannot, at present, regard the law imposing duties on
     imports passed at your last Session, as a basis for
     appropriations, because it is uncertain whether it will go
     into effect.

     The state and progress of Education among my people during the
     past year, you will learn from the Report of the President of
     the Board of Education. The change in that Department, by an
     Act of the last Legislature, has proved, thus far, to be
     beneficial. It is particularly gratifying to know that
     instruction in the English language is prosecuted with so much
     success among my native subjects. I recommend you to make as
     liberal a provision for the support of this class of schools
     as the state of my Treasury will admit.

     I feel so keenly the necessity of some new stimulus to
     agriculture, in all its branches, that I very seriously call
     your attention to that point, and shall be happy if in your
     wisdom you can devise any measures to promote so important an
     object. The Native Hawaiian Agricultural Society, lately
     instituted, needs your fostering care in the form in which you
     have manifested it towards the sister Association. The
     decrease of our population, and the means of staying it,
     occupy many of my thoughts; and a subject so important cannot
     fail to receive your serious consideration. Intimately
     connected with the subject last alluded to, is the still
     unaccomplished wish of all the true friends of the nation to
     see a Hospital established, and I sincerely hope that those
     who have foretold difficulties opposed to the success of such
     an institution, will at last allow the experiment to be made.
     Fearful, as we all must be, of the introduction of any new
     diseases to decimate us again, I beg of you to consider by
     what means, under Providence, such a calamity may be averted.

     I sincerely trust that the Ruler of all will guide your
     deliberations to a result beneficial to the nation.




                                              MAY 24, 1856.

_Reply by His Majesty to the Congratulations offered by the House of
Representatives upon His approaching Marriage._


     It is with much pleasure that I receive the congratulations of
     the Representatives of my People, upon the contemplated event
     of my marriage. Your voice is that of the Nation speaking
     through its Representatives, and it is a great satisfaction to
     me to have your approval of the important step I am about to
     take.

     You express the hope that the union may be the means of
     perpetuating our Sovereignty and promoting the welfare of the
     nation, and I sincerely unite with you in that hope.

     In conclusion, I thank you, Representatives, for the kind,
     prompt and unanimous manner in which you have responded to my
     Message.




                                              JUNE 11, 1856.

_His Majesty's Speech upon Proroguing the Session of the Legislature of
1856._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--At the close of a Session which
     has been marked by so much unanimity as that about to
     terminate, and during which so much that displays the wisdom
     essential to success in legislation has been observable, I
     cannot but feel a gratification in meeting you.

     The appropriations you have made for the expenses of my
     Government during the next two years, and the zeal you have
     displayed to render especially efficient the Bureau of Public
     Works, meet with my sincere approval.

     In the matter of one appropriation only, do I entertain any
     doubts; but if by any possibility the military establishment
     can be maintained upon such a scale as to ensure a promise of
     security, no exertions will be wanting on the part of my
     Government to do so, without overstepping the amount by you
     provided.

     To the members of the House of Representatives I would express
     my sincere acknowledgments for the readiness with which they
     have interpreted the public feeling, and provided for my
     establishment under the new relations which I am about to
     assume.

     I have no expectations that any necessity will arise for
     calling you together before the stated session of 1858, and I
     trust that the interim will be full of prosperity to you and
     the nation, the blessing of God making fruitful those
     exertions from which I now release you by proroguing the
     session.




                                              NOVEMBER 3, 1856.


                             THANKSGIVING.

                        PROCLAMATION BY THE KING.

     We, Kamehameha, King of the Hawaiian Islands, hereby issue our
     Proclamation agreeably to former custom, that:

     Whereas, during the year now drawing to a close, we have
     enjoyed, as a people, numerous and great blessings; peace and
     tranquility have prevailed throughout our islands; we have
     been not only free from dangers from abroad, but have
     continued to enjoy the most friendly assurances of protection
     in our independence from the most powerful governments in the
     world; although the times have been hard through the scarcity
     of money, and our people have suffered from a drought almost
     unparalleled, neither our agriculture nor commerce has
     entirely failed; both begin to revive; the crops in most
     places have been good; perhaps we have never enjoyed a year of
     more general health; our laws have been sustained; religion
     and education have been free and prosperous: For all of which
     numerous and invaluable blessings we owe, as a nation, a
     formal, general and heartfelt tribute of thanksgiving to the
     Almighty, on whose favor all prosperity, whether individual or
     national, depends.

     We do, therefore, with the advice and consent of our Privy
     Council of State, designate and recommend Thursday, the 25th
     day of December next, as a day of general and public
     Thanksgiving to God, our Heavenly Father, throughout our
     islands; and we earnestly invite all good people to a sincere
     and prayerful observance of the same.

            Done at our Palace this 3d day of November, A. D., 1856.
                                              KAMEHAMEHA.




                                              DECEMBER 9, 1856.

_His Majesty's Address at the Stone Church, before the Meeting of the
Native Agricultural Society, from the_ =Polynesian= _of Dec. 13._


Our reporter caught only some of the more prominent ideas embodied in
the King's address, which was delivered in the pure idiom of the elder
chiefs, by which device he connected, as it were, modern science with
ancient feeling. His train of discourse was nearly as follows:

     It were useless, his Majesty said, to make further
     suggestions, for to hear is not always to obey. If only a
     tenth part of all the practical hints that had been given from
     time to time, by persons standing where he then stood, had
     been systematically pursued, the usefulness of the Society
     would have been more apparent. Not but that the Society had
     done much good, and awakened an interest, in the minds of many
     besides its members, which might be considered as the dawn of
     a brighter day. His intention was briefly to examine the
     actual condition of agriculture science and practice; to show,
     not what we might be, but what we are.

     His Majesty spoke of the short-comings of the people as an
     agricultural population, and though he set down naught in
     malice it is equally certain that he extenuated nothing. This
     plain speaking tells with the Hawaiians, especially when it
     falls from the lips of their hereditary rulers. In the first
     place allusion was made to the almost universal want of
     perseverance which marks the character of the laboring classes
     more than that of any other. The King showed in few words how
     necessary it is to make agriculture an absorbing pursuit, the
     only pursuit in fact of the man who engages in it, proving
     that the intermission of a day may often render nugatory the
     labor of a month. No man in fact having put his hand to the
     plough ought to look back, till the last process of all
     dependent upon ploughing has been brought to the best possible
     issue. In the next place, the want of capital was touched on,
     and spoken of as a very serious draw-back, though not an
     insurmountable objection to the pursuit of agriculture. In
     a country like this where the necessaries of life are so
     easily supplied, one man's steady labor will always produce
     very much more than one man's sustenance, and the overplus
     with ordinary thrift--or what would be considered such in
     other lands--becomes so much capital with which to increase
     the scope of an individual's exertions, and provide those
     means and appliances which by reducing labor add to profit. A
     carelessness to observe and communicate the results of
     observation as to seasons and localities, was another
     peculiarity common amongst the Hawaiians. The natives are too
     much inclined to make an attempt without first gaining all the
     information procurable in regard to the particular plant or
     vegetable they intend to cultivate. Slight variations in the
     altitude of different fields above the level of the sea, and
     differences in the quality of the soil, produce oftentimes no
     less results than failure on the one hand and success on the
     other. But the Hawaiians are too apt to make an essay without
     previous enquiry, and afterwards to keep to themselves the
     result of the experiment. This should not be in a country
     which is visited weekly in its whole length and breadth by a
     newspaper intended, more than for any other purpose, to spread
     a knowledge of practical agriculture and afford a medium for
     intercommunication upon points interesting to persons engaged
     in the original pursuit of our race. The King enforced this
     idea with great earnestness, begging his hearers to look upon
     themselves as links in the chain of improvement, dependent
     upon the past, as future laborers would depend upon them for
     such experience as to seasons, methods and localities as might
     be worthy of record and transmission to another generation.

     The absence of methodical habits in the tillers of the soil
     was adverted to. Whilst on this subject, the King spoke of the
     utter disregard showed for any regularity in the hours of
     commencing and leaving off work. This desultory system is
     greatly aided by the want of stated hours for taking food and
     retiring to rest. If there were a common hour for breakfast
     and dinner, the hours for labor would be regulated and
     understood. The want of economy, not of time only, but of
     material, too, and labor, was then touched on. His Majesty
     seemed to be hinting at the old saying that "a stitch in time
     saves nine," a fact usually disregarded by the natives of this
     country. One gap in a fence is generally a prelude to its
     total destruction, whereas half a day's work might save it for
     years to come, and prevent the outlay at some future day of
     the labor and material necessary to build a new one. But we
     cannot follow the line of illustration used to enforce this
     point; suffice it to say that the matter was made intelligible
     and the value of economy fully vindicated. After some remarks
     on roads and means of communication by water, in which steam
     was spoken of as one of the agents to which our agriculturists
     must look for a helping hand up the hill that leads to
     competency and opulence, the King strongly recommended the
     planting of fruit trees, and went into some practical details
     of the method now pursued by the natives of Kona, Hawaii, who
     as a class bid fair not long hence to be, perhaps, more
     comfortably off than the people of any other district. Coffee,
     oranges, lemons and grape-vines were more particularly
     recommended to the fostering care of the audience. Allusion
     was also made to Dr. Hillebrand's very able remarks on the
     advantages of shade trees. His Majesty then brought his
     address to a close with a few general remarks that told home,
     breathing as they did the spirit of his often repeated
     exhortation to his people to remember that none will help
     those who will not help themselves--that responsible men must
     not, like children at their games, sit down to "open their
     mouths and shut their eyes," and "see what God will send
     them."




                                              MAY 26, 1857.

_His Majesty's Reply to the Address of S. N. Castle, Esq., on Presenting
a Bible on behalf of the "American Bible Society."_


     The volume you present me in behalf of the American Bible
     Society, and the letter with which it is accompanied, I
     receive with a mingled feeling of pleasure and reverence. When
     I remember the moral illumination and the sense of social
     propriety which have spread throughout these islands, in
     proportion as the Holy Scriptures have been circulated, I
     cannot but admire and respect the human agency through which
     Providence has effected its benign purpose. But of all the
     members of the institution, there is none with whom I could
     more gladly find myself in communication than the Secretary,
     whose labors have won for him a name among Christian
     philanthropists which might excite a world to emulation.

     I will not attempt to echo the tone of fervent admiration and
     gratitude with which you allude to the happy changes effected
     by the dissemination of God's Holy Word. But from the position
     I occupy, the facts meet me whichever way I turn my eyes. I
     see them every day and every hour. I see principles taking
     root among my people that were unknown and unintelligible to
     them at that dark period of our religious history to which you
     have referred. They have now a standard by which to judge of
     themselves and of each other as members of society. Without
     that standard no law but the law of autocratic power could
     have ruled them. Its absence would have rendered the gift of
     free institutions, such as they now enjoy, a worse than
     useless act of magnanimity on the part of my predecessors. The
     commerce and intercourse with other countries to which we owe
     our present prosperity would have been checked by numberless
     difficulties. In one word, we see through all our relations
     the effect of those aspirations and principles inculcated by
     this sacred volume.

     I should be wanting to myself did I not express the
     gratification I feel at seeing here present some of those who
     were the first to labor in the vineyard. Although they look
     for their reward elsewhere, they will not reject my passing
     tribute of respect. Their labor has been long and their
     anxiety great, but their constancy and patience have equaled
     the emergency. The result of their life's work may even
     disappoint them if they judge it by the anticipation of their
     more sanguine years. Yet, in their decline of life, they see
     some of the fruits they prayed for, and they will not complain
     when they remember that the measure of their success is from
     above.

     Allow me to thank you for your personal share in the
     presentation, and through you to express my kindest
     acknowledgments to the American Bible Society.




                                              DECEMBER 10, 1857.

                      BY ORDER OF THE KING.

     It is hereby proclaimed that Thursday, the 31st of December
     ensuing, be kept as a day of solemn fasting and humiliation
     for sin, and of thanksgiving to Almighty God for numberless
     unmerited mercies and blessings received during the year that
     expires on that day.

                                              L. KAMEHAMEHA.




                                              JANUARY 21, 1858.

_His Majesty's Reply to the Address of Capt. Davis, of the U. S. Sloop_
=St. Marys=, _upon the eve of her Departure for San Francisco._


     I can heartily assure you, Captain Davis, that it would have
     been a source of unfeigned regret to me, had circumstances
     prevented my having this last interview with you before your
     departure from these waters. When I say last, I mean the last
     during the visit of the _St. Marys_, for I sincerely hope to
     see you here again, and when you do return, I hope you will
     bring with you the same officers whose sojourn here with you
     has contributed so much to the social enjoyment of the last
     few months.

     Your desire to increase the good understanding existing
     between my Government and your own has been so conspicuous
     that I cannot but congratulate the latter upon the happy
     circumstances that in sending a ship here, for the
     preservation of safety and order, the command of that vessel
     devolved upon no other than you. That you have been successful
     in your object, must be a matter of pride to you, and I do not
     think you will hear with indifference from my lips the simple
     announcement, that I and every member of my Government have
     appreciated those exertions, but no one more so than I, whose
     opportunities of judging of your intentions have, I am happy
     to say, been more numerous than those of some others.




                                              MAY 21, 1858.

_Replies by His Majesty to the Congratulatory Addresses on the Birth of
a Son and Heir to His Throne, by A. P. Everett, Esq., for himself and
other Foreign Consuls; by H. R. H. Prince General Kamehameha; by the
Rev. Mr. Damon and other Clergymen; and by the U. S. Consul, A. Pratt,
Esq., for Foreign Residents generally._


His Majesty replied as follows:

     GENTLEMEN:--I very kindly thank you for the congratulations
     you have just offered to the Queen and myself, and for the
     kind wishes you have expressed for the prosperity and
     happiness of the infant Prince. I also thank you for the many
     expressions of sympathy and good will which you have employed
     towards my people and Government, and for the prosperity of
     both. I assure you that the prosperity and happiness of my
     country, and of all who live within my rule, are subjects dear
     to my heart. And there is no greater encouragement afforded me
     that the hopes so often expressed by the friends of the
     Hawaiian people will be fulfilled, than the knowledge that I
     have the support and sympathy of the great and powerful
     nations whose officers I rejoice to see before me on this, to
     me, particularly happy day.

     PRINCE AND SOLDIERS:--The expressions of loyalty you have just
     uttered are very welcome to me. There is no tie between the
     head of a government and his troops like that of mutual good
     wishes and a common object. Such exists between us, and may it
     never cease to exist. So long as it does we have nothing to
     fear of one another, but every thing to hope. In the Queen's
     name and that of our infant son I thank you kindly for your
     generous wishes.

Turning to Mr. Damon and the other reverend gentlemen present His
Majesty observed:

     GENTLEMEN:--For your valuable present allow me to thank you in
     the name of my son, whose advent into this life has been
     greeted so kindly, so heartily, by the community at large, but
     by none more sincerely, or with more ardent wishes for his
     real happiness than by yourselves--of that I am sure. The
     birth of the young Prince has placed me in a relationship to
     which I have hitherto been a stranger, and it has imposed upon
     me new responsibilities. I trust that in my conduct towards
     him throughout my life, I may remember the particular offering
     which your affection deemed most proper, and that as this
     Bible is one of my boy's first possessions, so its contents
     may be the longest remembered. In the Queen's name and my own
     I thank you, and it shall be the task of both of us to teach
     our first-born child to kindly regard you.

Then addressing himself more particularly to Mr. Consul Pratt, and from
him to the assembly in general, His Majesty added:

     GENTLEMEN AND FRIENDS:--I receive your congratulations on this
     occasion with mixed feelings of pleasure and pride. I take
     pleasure in knowing that the event which has given so much
     happiness in my own domestic circle, has caused a pleasure in
     this whole community and brought to my house these unmistakable
     marks of sympathy and good will; and I cannot but feel pride,
     at such a time as this, in knowing that my first-born child,
     the destined heir to the position I now occupy, enters the
     world amidst your hearty acclamations. I thank you for those
     expressions towards the Queen and myself, which are
     reiterations of feelings often expressed, and more often
     manifested than expressed, but which come doubly welcome at a
     time when every parent's heart has a yearning for sympathy.
     Gentlemen, you see me a proud father, and by these
     manifestations of your love for me and mine you make me a
     proud King. Such occasions as these make a throne worthy of
     any man's envy, whilst the feelings uppermost in my heart will
     establish and seal from this time forth a new tie between me
     and every man who, like myself, can say he has a child.




                                              MAY 22, 1858.

_Reply by His Majesty to the Address presented to Him by the Lodge of
Free Masons and the Royal Arch Chapter of Honolulu._


     MOST EXCELLENT HIGH PRIEST, COMPANIONS AND BRETHREN:

     Bound together as we are in a holy league of brotherhood, I
     should not be doing justice to the feelings which actuate me
     in my relationship with yourselves, and operate amongst us
     all, did I deny that I almost expected you would seek a
     special occasion to felicitate me in the character in which we
     now appear. For all your kind wishes I thank you from the
     bottom of my heart, and among the many blessings for which I
     have, at this time, especial reason to be thankful to our
     Supreme Grand Master, I do not reckon this the least, that I
     enjoy the sympathy of a Fraternity whose objects are so pure,
     and whose friendships so true as those of our Order. I will
     not multiply words, but believe me, that when I look upon my
     infant son, whose birth has been the cause of so much joy to
     me, and of so much interest to yourselves, the thought already
     crosses my mind that perhaps one day he may wear these dearly
     prized badges, and that his intercourse with his fellow men,
     like his father's, may be rendered more pleasant, and,
     perhaps, more profitable, by his espousing those solemn tenets
     which make the name of a Freemason honorable throughout the
     world.




                                              MAY 25, 1858.

_Replies by His Majesty to the Hon. D. L. Gregg, Commissioner of the
United States, and to the Hon. James W. Borden, his Successor, upon his
Presentation as the new Commissioner._


His Majesty, turning to Mr. Gregg, replied:

     From the renewed assurances of sympathy and good will towards
     this Kingdom which, on the part of the President of the United
     States of America, you have just expressed, I cannot but
     derive the liveliest gratification, reminding me as they do of
     the long course of years during which the successive Heads of
     your Government have offered, through their Representatives
     here, similar professions of amity, without one interruption
     having occurred to mar the retrospect. I should be sorry were
     the President, or you, to suppose for one instant that I
     regard these professions merely as a civil form of words
     called for by the occasion.

     The Government of the United States has never flattered me or
     my Predecessors with expectations of more than it intended to
     perform; the action has always followed true to the word, and
     we know by experience the value of such assurances as those to
     which I have just listened with so much satisfaction.

     It is, indeed, a fact worthy of notice and of remembrance,
     that the relations existing between the two countries were
     never more happy, or more calculated to inspire the smaller
     nation with a sense of independence and an appreciation of the
     fact that its future is in its own hands, than at this very
     moment, when, after having faithfully watched the interests
     intrusted to your care for more than four years, you are
     resigning that honorable duty into other hands. You have shown
     that strength of purpose may be united with courtesy of
     manner, and have justified your appointment by proving that
     their rights are best guarded, whose representative, being
     honest in his own intentions, does not without cause doubt the
     faith of the Government to which he is accredited.

     Although I am afraid you over-estimate the actual value of the
     marks of courtesy and attempts to make agreeable your
     residence and that of your family upon these islands, which we
     have sought to offer, I thank you for the kind expression of
     your acknowledgments, and trust that you will always believe
     that my object, and that of every member of my Government, was
     but poorly carried out by any manifestations which it has been
     in our power to make. But, Mr. Gregg, not to seem to claim
     more credit than we deserve, allow me to add that the attempt
     was by no means a disinterested one, for in all the relations
     of society, those persons are most welcome who ornament it
     most and are themselves the most courteous.

     I have too much confidence in the good will and sympathy of
     the Government of the United States, and faith in the wisdom
     of the President, to allow of a single doubt as to the course
     which your successor will pursue. It shall be my endeavor, and
     that of my Government, to regard him as the honored
     Representative of a great nation, and a good Friend. I believe
     that his dealings with us will be generous, that he will
     pursue the policy which in the hands of his predecessors has
     so largely helped to make this nation what it is to-day, and
     that if, coming after you, he cannot increase the feelings of
     kindness, and on one side of gratitude, which already exist
     here and in the United States, he will at least maintain them.

Then addressing himself to Mr. Borden, the King spoke as follows:

     In welcoming you as the Representative of the United States,
     allow me to say, Mr. Borden, that I anticipate nothing but the
     most satisfactory intercourse between you and my Government.
     The country from which you are accredited has afforded too
     many tokens of good will, and manifested too lively an interest
     in all that concerns this archipelago, and that for too long a
     succession of years, to leave any question possible as to its
     future policy.

     So long as such feelings exist on your side, and we retain
     gratitude enough to remember with acknowledgments the benefits
     we have already received from the Government and people of the
     United States, and can appreciate the advantages continually
     derived from the friendship and countenance of such a nation,
     there is little chance that the harmony now happily existing
     will be disturbed. I thank you for the kind terms in which you
     have alluded to the birth of the Prince, my son--an event
     which has filled me with the greatest pleasure and gives rise
     to many hopeful anticipations.




                                              MAY 29, 1858.

_Published by Authority in the_ =Polynesian=, _May 29, 1858._


                     ROYAL LETTERS PATENT.

     Know all men that we, Kamehameha, by the Grace of God, of the
     Hawaiian Islands King, by virtue of the power and authority in
     us vested as Sovereign of these realms, and in accordance with
     Article XXXVII, of the Constitution of our Kingdom, have
     decreed, and do, by these our Royal Letters Patent,
     constitute, establish and declare the following to be the
     style and title of our infant Son, born on the twentieth day
     of May, instant, the Hereditary Heir Apparent of Our Throne,
     viz:


            "HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE OF HAWAII."

     He, Our said infant son, from now and henceforth to assume,
     and to receive the aforesaid style and title for himself, and,
     in the event of his succeeding Us in the Throne, and having
     male issue of his body lawfully begotten, then, the said style
     and title shall descend to, and be the style and title of his
     first-born son, as being the nearest hereditary and
     Constitutional Heir to the Throne of the Hawaiian Islands.
            Done at the Palace, in Honolulu, this twentieth day of May,
              A. D. 1858, and in the 4th year of Our Reign.
                (Signed,)                     KAMEHAMEHA.




                                              JUNE 11, 1858.

_His Majesty's Speech at the Opening of the Session of the Hawaiian
Legislature of 1858._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--Since the Legislature was last in
     session, it has pleased Almighty God to bless me with a son. The
     birth of an Heir to the Throne is an event which you, now
     congregated to pass measures, not for the temporary only, but
     for the permanent prosperity of the Hawaiian Islands, under a
     Constitutional Monarchy, cannot but regard with solemn
     interest. Not only the continuance of his life, but the
     characteristics which the Prince may develop as he grows to
     manhood, and the education to be imparted to him, are matters
     in no small degree inseparable from the future of our
     country's history--from that distant part of it in which I,
     and many, if not all of you, will take no share. Gentlemen,
     the child is yours as well as mine; the circumstances that
     attend his birth deprive me of an undivided interest in him,
     for if such be the will of Divine Providence, he will one day
     be to your sons what I am to their fathers. Destined as he is
     to exercise a paramount influence in years to come, I
     consecrate him to my people, and with God's help, I will leave
     unused no faculty with which I am indued to make him worthy of
     your love and loyalty, and an ornament to the Throne of his
     great Predecessor who only did battle to establish peace and
     lay the foundations of order.

     I have called you together according to the requirements of
     the Constitution. Having thus fulfilled the duty imposed upon
     me, I would suggest to you, Nobles and Representatives, the
     propriety, under existing circumstances, of confining the
     business of the present session to providing, by a Joint
     Resolution, or otherwise, for the financial necessities of the
     Government, and appointing a Joint Committee to report after
     an adjournment and as soon as practicable, to their respective
     Houses, upon the New Code, or such portions of it as may be
     ready for presentation by the Commission appointed by the
     Legislature of 1856 to prepare it.

     The reasons for such a course will appear in the fact that the
     Commissioners selected to revise, codify and amend the laws
     now in force, partly on account of the ill health of one of
     the members, now deceased, and partly from the laborious
     nature of the task imposed upon persons whose time was already
     occupied by the duties of office, have been unable to perfect
     their work within the time, which before the undertaking was
     commenced, was deemed sufficient. The Joint Committee could
     only receive and proceed to review such portions of the
     Revision as are already prepared, and receive more as the
     Commissioners progressed. By means of a little inquiry, the
     time when their report upon the whole would probably be
     forthcoming might be ascertained, when the two Houses could
     meet again to review the Report and proceed with the general
     business of the country.

     The suggestion I have made demands further consideration from
     the fact that a new Treaty, negotiated between me and the
     Emperor of the French, has lately been returned from Paris,
     accompanied by the formal ratification of the Emperor. It now
     awaits a similar concurrence, on my part, to render it
     effective. In accordance with the provision of our
     Constitution, this Treaty is now under consideration by me, in
     my Privy Council of State. The provisional Act, therefore,
     which a former Legislature passed, will become operative or
     otherwise, according to the result of those deliberations I
     refer to, and until that result becomes known the Minister of
     Finance cannot make to you a satisfactory showing of the
     probable receipts of the Government for this and the next
     fiscal year; and without such data to go by you will hardly
     be able to dispose of the strictly financial business of the
     country.

     So, too, in regard to the Civil Acts, the passage of which
     draws so largely upon the time of your two Houses. It would be
     nothing less than a waste of labor to alter, by separate
     enactments, those laws which the Revised Code will amend, or
     to sanction new provisions, in that Compendium already
     provided for, and which temporary enactments would, therefore,
     become valueless almost as soon as they should have been
     promulgated.

     Believing, gentlemen, that you will coincide with me in seeing
     the necessity for a speedy adjournment, after having made the
     provisions I have pointed out, I forbear to call your
     attention to the general business and details to which I
     should otherwise direct your notice.




                                              MARCH 31, 1859.

_Special Message of His Majesty sent to the Legislature of 1859._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--I deem it my duty, as Chief
     Magistrate of the Kingdom, to submit to the Legislature
     certain points in regard to which the organic law seems to
     require revision.

     Experience has conclusively shown that the Constitution of
     1852 does not, in many important respects, meet the
     expectations of its framers, or of my Predecessor, by whom it
     was voluntarily conceded.

     It is the part of wisdom to derive lessons from experience,
     and to regulate our future policy in conformity with its
     suggestions.

     The 105th Article of the Constitution prescribes the ordinary
     mode of amendment. Without reference to a different manner of
     revision, clearly founded on the inherent rights of the
     different Estates of my Kingdom, I am, at this time, content
     to appeal to the Legislature for such action as will provide
     an adequate remedy for all existing difficulties.

     I am satisfied that it would result in great public advantage
     to allow to my Executive Ministers the privilege of election
     to the House of Representatives, except when constituted
     Members of the House of Nobles by Royal Patent. It would also,
     in my opinion, be politic to permit additions to be made to
     the House of Nobles for a term of years as well as for life.
     These changes are earnestly recommended and urged upon your
     favorable consideration.

     I further recommend that the House of Representatives be
     limited, as to its members, to a number not exceeding twenty;
     and that a suitable property qualification for eligibility be
     established. The compensation of such members ought also to be
     definitely fixed for the entire period of their service, so as
     to avoid all inducements to protracted sessions beyond the
     requirement of the public good.

     Relying on your wisdom and patriotic disposition, I place
     these suggestions before you, in the full confidence that they
     cannot fail to meet your sanction. I entertain no doubt that
     if the Constitution should be amended in conformity thereto, a
     beneficial reform of the Legislative Department would be
     effected, and the general advantage of my Kingdom thereby
     greatly promoted.

                                              KAMEHAMEHA.




                                              MAY 4, 1859.

_His Majesty's Speech Proroguing the Legislature of 1859._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--I congratulate you upon having
     concluded the labors of a Session protracted beyond my
     expectation, and, I imagine, that of the country at large. I
     trust that after all the attention which has been expended on
     the revised Civil Code, the result will prove a compilation
     sound in its principles and convenient in its arrangement. If
     it have no other effect than to encourage a decrease of
     litigation, by exposing in its proper place the law applicable
     to every civil regulation which legislation makes the
     frame-work of our national system, your time, and the expenses
     of the session, will not have been consumed in vain.

     I have heard with satisfaction that the amendments of the
     Constitution which I suggested and laid open to your
     consideration, have been acted upon, and I do not doubt that
     the next session will see them confirmed and made effective. I
     think they will initiate a more wholesome system of
     legislation, prevent unnecessary delays and expenses, and
     place the Executive Government in a position better calculated
     for giving explanations and receiving instructions from that
     House which originates every fiscal measure.

     I thank you, Representatives, for the provision you have made
     for myself and those nearest to me; and, while alluding to the
     Bill of Appropriations, I cheerfully notice the fact, that in
     making distribution of the revenue, you have, for the first
     time, proposed for the country a system of expenditure
     strictly proportioned to the estimated receipts.

     I confess that the act of your two Houses which I regard with
     most complacency, is that in which you commit the public
     Treasury to the aid of Hospitals. You, Representatives,
     amongst whose constituents are those very persons for whom
     these places of refuge are principally designed, have
     expressed a kind and grateful feeling for the personal share
     which I and the Queen have taken in the labor of securing the
     necessary means for the establishment of a Hospital in
     Honolulu. Whilst acknowledging your courtesy, I wish to take
     this first public occasion to express the almost unspeakable
     satisfaction with which I have found my efforts successful
     beyond my hopes. It is due to the subscribers as a body, that
     I should bear witness to the readiness, not less than the
     liberality, with which they have met my advances. When you
     return to your several places, let the fact be made known,
     that in Honolulu the sick man has a friend in everybody. Nor
     do I believe that He who made us all, and to whose keeping I
     commend in now dismissing you, has seen with indifference how
     the claims of a common humanity have drawn together, in the
     subscription list, names representative of almost every race
     of men under the sun.




                                              MAY 20, 1859.

_Replies by His Majesty to the Felicitations of the Commissioners of
France and of the United States, and to the Captain of the Honolulu
Rifle Corps, on behalf of its Members, on the first Anniversary of the
Birth of H. R. H. the Prince of Hawaii._


     GENTLEMEN:--I receive with unfeigned satisfaction the
     congratulations which you offer on this the first anniversary
     of the birth of the Heir to the Throne. As the Representatives
     of nations so pre-eminently called upon, by virtue of their
     physical and intellectual resources, to watch and foster the
     progress of the human race at large, I rejoice in those
     aspirations with which you have connected the future career of
     my infant son. To you, gentlemen, and to the Governments of
     which you are the honored organs, the best thanks of the
     Father and Mother of the Prince of Hawaii are cordially
     tendered.


     GENTLEMEN OF THE HONOLULU RIFLES:--For the loyal and generous
     expressions your Captain has offered in your behalf I thank
     you in the name of the Prince of Hawaii, who doubtless will
     one day hear in what manner your good wishes were made known
     on this occasion. For in families it is not uncommon for
     certain incidents and expressions to become traditional, and I
     know that neither I nor the Queen can ever cease to cherish
     the remembrance of the many tokens of good will and sympathy
     this day manifested, or fail to tell our Son in time to come
     how the anniversary of his first birth-day was welcomed by the
     "Honolulu Rifles."




                                              OCTOBER 3D, 1859.

_Speech of His Majesty at the Extraordinary Session of the House of
Nobles held at the Palace October 3d, 1859._


     GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF NOBLES:--I have thought proper to
     convene you in special session in order to consult on a
     matter, which in my judgment relates to the highest welfare of
     the nation. In contemplation of a vacancy in the chief
     executive office, at all times liable to occur, it is
     important that the succession to the crown should be
     definitely established in a constitutional manner. To this
     subject I invite your attention, in the full confidence that
     the recommendation I am about to make will receive at your
     hands a hearty concurrence.

     The Constitution points out the mode of procedure to be
     adopted, and I avail myself of the authority thus vested in me
     to designate my infant son, the Prince of Hawaii, as my heir
     and successor to the Throne. Your assent and co-operation in
     the measure are required, but I do not doubt your ready and
     loyal support, not only on grounds relating to the stability
     of the existing dynasty, but from motives intimately connected
     with the public good.


                            PROCLAMATION.

     KAMEHAMEHA IV., of the Hawaiian Islands, King, to all Our
     loving subjects, and others to whom these Presents shall come,
     Greeting:--

     Be it known that We, in concurrence with Our House of Nobles,
     hereby appoint and proclaim Our Son, His Royal Highness the
     Prince of Hawaii, to be Our Successor and Heir to the Hawaiian
     Throne.

            Done at Our Palace, at Honolulu, this third day of October,
               in the year of Our Lord 1859, and the fifth year of Our
               Reign.

                         (Signed,)            KAMEHAMEHA.

       (Signed) KAAHUMANU.

     By the King and Kuhina Nui.
                              (Signed,)         L. KAMEHAMEHA.




                                              MAY 23D, 1860.

        _The King's Speech to the Legislature of 1860._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--In accordance with the
     Constitution, I have called you together in Legislative
     assembly.

     It is with pleasure that I make known to you that my relations
     with Foreign Powers are in an amicable and satisfactory
     position, and to the Report of my Minister of Foreign Affairs
     I direct your attention for information in relation to the
     Department under his care.

     The Chief Justice in his Report has given a general view of
     the administration of the department of law. There are some
     portions of the report to which I desire to call your special
     attention. By reference to the comparative view of convictions
     contained therein, you will observe that two classes of
     offences against the laws constitute nearly two-thirds of the
     whole number of convictions. The inevitable effect of these
     offences is to demoralize and destroy the people, and I would
     designate as well worthy of your careful consideration and
     adoption, the recommendations of the Chief Justice in relation
     to such amendments or alterations of the existing laws as will
     tend to eradicate or diminish these evils.

     The Report of the Minister of the Interior will furnish you
     with full information in relation to the affairs of his
     department for the last two years. The financial prospects of
     the country, as exhibited in the Report of the Minister of
     Finance, are satisfactory, and I would particularly direct to
     your favorable consideration his suggestion that provision be
     made for paying off outstanding liabilities as they become
     due. I would also call to your attention for careful
     consideration, his suggestions in relation to the assessments
     and collection of taxes, and in relation to the transit
     duties; also to the proposed alteration in the mode of
     remunerating District Justices.

     The all-important subject of Education now occupies the public
     mind with more than usual interest, and I particularly
     recommend to your favorable notice the suggestions of the
     President of the Board of Education, with reference to
     substituting English for Hawaiian schools, in so far as may be
     practicable, and also in relation to the granting of Government
     aid towards independent schools for the education and moral
     training of females.

     Through the laudable efforts of a number of private
     individuals--whom I take this first public opportunity of
     thanking--several establishments of this latter description
     have been instituted during the past year; and although thus
     far little more than a commencement in the good work has been
     made, their progress has been satisfactory. I dwell on this
     subject, Nobles and Representatives, because our very
     existence as a people depends on the youthful training of the
     future mothers of our land, and that must not be jeopardized
     through lack of effort on our part.

     To your careful consideration I recommend the proposed
     amendments to the Constitution, as passed by the last
     Legislature.

     The "Queen's Hospital," at Honolulu, instituted for the relief
     of the sick and indigent, has now been in operation for nine
     months, and to this praiseworthy institution I direct your
     attention, that suitable provision in aid thereof may be made
     in the biennial estimates, with a view also that branch
     Dispensaries may be established at other places in the
     Kingdom.

     In conclusion, Nobles and Representatives, I trust that in
     your deliberations on the necessary business that may come
     before you, that you will combine care with dispatch, and I
     will join with you in supplicating the Ruler of all nations
     for that wisdom which will best direct your efforts.




                                              MAY 30, 1860.

_His Majesty's Reply to Rev. W. P. Alexander, on behalf of the "Hawaiian
Evangelical Association."_


     I assure you, gentlemen, that no expression of good will
     towards myself or my people is necessary on your part; that is
     well known. Nor need I say that the same confidence and
     friendly regard which was ever cherished towards you by my
     predecessors is entertained by myself. The feeling with me is
     not only personal but hereditary.

     In regard to those portions of my speech to the Legislature to
     which you are pleased to refer, I shall certainly rely upon
     the co-operation of the clergy in carrying into effect any
     measures that may be adopted for the suppression of those
     great evils referred to, and I am confident that I shall have
     it not only in this but in every other good work.

     Gentlemen and ladies, I am always happy to see you, while on
     these yearly visits to the metropolis.




                                              AUGUST 14, 1860.

_His Majesty's Special Message to the House of Nobles and
Representatives, delivered by the Royal Commissioners._


     KAMEHAMEHA IV., by the Grace of God King of the Hawaiian
     Islands:

     _To His Excellency_ M. KEKUANAOA, _Our Governor of Oahu, and
     the Honorable_ ELISHA H. ALLEN, Our Chancellor:

     GREETING:--We hereby commission you in Our place and stead, to
     deliver to the Nobles and Representatives, Our Message,
     touching certain alterations proposed to be made in the
     Constitution of Our Kingdom: And for so doing this shall be
     your sufficient warrant.
         Given at Our Palace in Honolulu, this Fourteenth day of August,
           in the year of our Lord 1860, and in the sixth year of
           Our reign.
                                              KAMEHAMEHA.

       KAAHUMANU.


At the request of the President, Mr. R. Armstrong read the Royal Message
in Hawaiian, after which the Chancellor read the same in English. The
following is the English version:

     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--I called the attention of the
     last Legislature to the amendments of the Constitution.
     Experience of the practical operation of that instrument has
     impressed me with their importance, and in this view that body
     coincided. But from some omission the publication was not made
     in conformity to the provision of the Constitution, and hence
     you have very properly expressed your constitutional inability
     to pass finally upon the amendments as adopted by them.

     Therefore, it has become my duty to call your attention to
     some of those amendments, as well as others, which a more
     mature reflection has suggested.

     I regard favorably the eligibility of the Ministers to the
     House of Representatives. The experience of monarchical
     governments has illustrated the importance of their services
     to the popular branch. It is a power of selection which may be
     wisely entrusted to the people to exercise. A property
     qualification of a limited amount will tend to make the
     selection from the more substantial men of the Kingdom, and
     the payment by a salary for their services, I regard as more
     just than a per diem allowance as now provided. A limited
     number of appointments to the House of Nobles for a term of
     years may afford that body valuable aid.

     When the Constitution was adopted, its provisions in reference
     to a successor to the throne, were made with especial
     reference to my Predecessor, who had no lineal heirs.
     Additional provisions now seem to be necessary as a protection
     to the Heir Apparent to the Throne, and so secure beyond
     reasonable contingencies the stable administration of the
     sovereignty.

     I regard a regency by the Queen, in cases of temporary vacancy
     of the Throne, or during a minority of the Heir Apparent, as
     the best means to secure a wise and safe exercise of regal
     authority, with proper regard to the rights of all persons. It
     would be a safe depository of power, for no one can feel a
     more sincere interest for the honor and prosperity of the
     Kingdom than the Queen Consort, and the mother of the Heir
     Apparent. Amendments which will secure these objects, you will
     regard as the part of wisdom to adopt.

     There are some minor amendments which will be submitted, to
     which I do not regard it as essential more particularly to
     advert. Of their wisdom and propriety I am fully impressed.

     Relying upon your wisdom and your devotion to the integrity
     and prosperity of my Kingdom, I have the most entire
     confidence that the amendments proposed will receive your most
     careful consideration.




                                              AUGUST 28, 1860.

_His Majesty's Speech at the Prorogation of the Legislature of 1860._


     NOBLES AND REPRESENTATIVES:--In meeting you to-day at the
     close of your session, I have first to ask you to join with me
     in returning thanks to the Ruler of all nations for His
     beneficent providence in restoring to health one of your
     number from that dangerous illness with which he has been
     afflicted, whose loss would have been a grievous calamity to
     the welfare of my Kingdom.[B]

     I beg to congratulate you on the termination of your labors,
     and trust that the new enactments passed by your joint wisdom
     may prove to be for the advantage and welfare of my people.

     I have to thank you, Gentlemen of the House of
     Representatives, for the provisions you have made for the
     expenses of the State during the current biennial period.

     While I regret with you, Nobles and Representatives, that,
     owing to the near approach to the termination of this session,
     you have been unable to take final action on the Amendments to
     the Constitution submitted to you with my late Message, I
     fully concur in the wisdom of your course--as made known to me
     by your Joint Committee--in deferring that important subject
     for that more mature consideration it requires.

     Nobles and Representatives, in conformity with the
     Constitution, I now and hereby do declare this session of the
     Legislature to be prorogued.

[Footnote B: The King here refers to H. R. H. Prince Kamehameha, who had
been dangerously ill.]




                                              NOVEMBER 28, 1860.

_Replies of His Majesty to the Addresses of the Diplomatic and Consular
Corps, on the occasion of the Anniversary of the Joint Declaration by
Great Britain and France of the 28th of November, 1843, Recognizing this
Kingdom as an Independent State._


His Majesty, in reply to Mr. Perrin, H. I. M.'s Commissioner, expressed
himself deeply gratified with the repeated kind offices of the two
Governments, whose congratulations had been so happily tendered by His
Excellency, and his confidence in the continuation of the same friendly
relations.

And to Mr. Green, who had addressed His Majesty on behalf of himself as
H. B. M. Acting Commissioner and Consul General, and of the Consular
Corps, His Majesty replied:

     For the congratulations you have just offered in so genuine a
     form, that any doubt as to their sincerity would be
     impossible, I offer you my kind thanks. The Consular corps has
     always sympathized with me and my people in everything that
     regards the real and physical prosperity of these islands.
     Indeed it could not be otherwise, for commerce makes our
     interests identical. It is with great pleasure that I see on
     this occasion the officers of a ship of war of that nation
     which concurred in the initiation of the declaration of the
     independence of these islands, the anniversary of which
     gracious act we this day celebrate.




                                              FEBRUARY 9, 1861.

_His Majesty's Replies To the Addresses of the Diplomatic Corps, and to
the Consuls of Foreign Nations, Congratulating Him on the Anniversary of
His 27th Birth-day._


His Majesty replied to M. Perrin and the members of the Diplomatic Corps
in the following gracious terms:

     GENTLEMEN:--For the congratulations you have just offered me
     on the recurrence of the anniversary of my birthday, I thank
     you very kindly indeed. I do indeed hope that further
     experience may offer me new lights by which to be directed in
     my endeavors to secure prosperity to all who dwell within this
     Kingdom. But let me assure you that your felicitations on this
     occasion cannot fail to stimulate and encourage me, for they
     show that at least up to this very day the large and
     predominating powers you represent, are good enough to survey
     with satisfaction, and through you, Gentlemen, to express
     their satisfaction for the present, and their hopes for the
     future, in the conduct of my Government, and with God's help,
     I will not disappoint them. In justice to myself and your kind
     expressions connected with the names of the Queen and our son,
     I must express the peculiar pleasure with which that portion
     of your address has filled me.

To Mr. Reiners and all other Consuls of foreign nations, his Majesty
made the following gracious answer:

     GENTLEMEN:--To congratulations so warm and so flatteringly
     addressed, it is difficult to reply so as to be satisfied that
     I have done justice to your feelings as they have this moment
     been expressed. I and my house have, indeed, a great deal for
     which to be thankful to Divine Providence, and on this
     twenty-seventh anniversary of my birthday, I cannot but be
     sensible of the debt I owe to the King of Kings. Any occasion
     which is converted into an opportunity for the expression of
     satisfaction and cordiality on the part of those who represent
     great external interests, must be gratifying to one whose
     position is a difficult one, even when things are at the very
     best, if due allowance be made for the number of conflicting
     interests to be respected, and more than that, fostered.

     At a time when our commerce is drooping from causes beyond the
     control of any Government, it is a source of high satisfaction
     to me to receive so many well wishes for the continuance of my
     rule from gentlemen so perfectly adapted as yourselves to
     judge of the benefits which my reign is likely to bestow. On
     the part of the Queen and the Prince of Hawaii, I thank you,
     most kindly and sincerely, for your prayers in their behalf.




Transcriber's note


Minor punctuation errors have been corrected without notice. The
following words were spelled in two different ways and were not changed:

birthday, birth-day

preeminently, pre-eminently

interisland, inter-island

A few obvious typographical errors have been corrected and are listed
below.

Page 15: "to be regreted" changed to "to be regretted".

Page 16: "circumstances that will alway" changed to "circumstances that
         will always".

Page 19: "these island" changed to "these islands".

Page 19: "I forsee a high" changed to "I foresee a high".

Page 24: "an Hospital established" changed to "a Hospital established".

Page 34: "Prince may develope" changed to "Prince may develop".

Page 34: "child is your's" changed to "child is yours".

Page 36: "Prorogueing the Legislature" changed to "Proroguing the
         Legislature".

Page 36: "an Hospital in Honolulu" changed to "a Hospital in Honolulu".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Speeches of His Majesty Kamehameha IV.
To the Hawaiian Legislature, by Kamehameha IV

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SPEECHES OF KAMEHAMEHA IV ***

***** This file should be named 26501.txt or 26501.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/5/0/26501/

Produced by Carla Foust and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
