The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gambia, by Frederick John Melville

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Gambia

Author: Frederick John Melville

Release Date: September 12, 2008 [EBook #26601]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAMBIA ***




Produced by Simon Gardner, Sankar Viswanathan, Adrian
Mastronardi, The Philatelic Digital Library Project at
http://www.tpdlp.net, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net








                        GAMBIA

                          BY
                   FRED J. MELVILLE,

                PRESIDENT OF THE JUNIOR
                  PHILATELIC SOCIETY.

              MDCCCCIX--PUBLISHED--BY--THE
                MELVILLE--STAMP--BOOKS,
              47,--STRAND,--LONDON,--W.C.

       *       *       *       *       *

[page 7]




INTRODUCTORY NOTE.


In collecting the stamps of Gambia one cannot too strongly emphasise
the necessity for guarding the stamps of the "Cameo" series against
deterioration by the pressure of the leaves in an ordinary unprotected
album. In their pristine state with clear and bold embossing these
stamps are of exceptional grace and beauty. Sunk mounts or other
similar contrivances, and a liberal use of tissue paper, should be
utilised by the collector who desires to retain his specimens in their
original state. A neat strip of card affixed to each side of the page
in an ordinary album will have the effect of keeping the pages above
from flattening out the embossing, but tissue paper should be used as
an additional safeguard.

We have to express thanks to Mr. Douglas Ellis, Vice-President of the
Junior Philatelic Society, for his notes on the postmarks--of which
he has made a special study--and also for the loan of his entire
collection of the stamps of Gambia for reference and illustration;
to Mr. H. H. Harland for a similar courtesy in the loan of his
collection; to Mr. W. H. Peckitt for the loan of stamps for
illustration; to Mr. D. B. Armstrong for interesting notes on
the postal affairs of the Colony; and to Mr. S. R. Turner for his
diagrams.

To the first two gentlemen we are also indebted for their kindness in
undertaking the revision of the proofs of this handbook.

[page 8]




TABLE OF CONTENTS.


INTRODUCTORY NOTE,                              7

          CHAPTER I.
THE COLONY AND ITS POSTS,                      11

          CHAPTER II.
CAMEO ISSUE OF 1869,                           16

          CHAPTER III.
ISSUE OF 1874,                                 20

          CHAPTER IV.
ISSUE OF 1880,                                 25

          CHAPTER V.
ISSUE OF 1886-87,                              37

          CHAPTER VI.
QUEEN'S HEAD SERIES, 1898,                     45

          CHAPTER VII.
KING'S HEAD SERIES, 1902-1906,                 50

          CHAPTER VIII.
PROVISIONAL ISSUE, 1906,                       53

          CHAPTER IX.
BIBLIOGRAPHY,                                  56

          CHAPTER X.
CHECK LIST,                                    58

          APPENDIX.
NOTES ON THE POSTMARKS, by Douglas Ellis,      66

[page 11]




GAMBIA.




CHAPTER I.

The Colony and Its Posts.


The British West African possession known as the Colony and
Protectorate of the Gambia occupies a narrow strip of territory
(averaging 12 miles in width) on both sides of the Gambia river.
The territory comprises the settlement of St. Mary, where the
capital--Bathurst--is situated, British Cambo, Albreda, M'Carthy's
Island and the Ceded Mile, a protectorate over a narrow band of land
extending from Cape St. Mary for over 250 miles along both banks of
the river.

The Gambia river was discovered by a Portuguese navigator in 1447;
under a charter of Queen Elizabeth a company was formed to trade with
the Gambia in 1588. In the reign of James II. a fort was erected by
British traders at the mouth of the river (1686), and for many years
their only traffic was in slaves. The territory became recognised as a
British possession under the Treaty of Versailles, and on the enforced
liquidation of the chartered company it [page 12] was incorporated
with the Crown as one of the West African settlements. Until 1843,
when it was granted separate government, it was administered by the
Governor of Sierra Leone. In 1868 it was again annexed to Sierra
Leone, and not until twenty years later was it created a separate
Crown Colony with a Governor and responsible government of its own. At
present the staple trade of the Colony is ground nuts, but efforts are
being made to induce the natives to take up other products.

Postally there is little to record prior to 1866, which is the date
ascribed by Mr. F. Bisset Archer, Treasurer and Postmaster-General,
to an alteration in the scale of postage, the half ounce weight for
letters being introduced. The rate to Great Britain was, we believe,
from that date 6d. per half ounce.

Mr. Archer also gives this year (1866) as the date when the first
postage stamps of the Colony were issued. This date was for a time
accepted in the stamp catalogues, but it is now generally believed to
be an error, the earliest records in the stamp journals of the period
shewing the date to be 1869.

The postal notices we have been able to trace are of but little
interest, the following being all that bear on matters of interest to
collectors:--


POST OFFICE NOTICE.

_Reduction of Postage, &c._

On and from the 1st April, 1892, the Postage to all parts of the World
on Letters, Newspapers, Books, etc., will be as follows:--

    For Letters, 2 1/2d. per 1/2 oz.

    For Postcards, 1d. each.

    For Reply Postcards, 2d. each.

[page 13]

    For Newspapers, books, printed papers, commercial papers,
    patterns and samples, 1/2d. per 2 oz., with the Postal
    Union proviso of a minimum payment of 2 1/2d. for a packet of
    commercial papers, and of 1d. for a packet of patterns or
    samples.

    Fee for registration of any of the above named articles, 2d.

    Fee for the acknowledgment of the delivery of a registered
    article, 2 1/2d.

  By His Excellency's Command,
  (Signed) J. H. FINDEN,
  _Postmaster._

  Post Office, Bathurst, Gambia,
  _3rd March, 1892._


POST OFFICE.

Ordinance No. 6 of 1897.

_March 11th, 1897._

1. This Ordinance may be cited as the Post Office Ordinance, 1897,
Inland Postal Regulations.

13. From and after the commencement of this Ordinance, postal packets
may be sent by post between such places in the Colony of the Gambia
and the Protected Territories adjacent thereto as may be from time to
time notified by the Administrator.

14. The Administrator-in-Council may from time to time make in
relation to the inland post hereby established such regulations as he
may think fit--

    For prescribing and regulating the places, times, and modes of
    posting and delivery.

    For fixing the rates of postage to be payable on inland
    letters and postal packets.

    For prescribing payment of postage and regulating the mode
    thereof.

    For regulating the affixing of postage stamps.

    For prescribing and regulating the payment again of postage in
    case of redirection.

    For regulating the dimensions and maximum weight of packet.

[page 14]

    For prohibiting or restricting the printing or writing of
    marks or communications or words.

    For prohibiting enclosures.

    For restricting the sending or conveyance of inland letters.

and such other regulations as the Administrator shall from time to
time consider desirable for the more efficient working of such Inland
Post.

And may affix a penalty not exceeding ten pounds, to be recovered
summarily before the Chief Magistrate, or two Justices of the Peace,
or, in default of payment, imprisonment not exceeding two weeks for a
contravention of any such regulation.

15. Any revenue derived from the Inland Post herein established shall
be paid into the Colonial Treasury at such times and in such a manner
as the Administrator shall direct, and shall be applied to the general
purposes of the Colony.

Insurance of and Compensation for loss and damage to Parcels.

11. Subject to the provisions of this Ordinance, if any article of
pecuniary value enclosed in, or forming part of, a parcel be lost
or damaged whilst in the course of transmission through the post, it
shall be lawful for the Administrator to cause to be paid out of the
public revenues of the Colony to any person or persons who may, in
the opinion of the Postmaster, establish a reasonable claim to
compensation (having regard to the nature of the article, the care
with which it was packed, and other circumstances), the following
rates of compensation--

    (a) In respect of an uninsured parcel, such sum, not exceeding
    twenty shillings, as he may think just.

    (b) In respect of an insured parcel the following scale shall
    apply--

To secure compensation up to L12 there shall be payable a fee of 5d
   "          "         "    L24      "          "       "       7 1/2d
   "          "         "    L36      "          "       "       10d
   "          "         "    L48      "          "       "       1/0 1/2d
   "          "         "    L50      "          "       "       1/3

We gather from the official handbook edited by Mr. Archer that a
Government steamer maintains weekly [page 15] communication between
the Capital, Bathurst, and M'Carthy's Island both for passengers and
mails. There is no house-to-house delivery of mails at either place.

Gambia joined the Universal Postal Union on January 1st, 1879; the
Imperial Penny Postage rate was adopted from December 25th, 1898; and
the unit of weight for colonial and foreign letter postage was raised
from half an ounce to one ounce on October 1st, 1907. The Cash on
Delivery system was introduced on October 15th, 1908.

The following table gives an outline of the postal business, the large
fluctuations in the revenue being chiefly due to the fluctuations in
the demand for postage stamps from dealers and collectors:--

Year    Revenue        Expenditure           Letters      Parcels
-----------------------------------------------------------------
1895     L686
1896    1,506
1897    1,845
1898    2,140
1899      589
1900      459                                 66,612        782
1901      769                                 77,937       1151
1902    1,452                                 77,918       1340
1903      553                                 94,365       1532
1904      597                                 94,358       1677
1905    2,731          L808  0  0             91,768       1554
1906    1,317           712 15 10             98,379       1994

[page 16]




CHAPTER II.

"Cameo" Issue of 1869.


[Illustration]

The _Philatelist_ for March 1, 1869, contained the first intimation of
the preparation of stamps for the Colony of

    "GAMBIA.

    "We are proud to announce the preparation of stamps for this
    African settlement. In a central circle is Queen Victoria's
    coroneted head in white relief; in straight bands above is
    GAMBIA; below, the value, which, as well as the spandril
    ornamentation, is embossed in white. The stamp is nearly
    square, and the specimens possessed by our correspondent are
    imperforate. Values:

    4 pence, deep brown.
    6   "      "  blue."

[page 17]

The stamps were manufactured by Messrs. de la Rue & Co. by a double
process of flat printing and of relief embossing, the flat printing
being doubtless effected first and the embossing afterwards. This
combination was unusually effective, and the finished stamps rank
among the handsomest adhesive postage stamps known to collectors.

As embossing evenly over a large area presented considerable
difficulties, the plates were made up of fifteen stamps only, in
three horizontal rows of five stamps. The plates for both processes
evidently fitted each other with precision, though in the printing
occasionally the embossing is slightly out of register.

The paper is white wove and has no watermark, and the stamps were
not perforated. There are two colours of the gum, one being the usual
clear white: the other is a pale yellow colour, which may, however, be
due to climatic influence, particularly as it is a noticeable feature
of a number of the later issues.

The colour of the 4d. value varies in shade from a deep chocolate
brown to brown and pale brown. The 6d. is pale to deep blue. There
is a quite pale shade which is very rarely met with, most of the
so-called "pale blue" specimens being an intermediate shade better
described as "blue."

The sheets of both values shew one printer's guide dot in each side
margin, opposite stamps No. 6 and 10 respectively (plate I).

Both values are known with the embossing shewing a distinct double
impression.

There are some peculiarities in these stamps which, although their
significance is uncertain, it may not be well to overlook.

[page 18]

Firstly, there frequently occurs throughout the embossed stamps
of Gambia a small spot of colour on the back hair, which in later
embossed stamps becomes a large spot, and even develops into a
coloured indentation from the coloured circular ground.

In this issue the spot, when it occurs, is usually quite small, two
copies of the 6d. examined shewing it somewhat enlarged.

Secondly, there are noticeable varieties of the pendant curl at the
back. The normal design shews a fairly thick wavy curl with a hair
branching out from it into the space between the curl and the neck.
This sub-curl, as we may call it, is occasionally missing, broken,
or as in No. 11 on the imperforate 6d. sheet (plate I), the curl and
sub-curl have joined together, giving a very different appearance to
the back hair. There are also varying lengths of the main curl.

In the sheet of the 6d. value the plates seem to have been slightly
defective, and there is a gentle slope down from the centre to the
outside stamp on each side (Nos. 1 and 5), the slope being more
pronounced on No. 5, where the upper label containing the word Gambia
is recognised as the variety with slanting label. The left side of
stamp 5 is 22 1/2mm. high, and the right side 22mm. That the peculiarity
occurs reversed on stamp No. 1, though it is less pronounced, there
can be no doubt. In later issues both stamps 1 and 5 shew the defect
more prominently, as will be readily seen from an examination of
plates I., X., and XI. Curiously enough, the fault is not confined to
the two outside stamps, as is generally supposed. The trouble is in
the entire top row being 1/2mm. taller than the normal stamps of rows 2
and 3, except the left and right sides [page 19] respectively of the
end stamps (Nos. 1 and 5). The middle stamp of the top row shews a
further peculiarity in the shape of the base of the neck. (Compare
plates I., X., XI., with XIV.)

Copies of both values exist overprinted SPECIMEN, and we have seen
similar copies of all the regular issues of this Colony.

[Illustration]

[page 20]




CHAPTER III.

Issue of 1874.


The introduction of watermarked paper for these stamps occurred in
1874, the paper being that familiar to collectors of British Colonial
stamps as watermarked "Crown C.C." The paper was not readily adaptable
for the small sheets of the Gambia stamps, and the method of cutting
it to suitable sizes for these sheets has produced some varieties for
the specialist.

Major Evans, writing in the _Philatelic Record_ for January, 1883,
says:--

    "Most collectors are probably aware that the stamps of the
    British Colonies printed in England are, as a rule, in sheets
    of 240, divided into four panes of 60, each pane consisting
    of ten horizontal rows of six stamps. The Crown and C.C.
    watermarks are arranged in the same manner upon the sheet of
    paper; each pane is enclosed in a single-lined frame. Down
    the centre of the sheet is a blank space of about half an inch
    wide; across the centre is a wider space, watermarked with the
    words CROWN COLONIES, which are also repeated twice along each
    side of the sheet.

    "Some of my readers may have noticed that the watermark is not
    always very clearly shown in the Gambia stamps. This is due
    partly to the fact of their being embossed, and partly
    to [page 21] their being arranged in small blocks of
    fifteen--three horizontal rows of five--so that a row of five
    stamps is printed on a row of six watermarks, and in most
    cases a complete watermark is not found on any one of the
    stamps in a block. Very frequently the upper and lower blocks
    on a sheet encroach on the margins, and consequently some
    of the stamps show portions of the words CROWN COLONIES in
    watermark; and I have seen a block which had been printed in
    the centre of one side of a sheet, and the middle row of which
    was watermarked COLONIES, while the upper and lower rows bore
    the Crown and C.C. Recent printings of some of the values of
    Gambia show the blocks printed sideways on the sheet, in which
    case each stamp will not show a complete watermark; and of
    these again I have seen a block with the vertical division of
    the sheet running across the central row."

In addition the stamps have been found with the watermark reversed,
indicating that occasionally a sheet has been fed into the press the
wrong side up. Inverted watermarks of this Crown and C.C. type are
also to be found.

Of this issue, which comprises the same two values--4d. brown and 6d.
blue, imperforate--we get the following variations in the watermark--

  Crown C.C. upright (Fig. A).
        "    inverted (Fig. C).
        "    reversed (Fig. B).
  Portions of the words CROWN COLONIES.
  Bars (i.e., division lines of the panes).

The gum shews the same variation--white and yellow--as in the original
issue. The 4d. stamp varies in colour from deep brown to pale brown;
the 6d. deep blue to blue, the solid colour in this case presenting a
very mottled appearance.

Again, both values are known with the embossing doubly impressed.

[page 22]

Very few copies of the 4d. of this issue examined shew the spot on the
hair, but in the sheet of the 6d. (plate I.) there are faint spots on
stamps Nos. 1, 4, 5, 9, 12 and 13.

No. 11 on the same sheet shews the curl and sub-curl joined.

The date of issue of these watermarked stamps is uncertain, but the
6d. was chronicled in _Le Timbre Poste_ for December, 1874. The
4d. was not recorded in any of the contemporary magazines, and was
probably not issued until some time after the higher denomination.

[Illustration: Fig. A.]

[Illustration: Fig. B.]

[Illustration: Fig. C.]

[page 25]




CHAPTER IV.

Issue of 1880.


Together with a number of other colonial possessions, Gambia was
admitted to the Universal Postal Union on January 1st, 1879, and
in June of the following year (1880) a more comprehensive series of
postage stamps was issued, all modelled after the same fashion as
the two denominations which had done service in the Colony for the
previous twelve years. The convenience of perforation was adopted
at the same time. The new series comprised the following values, the
shades being given in the approximate order of printings--

  1/2d. golden yellow, deep golden yellow, pale orange, vermilion,
          deep orange vermilion, citron,[1] pale ochre.[1]
  1d. lake, deep lake.
  2d. pale rose, rose, deep rose.
  3d. pale ultramarine, deep ultramarine, deep blue.
  4d. sepia brown, deep sepia brown.
  6d. pale blue, blue, deep blue.
  1s. bright green, deep green.

[Footnote 1: The 1/2d. citron and 1/2d. pale ochre are generally believed
to be changelings, due to atmospheric or other influences after the
stamps were printed.]

[page 26]

[Illustration: Fig. D.]

[Illustration: Fig. E.]

The watermark on this issue appears variously upright or sideways,
varieties of each being inverted. The normal "sideways" may be taken
as from left to right. Portions of the marginal lettering and the
vertical division lines of the panes are also to be found. The
following is a synopsis of these varieties--

  Crown C.C. vertical (Fig. A).
        "       "    inverted (Fig. C).
        "    sideways (Fig. D).
        "       "    inverted (Fig. E).
  Portions of words "CROWN COLONIES."
  Division lines of the panes.

The subject of perforations is of peculiar interest in this and the
next issue of the stamps of Gambia, as while to a certain extent the
printings are to be differentiated by shade the chief distinctions may
be made in the case of blocks and sheets by the perforations.

At first the stamps were perforated by a single line machine gauging
14. A single line machine, as its name implies, simply makes a single
long row of holes in one direction--

.................................................................

In the present case, where the sheets were so small, the row is much
longer than necessary, so in the sheets it extends through the margins
on all sides, as in plate II.

[page 29]

The horizontal rows may be perforated first (one row at a time),
and then the sheet is turned sideways and the vertical divisions
are similarly perforated. A peculiarity of this style of perforating
machine is that the points where the vertical lines cross the
horizontal lines rarely fail to fall foul of each other, and an effect
is produced like this--

[Illustration: Single line perforation. Note the crossing of
perforated lines.]

In this manner it is possible to tell blocks and pairs of this
perforation without any side margins. Single copies perforated in
this manner can occasionally be detected by the distance between the
vertical perforations. In the later perforation of this issue the
distance is fixed (as will be shewn), and the distance is 20 1/2mm.,
[page 30] measuring from perf. point to perf. point across the stamp.
Any stamp differing in width to any extent more than 1/2mm. from
20 1/2mm. may therefore be set down as perforated by the single line 
machine.

We have seen all the values except the 2d. rose and 1/- green
perforated by the single line machine, in practically every case the
C.C. watermark being upright, the exception being a strip of three
6d. with the sideways watermark. All the sheets with this perforation
appear to have one printer's guide dot in the centre of each side
margin.

The next form of perforating machine introduced in later printings
of the Crown and C.C. 1880 issue is known as a comb machine. The comb
machine perforates three sides of a stamp at once, and the form of the
first comb machine was arranged thus--

  ...............................................................
  :    :    :    :    :    :    : :    :    :    :    :    :    :
  :    :    :    :    :    :    : :    :    :    :    :    :    :
  :    :    :    :    :    :    : :    :    :    :    :    :    :
  :    :    :    :    :    :    : :    :    :    :    :    :    :
  :    :    :    :    :    :    : :    :    :    :    :    :    :

The arrangement of the teeth of the comb fitted the arrangement of the
panes of the regular Colonial postage stamps printed by Messrs. De la
Rue & Co., the narrow spaced teeth in the centre marking the dividing
space between two horizontal panes.

In perforating the stamps of Gambia in the small sheets of fifteen
in three horizontal rows of five, both sides of the machine appear
to have been used, the extreme end portion of the comb at either end
running off the side margin of the small sheet. When the left portion
of the machine was being used the sheet was [page 33] inserted upright
and the top row of stamps perforated first, the effect being that the
top margin is not cut through by vertical perforations, and the bottom
row is (see plate III.).

When the right-hand portion was in use the sheets appear to have been
systematically inverted when placed in the machine. This left the
bottom margin blank and the top margin cut through. Had the sheet been
simply inverted and perforated by the same portion of the machine, as
already described, the narrow spaced teeth would have been produced on
the left hand margin instead of the right. A comparison of plates
III. and VI. will shew that the narrow spacing is on the right in both
cases, but in III. the perforating has been started at the top on the
left side of the machine, and in VI. from the bottom on the right side
of the machine.

It is possible that sheets exist with the narrow spaced lines of
perforation on the left side. We have searched in vain for such
varieties, but they may exist. A sheet inverted when placed on the
left side of the machine would shew the top margin perforated through,
and narrow spaced perforation to left; while a sheet inserted top
first on the right hand side would leave the top margin blank and the
bottom one perforated through, and the narrow spaced perforation to
left.

This comb generally perforates so evenly that there is no clashing of
the perforations where the lines meet. Occasionally, however, a sheet
may get off the straight and an irregular perforation occurs.

The sheets perforated in this machine generally have one guide dot
in the left margin, and three at the right (see sheets III.-VII.,
IX.-XI., XIV., XV.).

[page 34]

[Illustration: Comb perforation. Compare crossing of perforated lines
with illustration on page 29.]

The 1/2d. pale orange vermilion exists doubly perforated at the top and
sides.

A minor variety of the 2d. rose shews a small white spot 1/2mm. from the
nose. The stamp is No. 6 on the sheet. The variety has been noted on
several (not all) the sheets of this value, and in various blocks,
pairs and singles.

The left and right hand top stamps (1 and 5) of the 6d. value shew the
sloping label, which is now very prominent (see plate X.).

All the values shew variations in the marks on the back hair and in
the curls.

[page 37]




CHAPTER V.

Issue of 1886-87.


In 1886 a number of the stamps began to appear on the paper
watermarked Crown C.A., the initials of "Crown Agents." The colours
were changed, and a new value inscribed "2 1/2 PENNY" on the value tablet
was added. The values and colours are--

  1/2d. grey-green, myrtle-green (shades).
  1d. carmine, rose-carmine, crimson.
  2d. orange-yellow, orange, deep orange.
  2 1/2d. pale ultramarine, deep ultramarine.
  3d. grey, slate-grey, pearl-grey.
  4d. brown, deep brown.
  6d. olive-green, bronze-green, grey-green.
  1s. violet, deep violet.

All values exist with the embossing double; several with the embossing
double, one of the impressions being inverted; part double and treble
perforations; and the white and the yellow gum.

The watermark Crown C.A. is uniformly sideways in this issue, the
normal position being from right to left (Fig. F.), but it may be
found inverted (Fig. G.).

[page 38]

[Illustration: Fig. F.]

[Illustration: Fig. G.]

The method of cutting up the sheets of Crown C.A. paper was to
guillotine the half sheets horizontally in half and then twice
vertically, dividing each horizontal half into three small sheets, the
half C.A. sheet of paper yielding six small Gambia sheets (plates XII.
and XIII.). The operators both at the guillotine and at the press
seem to have taken the utmost care to arrange all the small sheets
uniformly for passing through the press, as the varieties shewing the
watermark from left to right are rare. The diagrams on plates XII.
and XIII. will illustrate more clearly than a verbal explanation the
precise method of dividing up the Crown C.A. paper.

The early printings of the Crown C.A. issue were perforated with
the comb machine described in the previous chapter, but in the later
printings a new comb machine was introduced, which has not the narrow
spaced teeth in the margin, and, consequently, has not the double
row of perforation on the right hand margins of the sheets. The
perforations produced by the two machines gauge the same, and are not
distinguishable in single specimens or blocks, but only in sheets
or specimens with pieces of margins. The effect of the two different
combs on the sheet may be compared on the two sheets of the 6d. value
illustrated on plates X. and XI. We may note (plate VIII.) the second
comb with the teeth extending [page 41] through the top margin,
leaving the bottom margin blank, shewing that some of the sheets were
perforated from the bottom, which would produce this effect.

Unused imperforate copies exist of all values in the following
shades--

    Imperforate  1/2d. grey-green.
        "        1d. pale crimson.
        "        2d. orange-yellow.
        "        2 1/2d. pale ultramarine.
        "        3d. pearl-grey.
        "        4d. brown.
        "        6d. slate-green.
        "        1s. deep violet.

Copies in trial colours, perforated 12 instead of 14, exist as
follows--

    1/2d. rose.
    1/2d. violet.
    1/2d. dull green.
    1/2d. pale dull orange.
    3d. olive-green.

On some of the sheets of the 1/2d. value stamp 2 shews a slightly
elongated left stroke of the letter m in Gambia; No. 5 on the same
sheet shews a similar defect in the right stroke of the letter. (See
plate III., which reproduction, however, only shews the variety on
stamp 2.) Stamps Nos. 1, 12, 13 on the same sheet illustrated shew
a peculiarity in the form of a broken nose. We have not been able to
trace other copies shewing a similar defect, so possibly it is simply
due to over-inking or faulty inking of the colour plate.

The plate of the 3d. was altered in the final printing, two additional
printers' guide dots being added in the [page 42] left margin, and the
top and bottom dot on the right being removed (plate VIII.). This was
printed in pearl-grey only.

The early printings of the 6d. value shew the sloping labels; they
also shew the slight enlargement of the stamps in the top row. These
varieties occur in the olive-green, bronze-green, and grey-green
shades. Later a new plate was made without the defect in the top row,
and this was printed in grey-green only. (Cp. plates XI. and XIV.)

It may be noted that there are two varieties of the overprint on the
SPECIMEN stamps of this series, one having the letters sloping upwards
from left to right, the other being horizontal.

[Illustration]

[page 45]




CHAPTER VI.

Queen's Head Series, 1898.

[Illustration]


On the 31st January, 1898, the following notice was issued in
reference to the postage stamps of the Colony:--

    "WITHDRAWAL OF PRESENT ISSUE OF GAMBIA POSTAGE STAMPS.

    "On the 1st May, 1898, the present issue, if not previously
    exhausted, of all denominations of Postage Stamps in the
    Gambia that are then in the hands of the Government will be
    destroyed, and a complete new set of stamps will then be put
    in circulation.

  "ADMINISTRATOR'S OFFICE,
  BATHURST, GAMBIA,
  _31st January, 1898_."

[page 46]

After being faithful for nearly thirty years to the graceful design
of the "cameo" stamps the Colony adopted the regular De la Rue type
printed from a general key plate which did duty for a number of
colonial issues.

Essays were prepared by making impressions from this key plate,
shewing the profile of the Queen to left in a circle, and the words
POSTAGE--POSTAGE at the sides, the top tablet being left blank for the
name of the Colony, and a space for the sexagonal tablet of value at
bottom also being left blank. The essays consist of such impressions
with the name GAMBIA and the proposed values painted in by hand, to
shew the approximate effect of the stamps which would be produced from
this key plate. Only a very few such essays are known.

The values which were actually produced in the new series were--

    1/2d. dull green and green (plates 2 and 3).
    1d. carmine and carmine (plate 2).
    1d. deep carmine and deep carmine (plate 3).
    2d. orange and mauve (plate 2).
   2 1/2d. ultramarine and ultramarine (plate 2).
    3d. mauve and pale ultramarine (plate 2).
    3d. deep mauve and deep ultramarine (plate 3).
    4d. brown and ultramarine (plate 2).
    6d. olive-green and carmine (plate 2).
    1s. violet and green (plate 2).

All the stamps were printed at two impressions, the general design
being printed from the key plate, and the name GAMBIA and the value
tablet by a "duty" plate printed separately. In the 1/2d., 1d. and 2 1/2d.
values, however, both key and duty plates were impressed in the same
colour. The plates are constructed [page 49] to print sheets of 120
stamps, divided in two panes of 60 stamps each. The plate number
appears in the margin above and below each pane (plate XVI.). It
consists of an uncoloured figure on a circular ground of colour, and
is printed by the key plate. The plate numbered "2" was used for all
the values in the set, but later printings of the 1/2d., 1d. and 3d.
were printed from plate III. In the case of the 1/2d. and 1d. the
printings from plate III. do not shew any marked variation in shade;
but in the case of the 3d. both the mauve and the ultramarine colours
are distinctively deeper.

The perforation throughout gauges 14; the watermark is Crown C.A.
as in the last issue, but upright instead of sideways, as these
POSTAGE--POSTAGE plates were constructed to fit the watermarked paper.

[page 50]




CHAPTER VII.

King's Head Series, 1902-1906.

[Illustration]


The change from the Queen's Head type to the King's Head type of
design came in 1902, the new general Colonial key plate being used. It
is numbered 1 in a similar manner to the numbering on the Queen's Head
plates. All the denominations in the previous set were repeated, and
a 2s. value was added; later (May, 1905) three new stamps appeared of
the face values 1s. 6d., 2s. 6d. and 3s. respectively. Of these three
denominations it is stated that only 6000[2] copies of each were
printed. The stamps, which were perforated 14 and were [page 51]
printed on the same paper (Crown and C.A.) as the last issue,
comprised the following values--

Watermarked Crown C.A.

[Illustration]

    1/2d. green and green.
    1d. carmine and carmine.
    2d. orange and mauve.
    2 1/2d. ultramarine and ultramarine.
    3d. magenta and ultramarine.
    4d. brown and ultramarine.
    6d. sage-green and carmine.
    1s. violet and green.
    1s. 6d. green and carmine on yellow paper.
    2s. deep slate and orange.
    2s. 6d. purple and brown on yellow paper.
    3s. carmine and green on yellow paper.

[Footnote 2: Compare numbers overprinted in 1906 (Chapter VIII.).]

[Illustration]

In May, 1905, appeared also three new values printed on multiple
Crown C.A. paper, each stamp shewing portions of two or more watermark
designs instead of one more or less complete design as heretofore.
The new values were the 5d., 7 1/2d. and 10d. These being rather unusual
denominations, their appearance caused considerable ferment among
collectors, who ascribed their issue to motives not strictly
associated with legitimate postal business. Reference to the Post
Office Ordinance No. 6 of 1897 (quoted in Chapter I.) will shew that
the fees for insured parcels in force in the Gambia were 5d. for
compensation up to L12, 7 1/2d. up to L24, and 10d. up to L36; so it
is not unreasonable if, as one may assume, the colonists availed
themselves of these rates of insurance, that there was a use for such
denominations.

[page 52]

The new multiple watermarked paper had been adopted for the 1d.
value in 1904, and was during 1905-6 introduced for all the regular
denominations except the 1s. 6d., 2s. 6d. and 3s. On this paper,
therefore, we get the following--

Multiple Crown C.A.

    1/2d. green and green.
    1d. carmine and carmine.
    2d. orange and mauve.
    2 1/2d. ultramarine and ultramarine.
    3d. magenta and ultramarine.
    4d. brown and ultramarine.
    5d. grey and black.
    6d. sage-green and carmine.
    7 1/2d. green and carmine.
    10d. olive-brown and carmine.
    1s. violet and green.
    2s. deep slate and orange.

[Illustration]

[page 53]




CHAPTER VIII.

Provisional Issue 1906.

[Illustration]


The next and only remaining issue we have to describe are in the
nature of Provisionals issued during a temporary shortage of halfpenny
and penny stamps. The Bathurst correspondent of _Ewen's Weekly Stamp
News_, writing April 30, 1906, communicated the following information,
which is published in the issue of that journal for May 26, 1906:--

    "The surcharged penny and halfpenny postage stamps on the 3/-
    and 2/6 denominations respectively were issued on the [page
    54] 10th instant, and withdrawn on the 23rd April. The issue
    was necessary owing to a delay in receipt of a requisition
    for stamps sent to England on the 9th February, and by the
    abnormal sales, from some unknown reason, of the usual penny
    and halfpenny stamps during February and March.

    "A very small issue was made pending the arrival of the mail
    on the 24th, by which the indent above mentioned was received.
    The total issue was 4500 penny and 3780 halfpenny."

The stamps overprinted to provide these emergency supplies were the
2s. 6d. purple and brown on yellow paper, which was overprinted for
the halfpenny, and the 3s. carmine and green on yellow paper for the
penny overprint.

The surcharging was effected in the Colony. In the case of the 1/2d. the
overprint consists of the word

  HALF
  PENNY

in two lines of block capitals, and below this are two bars formed
by ordinary printers' rules about 8 1/2mm. long cancelling the figures
denoting the original value of the stamp.

The type and rules were set up to overprint the stamps thirty at a
time (5 horizontal rows of 6 stamps); thus the complete sheet of 120
stamps had to pass four times through the press. There is a slight
variation in the distance between the bottom of the letters comprising
the word PENNY and the uppermost bar, in the third and fourth rows of
the setting. In rows 1, 2 and 5 the bar is 5mm. away from the bottom
of the type; in rows 3 and 4 it is only 4mm. distant.

The first stamp in the second row of the setting is a variety in which
the E of PENNY is broken and the word reads PFNNY. The only other
variety occurring in the setting is a slightly depressed Y of PENNY.
This occurs in the first stamp in the 5th row.

[page 55]

The 3s. stamp was overprinted with the words "ONE PENNY" in one line
of small capitals. The overprint was applied to a complete pane of 60
stamps at a time, so that the entire sheet of 120 was surcharged at
two impressions instead of four, as in the 1/2d. on 2s. 6d. stamp. The
only varieties which have been recorded of this ONE PENNY overprint
are of slight defects, possibly occurring only in particular
impressions. It, however, exists with the overprint double.

The issue of these two Provisional overprints, following upon the
appearance in 1905 of the 5d., 7 1/2d. and 10d. stamps, brought a good
deal of censure from philatelists, who considered that the Colony was
descending to undignified means of increasing the revenue by the sale
of stamps to collectors. At the instance of Lord Crewe an inquiry has
lately been held into the reasons for the emission of various Colonial
postage stamps, and the report of the Governor of the Gambia is quoted
in the printed report of the Commission:--

    "The Governor of the Colony states that as the supply of the
    1/2d. and 1d. stamps had been exhausted before the arrival of
    a new supply which had been ordered, no [regular] stamps of
    these denominations were available from the 2nd to the 10th
    April, letters requiring such postage being stamped 'Postage
    Paid.' The surcharged stamps were on sale from the 10th to
    the 24th of April, the date on which the new supply became
    available. A surplus was left over, which was destroyed with
    proper precautions."

The unsold balance of the Provisional 1/2d. stamps on hand was destroyed
"under direction from the Secretary of State and by a special Board
appointed by His Excellency the Acting Governor" on October 16, 1906.
How small the "unsold balance" was is not stated.

[page 56]




CHAPTER IX.

Bibliography.

INDEX TO THE CHIEF PRINTED ARTICLES AND PAPERS IN PHILATELIC
PERIODICALS.


ABBREVIATIONS.

2 A.J.P.--American Journal of Philately, 2nd series.
E.W.S.N.--Ewen's Weekly Stamp News.
  G.S.W.--Gibbons Stamp Weekly.
M.W.S.N.--Mekeel's Weekly Stamp News.
P.J.G.B.--Philatelic Journal of Great Britain.
    P.R.--Philatelic Record.
    P.S.--The Postage Stamp.
      S.--Stamps.
  S.C.F.--Stamp Collectors' Fortnightly.
  S.C.M.--Stamp Collectors' Magazine.
S.G.M.J.--Stanley Gibbons Monthly Journal.

NOTE.--Roman figures thus--V.--denote the volume, and Arabic
figures--135--indicate the page. In a few cases the date takes the
place of the volume number. In E.W.S.N. the number of the issue alone
is given.

COLONIAL POST OFFICES COMMISSION [Ward], G.S.W., IX., 88.

    Contains the report of the Governor of the Gambia on the
    Provisional stamps of 1906.

CORRECTED PLATE, 6d., S.C.F., III., 207.

FORGERIES, 6d. [Hilckes], S.C.F., II., 217.

[page 57]

GENERAL. The Postage Stamps, etc. ... of the British Colonies,
Possessions and Protectorates in Africa. Part II., London, 1900.

    The Philatelic Society's work on Africa, pp. 65-72, covers the
    issues of Gambia adhesives from 1869-1898; also the postcards
    and reply paid cards.

---- S.G.M.J., VI., 26, 144; [Pemberton], P.J.G.B., XVII., 78;
[Barnsdall], G.S.W., VIII., 65, 81; [Nankivell], P.S., II., 3;
2 A.J.P., IV., 498; [Lehner], S., I., 90; [Clark], S., I., 102,
reprinted in M.W.S.N., X., 255.

ISSUE OF 1869, S.C.M., VII., 57.

---- Date of [Lehner], S., I., 90; [Nankivell], S., I., 106.

MINOR VARIETIES. Sloping label. [Hilckes], S.C.F., II., 253.

PERFORATIONS [Bacon], P.R., XXV., 3. *** Plates. [Napier &
Bacon], S.G.M.J., XIV., 97. *** Plates.

PROVISIONALS, E.W.S.N., 347, 348, 350, 352, 353, 360, 373.

SHEETS [Thiele], _The Adhesive_, July, 1904.

SPECULATION, S.C.F., VI., 142.

VALUES, S.C.F., VI., 119, 126.

WATERMARKS [Evans], P.R., IV., 224.

[page 58]




CHAPTER X.

Check List.


1869.--No watermark. Imperforate. White gum.

  4d. deep chocolate-brown.
  4d. brown.
  4d. pale brown.
  Yellow gum.
  Double embossing.
  6d. deep blue.
  6d. blue.
  Yellow gum.
  Label sloping to right.
    "     "        left.
  Double embossing.

1874.--Watermarked vertically Crown C.C. Imperforate. White gum.

  4d. deep brown.
  4d. brown.
  4d. pale brown.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       reversed.
    "       inverted and reversed.
    "       bars (division lines of the panes).
    "       portions of words CROWN COLONIES.
[page 59]
  6d. deep blue.
  6d. blue.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       reversed.
    "       inverted and reversed.
    "       bars.
    "       portions of words CROWN COLONIES.

1880.--Watermarked Crown C.C. vertical. Perf. 14. White gum.

  1/2d. golden-yellow.
  1/2d. deep golden-yellow,
  1/2d. pale orange-vermilion.
  1/2d. deep orange-vermilion.
  1/2d. citron.
  1/2d. pale ochre.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       sideways.
    "         "       inverted.
    "       portions of words Crown Colonies.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Single line perf.
  1st comb perf.
  Double perf. top and sides (pale orange-vermilion).
  1d. lake.
  1d. deep lake.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       sideways.
    "         "       inverted.
    "       portions of words Crown Colonies.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Single line perf.
  1st comb perf.
[page 60]
  2d. pale rose.
  2d. rose.
  2d. deep rose.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       sideways.
    "          "      inverted.
    "       portions of words Crown Colonies.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  ? Single line perf.
  1st comb perf.
  Dot variety.
  3d. pale ultramarine.
  3d. deep ultramarine.
  3d. deep blue.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       sideways.
    "          "      inverted.
    "       portions of words Crown Colonies.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Single line perf.
  1st comb perf.
  4d. sepia-brown.
  4d. deep sepia-brown.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       sideways.
    "          "      inverted.
    "       portions of words Crown Colonies.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Single line perf.
  1st comb perf.
  6d. pale blue.
  6d. blue.
[page 61]
  6d. deep blue.
  Slanting label to right.
    "        "      left.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       sideways.
    "          "      inverted.
    "       portions of words Crown Colonies.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Single line perf. (vertical watermark).
    "      "        (sideways watermark).
  1st comb perf.
  1s. bright green.
  1s. deep green.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       sideways.
    "          "      inverted.
    "       portions of words Crown Colonies.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  ? Single line perf.
  1st comb perf.

1886-7.--Watermarked Crown C.A. sideways. Comb perf. 14.

  1/2d. grey-green.
  1/2d. myrtle-green.
  Double embossing.
    "      "       one inverted.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark portions of words CROWN AGENTS.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Imperforate (grey-green).
  Treble perf. at bottom.
  Left stroke of M long.
  Right  "         "
  Sheets--1st and 2nd comb perforations.
[page 62]
  1d. carmine.
  1d. rose-carmine.
  1d. crimson.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark portions of words CROWN AGENTS.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Imperforate (pale crimson).
  Sheets--1st and 2nd comb perforations.
  2d. orange-yellow.
  2d. orange.
  2d. deep orange.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark portions of words CROWN AGENTS.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Imperforate (orange-yellow).
  Sheets--1st and 2nd comb perforations.
  2 1/2d. pale ultramarine.
  2 1/2d. deep ultramarine.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       portions of words CROWN AGENTS.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Imperforate (pale ultramarine).
  Sheets--1st and 2nd comb perforations.
  3d. grey.
  3d. slate-grey.
  3d. pearl-grey.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark portions of words CROWN AGENTS.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Imperforate (pearl-grey).
  Sheets--1st and 2nd comb perforations.
  Final printing, 3 guide dots in left margin (pearl-grey only).
[page 63]
  4d. brown.
  4d. deep brown.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark inverted.
    "       portions of words CROWN AGENTS.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Imperforate (brown).
  Sheets--1st comb perforation.
  6d. olive-green.
  6d. bronze-green.
  6d. grey-green.
  Label slanting to right.
    "     "         left.
  Double embossing.
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark portions of words CROWN AGENTS.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Imperforate (slate-green).
  Sheets--1st and 2nd comb perforations.
  New plate without defective top row.
  1s. violet (shades).
  1s. deep violet.
  Double embossing.
    "      "        one inverted (violet).
  Yellow gum.
  Watermark portions of words CROWN AGENTS.
    "       division lines of the panes.
  Imperforate (deep violet).
  Sheets--1st comb perforation.

[page 64]


1898.--Watermarked Crown C.A. (upright). Perf. 14.

    [NOTE.--Unless otherwise stated, the plate number is 2.]

  1/2d. dull green and green (plates 2 and 3).
  1d. carmine and carmine.
  1d. deep carmine and deep carmine (plate 3).
  2d. orange and mauve.
  2 1/2d. ultramarine and ultramarine.
  3d. mauve and pale ultramarine.
  Imperforate.
  3d. deep purple and deep ultramarine (plate 3).
  4d. brown and ultramarine.
  6d. olive-green and carmine.
  1s. violet and green.

1902-1905.--Watermarked Crown C.A. Perf. 14.

    [Printed from plate 1 in each case.]

  1/2d. green and green.
  1d. carmine and carmine.
  2d. orange and mauve.
  2 1/2d. ultramarine and ultramarine.
  3d. magenta and ultramarine.
  4d. brown and ultramarine.
  6d. sage-green and carmine.
  1s. violet and green.
  1s. 6d. green and carmine on yellow paper.
  2s. deep slate and orange.
  2s. 6d. purple and brown on yellow paper.
  3s. carmine and green on yellow paper.

[page 65]

1904-1905.--Watermarked Multiple Crown C.A. Perf. 14.

  1/2d. green and green.
  1d. carmine and carmine.
  2d. orange and mauve.
  2 1/2d. ultramarine and ultramarine.
  3d. magenta and ultramarine.
  4d. brown and ultramarine.
  5d. grey and black.
  6d. sage-green and carmine.
  7 1/2d. green and carmine.
  10d. olive-brown and carmine.
  1s. violet and green.
  2s. deep slate and orange.

1906 (April 10).--Provisional Issue. Overprinted in black.

  HALF
  PENNY on 2s. 6d. purple and brown on yellow paper.
  5mm. between letters and bars.
  4mm.       "          "
  Depressed Y in PENNY.
  ONE PENNY on 3s. carmine and green on yellow paper.
  Double overprint.
  Depressed Y in PENNY.
    "       E      "

[page 66]




APPENDIX.

Notes on the Postmarks.

By DOUGLAS ELLIS.


The first Gambia stamps appeared early in 1869, and postmarks of that
year are usually composed of a circle with "Gambia" across the centre
in a straight line, and the date in two lines below and a control
letter above.

This postmark is usually in red, but is also found in black. It
was apparently only in use for a short time, being superseded by
a circular postmark of the same size, but with "Gambia" at top and
"Paid" at bottom, both following the line of the circle.

The day and month are in a straight line across the centre of the
circle, with the year (last two figures only) below and a control
letter above. This, in the early dated specimens, is A, followed by
B and then C. The postmark is always in red down to the early part of
1887.

On the early imperforate stamps we find a similar postmark in black,
but lettered "Gambia" above and "Unpaid" below. This was probably
intended for use on letters posted without a stamp. The control letter
is A.

[page 67]

From 1887 to 1892 the Gambia-Paid postmark appears in black. The
control letters are B or C.

In 1892 this was superseded by a fresh cancellation with "Bathurst"
above and "Gambia" below, both following the line of the circle, the
date across the centre as before, and the control letter being C.

The lettering may be found in two sizes; on one the distance between
the B of Bathurst and the G of Gambia is 3mm. and on the other 6mm.

In 1895 the control letter C was replaced by a six-pointed *, and this
cancellation is still in use.

About 1901 a special postmark for Registered letters was brought
into use, consisting of a large ellipse with "Registered" above and
"Gambia" below, both following the line of curve, and with date in
centre and control letter above, either B or C, the latter often being
found reversed or upside down. This is still in use.

From 1895 onwards stamps may be found cancelled with a circular
postmark with "Received" above and "Gambia" below, and either a
control letter C or a six-pointed *. Possibly this was a Fiscal
cancellation wrongly used on postage stamps.

Most Gambia stamps, from the C.C. perforated issue onwards, may be
found with a cancellation consisting of seven parallel bars forming
a circle of 19mm. diameter, the two outside bars being rounded off to
form part of the circle. Though this can be found on the last issue of
Queen's Head stamps, it does not appear to be now used.

On the 1887 and later issues we find a cancellation composed of four
concentric circles, the diameter of the largest being 18mm.

[page 68]

Many letters appear to have been posted on board the mail steamer, or
sent from the post office without the stamp being cancelled, as Gambia
stamps are found with the mail steamer postmark, which consists of two
circles with "Paquebot" above, and either "Plymouth" or, "Liverpool"
below, both being between the two circles.

The date, comprising not only the year and month but day and hour, is
in three lines in the centre.

Many Gambia stamps can also be found postmarked "Freetown, Sierra
Leone," or "Registered, Sierra Leone," but as we have no record of
Gambia stamps being used to defray postage from Sierra Leone, we must
conclude that they were sent on by a steamer which did not possess a
post office, and cancelled at Sierra Leone before being shipped on the
mail steamer.

Stamps of Gambia can also occasionally be found with the postmark of
the French Colony of Senegambia.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: Plate I.--6d. Imperforate.]

[Illustration: Plate II.--1/2d. Single line perforation.]

[Illustration: Plate III.--1/2d. First comb perforation (points down).]

[Illustration: Plate IV.--1d. First comb perforation.]

[Illustration: Plate V.--2d. First comb perforation.]

[Illustration: Plate VI.--2 1/2d. First comb perforation (points up).]

[Illustration: Plate VII.--3d. First comb perforation. Three guide
dots to right.]

[Illustration: Plate VIII.--3d. Second comb perforation. Three guide
dots to left.]

[Illustration: Plate IX.--4d. First comb perforation.]

[Illustration: Plate X.--6d. First comb perforation (sloping label
stamps, 1 and 5).]

[Illustration: Plate XI.--6d. Second comb perforation (sloping label
stamps, 1 and 5).]

[Illustration: Plate XII.--Diagram of an uncut sheet of "Crown C.A."
paper.]

[Illustration: Plate XIII.--Diagram showing method of cutting the
"Crown C.A." paper for the "Cameo" stamps.]

[Illustration: Plate XIV.--6d. New plate. Without defective top row.]

[Illustration: Plate XV.--1s. First comb perforation.]

[Illustration: Plate XVI.--2 1/2d. Complete Sheet, shewing arrangement
of panes, fitting half sheet of watermarked paper, which shews through
the page from the back.]

[Illustration: N.B.--To be examined through the stamps on the other
side of the plate.]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gambia, by Frederick John Melville

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GAMBIA ***

***** This file should be named 26601.txt or 26601.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/0/26601/

Produced by Simon Gardner, Sankar Viswanathan, Adrian
Mastronardi, The Philatelic Digital Library Project at
http://www.tpdlp.net, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
