The Project Gutenberg EBook of How to Read the Crystal, by Sepharial

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: How to Read the Crystal
       or, Crystal and Seer

Author: Sepharial

Release Date: September 14, 2008 [EBook #26622]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO READ THE CRYSTAL ***




Produced by Ruth Hart







[Note:  In the original text, the Concise Dictionary of
Astrological Terms displayed a small astrological glyph illustration
next to each term, but I have not indicated these in this online text.]



HOW TO READ THE CRYSTAL
OR, CRYSTAL AND SEER

WITH A CONCISE DICTIONARY OF ASTROLOGICAL TERMS

BY

SEPHARIAL

AUTHOR OF "BOOK OF CARDS," "THE LITTLE BOOK OF MAGIC," ETC.


LONDON FOULSHAM & CO., LTD.
10 & 11, RED LION COURT, FLEET STREET, E.C.
1922


_Printed in Great Britain_


CONTENTS

Chapter I.     A Postulate                                5
Chapter II.    Qualifications                            13
Chapter III.   Preliminaries                             17
Chapter IV.    The Vision                                21
Chapter V.     Difficulties                              25
Chapter VI.    Symbols                                   29
Chapter VII.   Some Experiences                          35
Chapter VIII.  Directions for Using the Ovoids and
               Spheres for Crystal or Mirror Vision      51
Chapter IX.    Consise Dictionary of Astrological Terms  53



CHAPTER I.

A POSTULATE

Any attempt at a scientific explanation of the phenomenon of
"crystal seering," to use an irregular but comprehensive term,
would perhaps fall short of completeness, and certainly would
depend largely upon the exercise of what Professor Huxley was
wont to call "the scientific imagination." The reasons for this are
obvious. We know comparatively little about atomic structure in
relation to nervous organism. We are informed to a certain degree
upon atomic ratios; we know that all bodies are regarded by the
physicist as a congeries of atoms, and that these atoms are
"centres of force." Primarily, the atomic theory would refer all
heterogeneous bodies to one homogeneous substance, from which
substance, by means of a process loosely referred to as
"differentiation," all the elements are derived. These elements are
the result of atomic arrangement, and the atoms of each are known
to have various vibrations, the extent of which is called the "mean
free path of vibration." The indestructibility of matter, the fact that
all nature is convertible, and the absolute association of matter and
force, lead to the conclusion that since every change in matter
implies a change of force, matter must be ever living and active,
and primarily of a spiritual nature. The great Swedenborg, no less
a scientist than a spiritual seer, laid down his doctrine of
"Correspondences" upon the primary concept of the spiritual
origin of all force and matter. Matter, he argued, was the ultimate
expression of Spirit, as Form was that of Force. Spirit was to Force
what Matter was to Form--our ideas of Matter and Form being
closely related. Hence, for every _Spiritual Force_ there is a
corresponding _Material Form_, and the material or natural world
corresponds at all points with the world of spirit, without being
identical. This, in brief, is the conclusion to which the "scientific
imagination" of the present day, extending as it does from the
known into the unknown, is slowly but surely leading up.

Taking as our postulate the scientific statement of the atomic
structure of bodies, atomic vibration and molecular arrangement,
we turn to consider the action exerted by such bodies upon the
nervous organism of man.

The function of the brain--which must be regarded as the bulbous
root of a nervous plant whose branches grow downwards--is
twofold; to affect, and to be affected. In its active or positive
condition it affects the whole of the vital and muscular processes
in the man, finding expression in vital action. In its passive or
negative state it is affected by impressions coming to it in different
ways through the sense-organs, resulting in nervous and mental
action. It is this latter phase of brain-function with which we are
immediately concerned.

The range of our sense-perception puts us momentarily and
continually in relation with the material world, or rather with a
_certain portion_ of it. We say a certain portion because we
know from scientific experience that the scale or gamut of
sense-perception is limited, both as to its extent and as to its
quality. Many insects, birds, and quadrupeds have keener perceptions
in some respects than man. The photographic plate can register
impressions which are beyond the perception of our highest sense
of sight. The Roentgen rays have put us into relations with a new
order of impression--records quite beyond the range of our normal
vision. The animalcule and microbic life, itself microscopic, has
yet its own order of sense-organs related to a world of vitality
beyond our ken. These, and a host of other observations, serve to
show that our normal perceptions are extremely limited, and,
further, that nature does not cease to exist where we cease to
perceive her.

The relation of our sense-organs to the several degrees of matter,
to solids, fluids, gases, atmospheric and etheric motions, vary in
different individuals to such a wide extent that the average
wool-sorter leaves many an artist behind in his perception of
colour-shades. The same odour is perceptible by one person and
unrecognisable by another. In the gradation of sound, too, the
same differences of perception will be commonly noticed. But
quite apart from the scale or range of perception, the _quality_ of a
sense-impression is found to vary with different persons. By this
we mean that the same body will affect different persons in
dissimilar manner. Hence arises the variety of "tastes" in regard to
forms, colours, flavours, scents, sounds, fabrics, etc., what is
agreeable to one being highly objectionable to another. The
experience is to common to need illustration; but the conclusion to
which we are led is that, in relation to the nervous system of man,
every material body has a variable effect. And this clears the
ground for a statement of our views in regard to the Crystal and its
effects upon the seer.

The Crystal itself is a clear pellucid piece of quartz or beryl,
sometimes oval in shape, but more generally spheroidal. It is
accredited by Reichenbach and other researchers with highly
magnetic qualities capable of producing in a suitable subject a
state analogous to the ordinary waking trance of the hypnotists. It
is believed that all bodies convey, or are the vehicles of, a certain
universal magnetic property, variously called Od, Odyle, etc.,
which is regarded as an inert and passive substance underlying the
more active forces familiar to us in kinetic, calorific, and
electrical phenomena. In this respect it bears a position analogous
to the Argon of the atmosphere. It is capable of taking up,
sympathetically, the vibrations of those bodies or elements to
which it is temporarily related. But of itself it has no activity,
although in its still, well-like, and calm depths it holds the
potentiality of all magnetic forces. This Odyle, then, is particularly
potent in the quartz or beryl, when brought into activity by the
intention of the seer. It produces and retains more readily in that
form the various images communicated to it from the soul of man.
And the soul, in this connection, must be regarded as the
repository of all that complex mass of emotions, thoughts,
impressions, perceptions, feelings, etc., included in the inner life
of man; for the soul of man is not the less a scientific fact because
there are those who bandy words concerning its origin and nature.
Reichenbach has shown by a series of experiments upon sensitive
and hypnotised subjects that metals and other substances produce
very marked effects in contact with the human body. Those
experiments showed, too, that the same substance affected
different patients in diverse manner. The hypnotic experiments of
Dr. Charcot, the well-known French biologist, also demonstrate
the _rapport_ existing between the sensitive patient and foreign
bodies when in proximity or contact; as for example, when a bottle
containing a poison was taken at random from among a number of
others of exactly similar appearance, and applied to the back of the
patient's neck, the hypnotised subject would once develop all the
symptoms of poisoning by arsenic, strychnine, prussic acid, etc., it
being afterwards ascertained that the bottle thus applied actually
contained the toxine whose effects had been portrayed by the
subject.

It need not, then, be a matter of surprise to learn that the Crystal
exerts a very definite and sensible effect upon the nervous system
of a certain order of subjects. It does not affect all alike, nor act
in exactly the same way on those whom it does so affect. Where its
action is more or less rapid and remarkable, the quartz or beryl
Crystal may be taken as the most effective medium for producing
the vision. In other cases the concave mirror, either of polished
copper or black japan, will be found serviceable for inducing the
clairvoyant state. In some other cases, again, a bowl of water is
sufficient. The ecstatic vision was first induced in the case of
Jacob Boehme by the sun's rays falling upon a bowl of water
which caught and dazzled his eyes while he was engaged in the
humble task of cobbling a pair of shoes. As a consequence of this
exaltation of the sense of sight we have those remarkable
works, "The Aurora," "The Four Complexions," "The Signatura
Rerum," and many others, together with a volume of letters and
commentaries which, in addition to being of a highly spiritual
nature, must also be regarded as scholarly when referred to their
authorship.

In cases like the above it may be said that the clairvoyant faculty is
constitutional and already fully developed, waiting only the
circumstances which shall serve to bring it into active play,
Emanuel Swedenborg, if we remember rightly, was 54 years of
age before he awoke to the consciousness of his spiritual vision.

The medium employed for inducing the clairvoyant state cannot
be definitely prescribed. It must remain a matter of experiment for
each investigator. This, however, may be said:  _Every person
whose life is not wholly sunk in selfish and material pleasures, but
in whom the aspiration to a nobler and purer life is a hunger the
world cannot satisfy, has within himself the power to see and
know that which he seeks behind the veil of his earthly senses.
Nature has never produced a desire she could not satisfy. There is
no hope, however vague, that the soul cannot define, and no
aspiration, however high, that the wings of the spirit cannot reach.
Therefore be patient and strive_.

That there are some in whom the psychic faculties are more prone
to activity than in others is certain, as also some in whom these
powers are native, by spiritual or hereditary succession; all of
which may be determined from their genitures by the astrological
art. In others, the determination of the natural powers takes a more
practical and mundane tendency, making them more successful in
the affairs of daily life than in aught of a spiritual nature St. Paul
has spoken of a diversity of gifts. "One star differeth from another
in glory," he says, in very truth. This distribution of natural gifts
proceeds from the celestial world, and is so ordered that each
person born on this earth may fulfil his part in the economy of
life. And because the spiritual needs of mankind are of primary
importance, there are those born in whom the power of spiritual
interpretation is the dominant faculty, such persons being the
natural channels of intercourse between the superior and inferior
worlds. These are to mankind what a certain order of microbic life
is to the body of man--organic interpreters, translating the
elements of food into blood, nerve, fibre, tissue, etc., agreeably to
the laws of their being.

For those who would aspire to the gift of pure vision, and in whom
the faculty is striving for expression, the following pages are
written. To others we would say, Be content. All birds are not
eagles. The nightingale has a song, the humming-bird a plumage
which the eagle will never possess. The nightingale may sing to
the stars, humming-bird to the flowers, but the eagle, whose
tireless eyes gaze into the heart of day, is uncompanioned in its
lofty loneliness in the barren mountain-tops.



CHAPTER II.

QUALIFICATIONS

There are in existence certain magical works, such as those of
Trithemius and Barrett, wherein the use of the Crystal is
accompanied by certain rites and invocations. This ceremonial
magic we are disposed to repudiate as highly dangerous. It brings
into play a number of forces which may well prove disastrous in
inexperienced hands. All action and reaction are equal and
opposite. A child might easily fire a cannon, but could not
possibly withstand its recoil. So in the education of the spiritual
faculties, it is better to encourage their natural development by
legitimate exercise than to invoke the action of stimulants which
we may not afterwards be able to control. The continual fretting of
the water will wear away a rock, though none doubts the water is
softer than the rock. If the barrier between this and the soul-world
be like granite, yet the patient and persistent action of a
determined mind will sooner or later wear it away, the last layer
will break down, and the light will stream through, dazzling the
unaccustomed eyes with its effulgence.

It is our desire to indicate by what means and by what persons the
natural development of the clairvoyant faculty may be achieved.

First, in regard to the subject, medium or seer. There are two
distinct temperament in which the faculty is likely to be dominant,
and capable of high and rapid culture. There is the nervous
temperament associated, with a high muscular development,
classified as the "mental-motive" temperament. It is characterized
by extreme activity of body and mind, a certain nervous
excitability, prominent features, full osseous development,
prominent brows, intent gaze, and generally a swarthy complexion.
This type represents the _positive_ seers, in whom the mind
goes out towards the images of the soul. The other, in whom
the _passive_ temperament is present, and to whom the soul-images
come by passive reflection, as things mirrored in a moveless
lake, are known by the following characteristics: Full and
lymphatic habit, pale or delicate complexion, generally blue
eyes, straight fine hair; small, plump, and cold hands; a high,
piping or feeble voice, and languid disposition.

These two types--of which there are many varieties--achieve their
psychic development by quite opposite means. The positive seer
works with effort, throwing out the soul-images by the power of
his will, perceiving them with more or less accuracy, and
thereafter turning them over in the mind, reasoning and
questioning concerning their import and meaning. The passive
seer, on the contrary, works not at all and makes no effort, the
visions coming slowly, almost imperceptibly, and in most cases
having a literal interpretation. The visions in this case are not
allegorical, emblematic, or symbolic, as in the case of the positive
seer, but are actual visions of facts just as they have happened, or
will transpire in the future. Of the two orders, the passive is the
more serviceable because the more perspicuous, but it has the
disadvantage of being largely under the control of external
influences, and hence is frequently incapable of "seeing" anything
whatever.

The positive type of seer exercises an introspective vision,
searching inwardly towards the soul-world whence the revelations
proceed. Of what nature these revelations are will appear in the
following pages. The passive type of seer, on the contrary, remains
_in statu quo_, open to impressions coming inwards towards the
perceptive faculty, but making no effort towards either outward
or inward searching. The success of each depends upon the
observance of that method which is agreeable to their respective
temperaments.

In regard to the qualifications which should supplement and
sustain the natural aptitude of the seer or seeress, the following
remarks may be of general service.

Self-possession and confidence in one's own soul-faculties must
be the firm rock upon which all revelations should rest. The purer
the intention and motive of the seer, the more lucid will be the
visions accorded. No reliable vision can be obtained by one whose
nature is not inherently truthful. Any selfish desire dominanting
the mind in regard to any thing or person will distort the visions
and render them misleading, while a persistent self-seeking spirit
will effectually shut the doors upon all visions whatsoever.
Therefore, above all things it is essential for the investigator to
have an unflinching love of truth, to be resigned to the will of
Heaven, to accept the revelations accorded in a spirit of grateful
confidence, and finally to dispel all doubt and controversy
by appeal to the eyes of one's own immortal soul. These are
qualifications with which the seer or seeress should be invested,
and if with these the quest is unsuccessful after a period of earnest
trial, it must be taken as sufficient warrant that the faculty is not
in the category of one's individual powers. Haply, the same
qualifications brought to bear upon some other psychic faculty
will result in a rich recompense.



CHAPTER III.

PRELIMINARIES

Having obtained a good Crystal, as free as possible from blemish,
care must be taken to keep it is much as possible in a dark place
when not in use. The best covering therefore is a black one of soft
material, such as velvet, which will not scratch the polished
surface of the quartz.[*] Exposure to the sun's rays not only scores
the faces of the crystal, but also puts the odylic substance into
activity, distributing and dissipating the magnetic force stored up
therein. It must not be understood that the visions are in the crystal
itself. They are in the soul of the seer. But the odylic substance is
acted upon by the nervo-vital emanations of the body of the seer,
and reacts upon the brain centres by means of the optic nerves.
That is why it is necessary to keep the crystal as free as possible
from disturbing elements. For the same reason, when in use, the
crystal should be overshadowed by the seer, and so placed that _no
direct rays_ of light from sun, or lamp, or gasalier may fall upon
it. The odyle, as has been already stated, rapidly responds to
surrounding magnetic conditions, and to the vibrations of
surrounding Bodies, and to none more powerfully than the etheric
perturbation caused by combustion--indeed, to light of any kind.

[*] It is bad policy to buy a cheap article. A good crystal
is more than worth the outlay. Our publishers supply crystals,
varying from 15s. 6d. upward, and from what we have seen of
them we can safely recommend them as reliable articles.

For similar reasons the room in which the sitting is conducted
should be only moderately warm and shady as possible, provided
it be not actually dark. A light by which one can just see to read
average print is sufficient for the purpose in view. The crystal with
which we have had the most satisfactory and surprising results is a
cube of fine azure beryl, the deep blue of its serene depths being
peculiarly restful and inspiring. But, as we have said, nothing is
more effective than the white quartz crystal when found suitable.

It is important that all persons sitting in the same room as the seer
should be at arm's length away from him--farther if possible.
Silence should be uniformly observed by those present. A recorder
should be at hand to set down everything the seer may give voice
to. If any questions are addressed to the seer while the sitting is in
progress, they should be spoken in an undertone and as nearly a
monotone as may be so that the seer is not suddenly surprised into
consciousness of his surroundings, and the psychic thread thereby
broken.

At first the sittings should not be of longer duration than fifteen
minutes, but it is important they should take place _regularly_,
every day if possible, and always at the same hour and in the
_same place_. By this method of procedure it will be found that a
cumulative effect is produced and success more speedily ensured.
The reason is obvious. All actions tend to repeat themselves, to
become automatic, to pass from the purposive into the habitual,
and hence the psychic faculties will, if actuated at any set time and
place, tend to bestir themselves towards the same end as that to
which they were first moved by the conscious will and intention of
the seer.

Until definite and satisfactory results are obtained, not more than
two persons should be present at the sittings, and these should be
in sympathy with the seer and each other. When the sitting is over,
it will be found agreeable and useful to discuss the results
obtained; or if none are elicited, the seer can give an account of his
or her impressions and feelings during the sitting. It will be
interesting to note these experiences and to compare them from
time to time.

The seer or seeress must not be disheartened if at the first few
sittings nothing of any moment takes place, but must persevere,
with patience and self-control. Indeed, when one comes to
consider the fact that for hundreds of generations the psychic
faculties inherent in mankind have lain in absolute neglect, that
perhaps the faculty of "clear vision" has never yet been brought
into activity by any save the most remote of our ancestors, it will
not be thought remarkable that it should be at first difficult get any
definite results. Rather should it be a matter of surprise that the
power is still with us, that it is not wholly irresponsive to the voice
of the soul. While, in the course of physical evolution, many
important functions have undergone remarkable changes, and
organs, once active and useful, have become stunted, impotent,
and in some cases extinct; yet it is said that seeds have lain
dormant in arid soil for hundreds of years, to spring into leaf and
flower as soon as the rains have fallen and the climate changed.
The faculty of pure vision is like the latent seed-life. It waits only
the conditions which favour its growth and development; and
though for hundreds of years it may have lain dormant, yet in a
few days, weeks, or months it may attain the proportions of a
beautiful flower, a thing of wonder and delight, gracing the garden
of the soul.



CHAPTER IV.

THE VISION

Visions seen in the crystal are of two kinds, both of which may be
conveyed to the perception of the seer in two ways. The two kinds
of visions are: 1, Direct visions; 2, Symbolic visions. The first of
these is a representation of scene or incident exactly as it will
transpire, or has already happened, either in relation to the seer,
those sitting with him, or yet in relation to public affairs. The
second order of vision is a representation, by means of symbol,
ideograph, or other indirect means, of events similar to those
conveyed by direct vision.

In most cases it will be found that answers, to questions take the
form of symbols. But this is not always so, as will appear from
the following remarks concerning the manner in which these
impressions or visions are conveyed to the perception of the seer.

The vision is conveyed in one of two ways--first, as a vivid picture
affecting the focus and retina of the eye, perfect in its outline and
colouring, and giving the impression of being either distant or near
or at moderate range, Secondly, it may be conveyed as a vivid
impression accompanied by a hazy and undefined formation in the
crystal field. In this form it becomes an apperception rather than a
perception, the consciousness receiving the impression of the
vision to be conveyed before it has had time to form and define
itself in the crystal.

The _direct_ vision is more generally found in association with the
_passive_ type of seer. It is not usually so regular and constant as
the symbolic vision, owing to the peculiarities of the negative
temperament. When it does appear however, it is particularly lucid
and actual, and has its literal fulfilment in the world of experience
and fact. It is an actual representation of past or future event, or
yet of what is then presently happening at some place more or less
distant.

The _symbolical_ vision is more closely associated with the
_positive_ temperament. It has the advantage of being more ready
and constant in its manifestation than the _direct_ vision, while on
the other hand it is frequently a matter of speculation as to what
the symbolic vision may portend.

The positive temperament, centripetal and forceful in its action,
appears to throw off the soul-images, afterwards going out towards
them in a mood of speculative inquiry. The passive temperament,
however, centrifugal and sensitive, most frequently feels first and
sees afterwards, the visionary process being wholly devoid of
speculation or mental activity. The one sees and thinks, the other
feels and sees that, in a word, is the distinction between the two
temperaments.

In the early stages of development the crystal will begin to cloud
over, first becoming dull, then suffused with milky clouds, among
which sparkle a large number of little specks of light like gold dust
in the sunlight. The focus of the eyes is inconstant, the
pupil rapidly expanding and contracting, the crystal at times
disappearing entirely in a haze or film which seems to pass before
the eyes. Then the haze will disappear, and the crystal will loom
up into full view again, accompanied by a lapse of the seer into
full consciousness. This may be the only experience of the first
few sittings, it may be that of many; but, sooner or later, there will
come a moment when the milky clouds and dancing starlights will
suddenly vanish--a bright azure expanse like an open summer sky
will occupy the field of vision; the brain will take up a spasmodic
action, as if opening and shutting in the superior coronal region;
there will be a tightening of the scalp on a level with the base of
the brain, as if the floor of the cerebrum were contracting; the seer
will catch his breath with a spasmodic sigh, and the first vision
will stand out, clear and life-like, against the azure screen of
heaven.

The danger at this supreme moment is that the seer will be
surprised into full waking consciousness. During the process of
abstraction which precedes every vision or series of visions,
the consciousness of the seer is gradually and imperceptibly
withdrawn from his surroundings. He forgets that he is seated in
this or that room, that such a person is at his right hand, such
another at his left. He forgets that he is gazing into the crystal. He
hears nothing, sees nothing, save what is passing before the eyes
of his soul. He loses sight, for the time, even of his own identity.

Therefore, when his vision is suddenly arrested by an apparition,
startling in its reality and instantaneous production, even though
hoped for and expected, the reaction is so violent and rapid that
the seer is frequently carried back into the full consciousness
of his physical conditions. Therefore, the qualifications of
self-possession and confidence in one's own soul-faculties have been
stated as of primary importance in this domain of research. Excess
of joy or fear at sight of the vision will be fatal to its continuance
and to the condition of mind required for the process of
development. This fact must therefore be borne in mind.



CHAPTER V.

DIFFICULTIES

Under this head we propose to cite a few of the obstacles to be met
with in the process of inducing the psychic vision, and some also
which may be expected in connection with the faculty when
induced.

Putting aside the greatest of all obstacles--that of constitutional
unfitness--as having been already discussed in preceding pages,
the first obstacle to be avoided is that of ill-health. The importance
of a moderate and sustaining diet in regard to psychic development
cannot be too strongly urged. All overloading of the stomach with
indigestible food and addiction to alcoholic drinks tends to cloud
the spiritual perception, It depletes the brain-centres, gives the
heart too much work, and overthrows the equilibrium of the
system. Ill-health follows; the mind is centred upon the suffering
body, spiritual aspiration ceases, and the soul folds its wings and
falls into the sleep of oblivion. The consciousness of man works
from a centre, which co-ordinates and includes all the phenomena
of thought, feeling, and volition. This centre of consciousness is
capable of rapid displacement, alternating between the most
external of our bodily functions and the most internal of our
spiritual operations. It cannot be active in all parts of our complex
constitution at one and the same moment. Hence it follows that
when one part of our nature is active another is dormant as
happens in sleeping and waking, dream-life being that wherein the
centre of consciousness hovers between the body and the soul.

With these considerations in mind it will be obvious to every one
that a condition in which the consciousness is held in bondage by
the infirmities of the body is not one conducive to psychic
development. The constitution need not be robust, but it should at
all events be free from disorder and pain. Some of the most
ethereal natures are associated with a delicate organism, but while
the balance is maintained the soul is free to develop its latent
powers.

It is advisable not to sit for crystal reading, or indeed for any order
of psychic exercise, immediately after or before a meal. The body
should be at rest, and the mind contented and tranquil. Again, the
attitude of the seer should not be too expectant or over-anxious in
regard to the production of the vision. Let the development take its
natural course. Do not force the young plant in its growth or it will
come to a premature end. Take time, as Nature does. It is a great
work, and much patience is needed. The acorn becomes the sturdy
oak only because Nature is contented with small results, because
she can afford to wait and is never in a hurry to see the result of
her operations. And because she is patient and careful in her
beginnings, her works are wonderfully great and complete in their
issues. Above all, they endure. Whoever breathes slowest will live
the longest. This is an Eastern saying which voices a fundamental
truth.

The vision is produced. The faculty of clairvoyance has become
more or less under the control of the mind. New difficulties arise,
and, of these, two will be conspicuous. The first is that of
time-measure, and the other is that of interpretation. The former is
peculiar to both orders of vision, the _direct_ and the _symbolic_.
The difficulty of interpretation is, of course, peculiar to the latter
order of vision.

Time-measure is, perhaps, the greatest difficulty encountered by
the seer. It is sometimes impossible to determine whether a vision
relates to the past, the present, or the future. In most cases,
however, the seer learns by experience how to distinguish, and
frequently it will be found that an intuitive impression of
the period involved comes with the vision itself. In our own
experience the foreground, middle distance, and background, mark
off the present, the approximate, and the distant future. In tracing
the succession of events, we have found it convenient to think of
time-measure at the outset, bending the sight upon, each month or
year separately and in succession, noting the visions that arise with
each in order. And as regards the past or future, we distinguish
between them by an intuitive sense rather than by any other
means, and very rarely is this sense deceived, for it is part of the
psychic faculty we had in training.

Therefore, if the vision appears in the foreground and, as it were,
at the feet of the seer, then it may be taken as relating to the
present or a quite recent date. In the same way, the middle distance
indicates the near past or future, and the background denotes the
more distant past or future. The other difficulty we have
mentioned is that of interpretation of such symbols as may arise.
The following pages will indicate some of the symbols and their
meanings. The rest must be left to the intuition of the seer.



CHAPTER VI.

SYMBOLS

Symbols are thought-forms which convey, by the association of
ideas, a definite meaning in regard to the mind that generates
them. They depend wholly upon the laws of thought, and the
correspondence that exists between the spiritual and material
worlds, between the subject and the object of our consciousness.

Among the ancients symbols were the original form of record, of
communicating ideas, and of writing. The hieroglyphs of the
Egyptians, the word-pictures of the aborigines of Central America,
the ideographic writing of ancient Mongolia, are all forms
of symbolic writing, drawn from natural objects. The Hebrew
alphabet, the names of its 22 letters, clearly indicate the nomadic
and simple life of those "dwellers in tents." Thus the names of the
letters include such objects as ox, tent, tent-door, tent-peg, camel,
fish, fish-hook, an eye, a hand, a basket, a rope-coil, a head, an
ox-goad, water, etc. From the combination of these simple forms the
words are constructed. Thus the word used to signify "knowledge"
is derived from three letters, Yod, Daleth, Oin, which mean a
hand, a door, an eye. The _hand_ denotes action, power, etc.; the
_door_ denotes entering, initiation, etc.; the _eye_ denotes seeing,
vision. Therefore the three ideograph; when combined, denote
"opening the door to see," which is a very graphic way of
conveying the idea of acquiring knowledge. One cannot help
seeing the hand of the young Hebrew drawing aside the canvas
door of the tent and peeping in to see what secrets may be learned!

All symbols, therefore, may be translated by reference to the
known nature, quality, and uses of the objects they represent. Thus
a foot signifies a journey, and also understanding; a mouth denotes
speech, revelation; an ear news, information, and, if ugly and
distorted, scandal or abuse. The sun, shining brightly, denotes
prosperity, honours. The moon, when crescent denotes success,
increase, and improvement. When gibbous, it denotes sickness,
decadence, losses, and trouble. The sun eclipsed shows death or
ruin of a man; the moon, similarly afflicted, denotes equal danger
to a woman. These are natural interpretations.

Every symbol, however, has a threefold interpretation, and the
nature of the inquiry or the purpose for which the vision is sought
must determine the meaning of the symbols. If they refer to the
spiritual world the interpretation must be agreeable to the nature of
the spirit, and similarly if they refer to the intellectual or physical
worlds. Thus a pair of scales would denote Divine Justice in the
spiritual sense, judgment in the intellectual sense, and obligation
in the material sense. If the scales were evenly balanced the
augury would be good. But if weighed down on one side it is
_Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin_, "Thou art weighed and found
wanting"; it shows a corrupt judgment, a wrong conclusion, an
unbalanced mind, failure in one's obligations, injustice, etc. And if
a sword should lie across the scales or be seen overhead, then a
speedy judgment will be meted out.

A ship is a symbol of intercourse, of trading, of voyaging, etc. If in
full sail it shows that the communication with the spiritual world is
increasing, that news from far-off lands will come to hand, that
trade will increase, that a voyage will be taken. If aught is written
on the sails it will be an additional source of enlightenment. If the
symbol of death be written there, it shows speedy translation to a
far-off country in which the subject will die. That far-off country
may be the spiritual world itself in which case the death would be
a natural one. But if the ship's sails are drooping, then it denotes a
falling away of spiritual influx of intelligence, and of trade.
Expected news will not come.

Black bread denotes a famine, and if it be spotted with yellow
blotches it shows a plague. This symbol was seen, with a goat
butting at it, in June, 1896. There followed a famine and plague in
India, which country is said to be ruled by the zodiacal sign
Capricorn! The symbol was not deciphered till the event came to
throw light upon it. In the same way a leaf of shamrock, denoting
the Triple Alliance, has been seen split down the centre with a
black line, denoting the fracture of the treaty. It would also seem
to indicate that Ireland, whose symbol is the shamrock, will be
separated by an autonomous government from the existing United
Kingdom.

In similar manner all symbols arising in the crystal may be
interpreted by reference to their known qualities and uses, as well
as the associations existing between them and other things,
persons, and places, in the mind of the seer. As we have already
said, however, the meanings of most of the symbols will be
conveyed to the consciousness of the trained seer at the time of
their appearance in the crystal. Experience will correct many
errors, and a symbol, once known, will assume a constant meaning
with each seer, so that after repeated occurrence it will hold a
definite signification.

It should be mentioned, however, that the same symbol will have
different meanings with different seers. It is difficult to say why
this is the case. But it probably arises from the difference of
individual temperament, and the Order to which the soul belongs
in the spiritual world. These dissimilarities exist between
individuals down to the lowest of our sensations. We have the
same laws of thought and the same general constitution. Humanity
holds us all within the bonds of a single nature. Yet, despite this
fact, we have differences of opinion, of emotion, of sympathy and
antipathy, of taste, and so forth, Therefore it would appear that the
soul images projected by the magical power of the mind must have
different significations with each of us, their interpretation being
in some peculiar way in agreement with the nature of the person
who sees them. Necessarily no definite rule can be laid down as to
interpretation, but it is advisable that the seer or seeress should be
his or her own interpreter.

Thus, although every symbol has some general signification in
agreement with its natural qualities and uses, yet it obtains a
particular signification in regard to each person. It is within
common experience that this is the case in regard to dreams,
wherein the faculty of seership is acting in its normal plane. Every
person is a seer in dream-life, but few persons pay that attention to
dreams that their origin and nature warrant. The crystal is but a
means of bringing this normal faculty of dreaming into activity in
the waking life. Yet, as stated above, the differences of import or
meaning, even in the dream-world, of any particular symbol is a
common experience. Thus one person will dream to be wading in
water whenever there is trouble ahead. Another will dream of a
naked child when similar troubles are about to occur, Butcher's
meat will signify financial troubles to one person, to another a
fortunate speculation. The controlling factor in this matter is
probably to be found in the constitution of the mental and psychic
qualities conferred by the hereditary and psychic influences
converging at the conception of an individual, and expressed in the
birth. Probably, too, an argument could be established in regard to
the influence of the planets ruling at the nativity, and also from the
dominion of the signs of the zodiac in the horoscope of birth. But
this would be beyond the scope and intention of this short treatise.



CHAPTER VII.

SOME EXPERIENCES

The following facts, in connection with predictions made from the
Crystal, have come within the knowledge of the writer, either as
personal experiences or in association with others in which the
faculty of clear vision is active.

A lady of title visited the seer in the month of June, 1896, and was
told that she would hear news from abroad in some hot country
concerning the birth of a child, a boy, who would arrive in the
following year in the month of February. The lady did hear such
news, and in February, 1897, a boy was born to the lady's sister in
India. The same lady was told that on a certain date, while
travelling, she would meet with an accident to the right leg. She
fell between the platform and the footboard while getting into a
train, and suffered severe abrasion of the right leg, together with a
serious muscular strain which laid her up for several days.
Previous to that the lady was to be surprised by some good fortune
happening to her son in connection with papers and a contest. This
happened at the time specified. Her son passed his examination for
the military college with honours.

Mrs. H. was consulted by a lady of some ability in a special line of
literature. This fact was not, however, within the knowledge of the
seeress. She was told that she would go up a certain staircase into
a dingy room with a roll of something under her arm. She would
see a dark man who was thick-set and of quiet demeanour. The
man would take the roll, and it would be a source of good fortune
to her at a later date.

The lady-consultant did so take a certain manuscript rolled up
beneath her arm. She went up the dingy staircase described by the
seeress, and saw the man whose description had been given.

The manuscript was transferred from her hand to that of the
publisher, for such was the man's occupation. The manuscript was
accepted, and later on was published. So the prediction was
literally fulfilled.

In the first case cited the vision was _symbolical_, and the
interpretation was made by the seer himself. In the second case the
vision was literal, and needed no interpretation. These two cases
will serve for an illustration of the two types of vision.

Mrs. A. was consulted by a lady of the writer's acquaintance in
1893. She was told that she would not marry the person to whom
she was then engaged, but would have to wait till a certain person,
who was described, should come from a foreign country and take
her away. This would happen, it was said, in the month of January,
three years later. This event transpired in due course exactly as
predicted, though nothing was further from the probable course of
events; in fact, the lady was not a little irate at the allusion to
the breaking off of her then existing relations, while the idea of
marrying a person whom she had never seen, and for whom she
could have no sort of regard, was naturally revolting to one so
wholly absorbed as she was at the time.

Mrs. G. consulted the seer on September 27th, 1894. She was told
she would have sickness incidental to the loins and shooting pains
in the knees. [A figure was seen with a black cloth around the
loins, the figure stooping and resting its hands upon its knees.] She
would be the owner of a house in the month of December. [A
house was seen covered with snow; the trees were bare.] A
removal would be made when the trees were without leaf. [A bird
was seen on a branch without leaf; the bird flies off.] The
consultant would be engaged in a dispute concerning money.
[Several hands seen grabbing at a pile of money.]

These events came to pass at the time predicted. It is advisable to
note that in the first instance the symbolical vision is seen; in the
second, a _literal_ vision supervenes; and in the third and fourth
cases the vision reverts to the symbolical. Here we have an
instance of the overlapping of the two conditions of the
temperament, the active and the passive state alternating.

As an illustration of the extreme difficulty of interpretation in the
normal state of consciousness a symbol may be cited which was
seen in the crystal for Miss X. "A shield, and a lion rampant
thereon, in red." Now this might mean anything. It suggests the
armorial bearings of a princely family. The lion rampant might
mean the anger of a person in authority, as the lion is the avowed
king of beasts. Its colour, red, and its attitude are naturally
expressive of anger. The shield might be a protection, though little
needed by a lion, especially if the assailant were the fragile Miss
X. to whom the vision had reference.

Now observe the interpretation of the seer. "You will hear news
from a man of medium height and fair complexion concerning a
foreign country. A letter will come in reference to something
written by you which will be the very best thing that could happen.
You will score a great success." This interpretation, which is quite
in line with the fact and which afterwards transpired, is probably
as far removed from all that one might have expected as anything
could well be. But we have to remember that the condition in
which the seer voices the interpretation of symbols seen by him is
a psychological one, and no doubt in that state natural symbols
take on quite a different signification to that which they would
hold in the normal state of waking consciousness. How often do
dreams have a marked influence upon the dreamer while still
asleep; how often do they assume proportions of magnitude and
become pregnant with meaning to the dreamer, only to dissolve
into ridiculous triviality and nonsense as soon as the person
awakes! It would indeed appear that a complete hiatus exists
between the visionary and the waking states of consciousness, so
that even the laws of thought undergo a change when the centre of
consciousness is removed from the outer to the inner world of
thought and feeling.

The writer has known cases of sickness predicted with remarkable
accuracy, the time and the nature of the sickness being foretold
with more or less accuracy. The reception of unexpected letters
and telegrams; their import and consequences; the various
changes, voyages, business negotiations and speculations
occurring in the consultants' lives have been foretold by means of
the crystal. Deaths have been foreseen, and even changes in the
religious views of the consultant or his associates.

In one case the writer saw a vision of a public square in which was
the effigy of a lamb mounted upon a pedestal. The lamb was made
of solid silver and was mounted on marble. A Catholic priest came
along and pointed at the lamb. Immediately a flash of lightning
came from the sky and struck the effigy, melting off one of its
ears.

This was stated to signify that the community to which the consultant
belonged would immediately lose a member by conversion to
the Roman Church. By the next mail the consultant learned
that such was the case--an important member of the community
having gone over to the Roman Catholics exactly as predicted.

In another case a man was seen dressed in black and wearing the
habit of a judge. He held some papers in his hands which he was
endeavouring to conceal. He appeared unsuccessful in his efforts.
A snake was seen at his feet. It rose up against him. A change took
place in the field of the vision and the same man was seen lying on
his death-bed. From this it was predicted that the man designated
by the vision would be guilty of misrepresentation, and would be
cut off by death three years from that time. The prediction was in
every respect verified.

Not unfrequently the visionary state is induced by excessive
emotion, during which the prophetic faculty is considerably
heightened. Some temperaments of a peculiarly sensitive order
will fall into the clairvoyant condition while engaged in thought.
The thread of thought is broken, and there appears a vision wholly
unconnected with the subject but a moment ago in the mind. It
would appear that the soul of the sensitive, while probing the
depths of its inner consciousness, suddenly comes into contact
with the thin partition which may be said to divide the outer world
of thought and doubt from the inner world of intuition and direct
perception, and, breaking through, emerges into the light beyond.
The same may be said of cases which manifest the faculty of clear
visions while in the hypnotic state, whether spontaneous or
induced. The trance condition frequently manifests this faculty in
conjunction with others, such as clairvoyance or clear-hearing and
the sense of psychic touch.

The following instance, which was reported in the _Morning
Leader_ of Friday, 14th August, 1896, is remarkable for its
extreme pertinence to the subject under consideration:

"Last month a man named David Thomas, who had for a short
time been employed by Lord Windsor as his estate carpenter, was
found shot dead in a lonely spot on the roadside near Fairwater, a
village not far from Cardiff. No trace of the murderer could be
found, and no motive has been supplied for the fell deed.

"David Thomas was, from all accounts, a quiet, peaceable fellow,
well liked by his intimates, and happy in his domestic relations.
He was a native of the little fishing village Aberaeron, in
Cardiganshire, but he had lived in Glamorganshire for some years,
and had married a respectable woman, a native of the Vale of
Glamorgan. A few months ago he received the appointment of
carpenter on Lord Windsor's estate. He then removed with his
family to live in the little village of St. Fagan's a few miles out of
Cardiff. He had hardly settled down there when the tragedy took
place. It happened on a Saturday night. He had given up work
early, and had come home to cut the grass in the little green in
front of his cottage, and to tidy up his new home. Early in the
afternoon he seems to have grown tired of the work and went
indoors. His wife asked him to take the children out for a stroll. He
made no reply, and his wife, busy in another part of the house, did
not pay much attention to his subsequent movements. She knows,
however, that he washed and went upstairs to put himself tidy, and
then went out--without the children.

"He seems to have met a friend on the road, and went for a walk
with him. They called at a public-house, and had a glass or two of
beer. Then, about ten o'clock, they parted. Thomas was quite
cheerful, and started for home at a brisk pace. He came presently
to a lonely part of the road. A wayfarer heard a pistol shot and a
scream, and presently met a man who was hurrying away from the
direction of the scream, and who wished him a gruff good-night.
Two hundred yards farther on the traveller saw in the dim night
the body of a man stretched out on the side of the road. He fetched
assistance: the body was that of David Thomas. He had been shot
about a hundred yards behind, but he had not been killed outright.
He had run in terror up the road, spouting blood as he went, and
leaving a ghastly trail behind him.

"But a weird story which is told in the _Western Mail_ of Cardiff
serves to lend that touch of horror to the tale which renders it more
thrilling than any story which the most daring novelist would
venture to create.

"A young girl, who is not yet 20, has been in the habit for some
time past of attending seances held by the Cardiff Psychological
Society. One night at a seance, while in a state of trance, she was
seized with a strange convulsion. Through her lips came the
words:

"'I--WILL--have--my--revenge.'

"'Who are you, friend?' asked the interlocutor.

"'David--Thomas. I--was--shot.'

"This entirely unexpected answer was followed by sensational
statements concerning the murder and the identity of the murderer.
Some days after she was taken out to Fairwater--which she had
never before visited--and reenacted in a trance the scene of the
murder.

"The story leaked out, and came to the ears of the _Western Mail_.
Doubts were cast at once on the _bona fides_ of the girl and the
whole story. An offer was made to repeat the experiment in the
presence of two _Mail_ representatives. The offer was accepted,
and one night this week, at ten o'clock, the little party met outside
the Railway Inn, where poor David Thomas had had his last drink.

"A start was made. The medium walked at an easy pace between a
male and female friend, whose arms were linked. The faint outline
of the road ahead led always on towards a wall of blackness.

"At last they came near Fairwater. Suddenly the medium spoke:

"'I see a pistol right in front of me--held towards me--it is a shiny
one--there it is, held up--it has a large mouth.'

"Forty yards farther on the medium spoke again: 'Hark! I hear
footsteps! I see a man!'

"'Where?'

"'Right in front of us. There he is, creeping along the hedge. He is
keeping out of sight.'

"'What is he like? How is he dressed?'

"The medium described her vision very minutely. Her pace
increased suddenly; she dragged her linked companions on with a
lurch forward. The farmhouse where she first saw the phantom
stranger was well passed. She was following him, eagerly now.

"A piercing scream came from the girl. A pressman sprang to her
side and helped to prevent her body pitching headlong forward.

"This was at the spot where David Thomas fell at the first shot.

"'O--o--oh!' moaned the medium, twisting her left arm round to
the back, to a spot immediately below the shoulder-blade, as if in
intense agony. Then, supported on either side, she staggered
forward.

"A light was struck to see her face. It was the hue of death. Her
eyes were turned until the whites only were visible.

"'Let her go down!'

"Moaning, she was allowed to sink, and lay there prone. Her
moans expressed intense agony, and were like those of a man
dying, blood gurgling in the sound; it was scarce conceivable a
woman actually lay there.

"'Speak, friend,' said her interlocutor, and presently came the slow
answer, a whisper:

"'David--T-T-Thomas.'

"'What do you want of us, friend?'

"'I--was--shot!' The tones of the voice were those of a man.

"'Who shot you?'

"A name was given.

"'What do you want to do, my friend?'

"Slowly, distinctly, with relentless purpose came the answer:

"'I--will--have--my revenge. He shot me.'

"Then the medium told them where the pistol had been bought by
the murderer a year ago under an assumed name, and where the
pistol would be found. All this while the poor girl lay prone on the
roadside under the thin sinister telegraphic pole.

"Gradually she revived. 'Look, look!' she cried, in a voice of
horror, 'Look at the blood.'

"'Where?'

"'Here--look! Look here!' indicating spots not visible to any one
else. 'Take me away,' she shuddered, but before her frightened
exclamation could be obeyed her body suddenly stiffened.' He is
there!' she said, with a pitiful horror in her tone, but with her face
expressionless and her eyes still white.

"'What do you see?'

"'The ghost.'

"Then the party returned, shaken in mind and surfeited with
horrors."

Examples of a similar nature might be multiplied indefinitely, and
would but serve to show what has already been stated as a matter
of personal experience among all those in whom the psychic
faculties have attained any degree of development, viz., that the
_rapport_ existing between the human soul and the world of
subjective consciousness is capable of being actively induced by
recourse to appropriate means, or cultivated, where it exists to any
degree, by means of the crystal and other accessories, such as the
metal disc used in China, or the Shiva-lingam stones used in India.

The following example of the psychic sense of feeling will serve
to show that all the senses, not that of vision alone, are capable of
development under suitable conditions. A contributor to the
_Westminster Budget_, in December, 1893, sends the following
account of the use of the divining rod for the purpose of
spring-finding:

"A few weeks ago took place some operations with the divining
rod by Mr. Stears, of Hull, who was called to Mr. S. Campion's
farm at East Heslerton, near Malton, to search for a water supply.
At that time he marked two places near the farmhouse where, he
said, the presence of water was indicated by the rod. Since then
Mr. E. Halliday, plumber of Malton, has bored an artesian well at
one of the places indicated, and found a very copious supply of
water at a depth of 87 feet, after going through sand, clay, and a
bed of what Mr. Halliday says is quartz and lead ore. Mr.
Campion, who was previously without a supply of pure water, is
delighted with the results of the visit of the 'diviner,' and has faith
in his power with the rod. Mr. Stears has since been called in to
experiment on several farms on the Birdsall estate of Lord
Middleton, the operations being conducted in the presence of
Julia, Lady Middleton, the Hon. Geoffrey and Mrs. Dawnay, Mr.
Persons (Lord Middleton's agent), and others. Other farms were
visited, and Mr. Stears, after employing the rod, indicated the
presence of water at each. Mr. Halliday has also received
instructions to make tests at these places, and operations are now
in progress. Mr. Stears has successfully 'divined' for water on two
of Mr. Lett's farms in the East Riding, and also at Amotherby, near
Malton; and his success is drawing fresh attention to the 'divining
rod' and its capabilities in the hands of a duly 'inspired' professor.
Mr. Stears claims that he can also discover metals as well as water,
and he alleges that not one person in 10,000 can use the rod
successfully. His explanation of the power he possesses beyond
the ordinary run of his fellow-men is that it is what he would call
'animal electricity,' because at times, after using the rod for a long
period, he loses his power with it, and only recovers it after a short
rest and refreshment. In the presence of Lady Middleton and the
rest of the company he made several interesting experiments--for
instance, standing on a china dish, to show that china is a
non-conducting agent (the rod ceasing to oscillate even when over
water); finding metals hid in the ground, etc."

Mrs. Louise Cotton, writing of the operation itself, says:

"When a sensitive person who has the power of feeling the
existence of water or mineral under the surface of the earth, steps
exactly over the course of a spring or running water, or metallic
vein, etc., the piece of wood or other medium used turns in
the hands--in most cases upwards for water and downwards
for minerals. The motion varies according to individual
temperaments: in some hands the turning is slow and but slightly
felt, or scarcely perceptible by lookers-on; with others it rotates
rapidly, and when held tightly by the thumb, the bark of the branch
or twig often peels off; and, with very susceptible operators. I have
seen the rod fly, out of the hands, or, if very tightly held, break."

As yet, however, the majority of people are wholly oblivious to
the fact that such psychic faculties exist, and even those who
possess them, _i.e._, who have them in something like working
efficiency, are conscious of having but an imperfect control over
them.

Probably it is as suggested by Mr. F. H. Myers, these things are, as
yet, imperfectly understood. Genius, far from being a condition
bordering on neurosis or other nervous ailments--as Lombroso and
Nordau have erroneously taught--is an exaltation of faculty which
brings its subject into relations with a plane of life possibly far in
advance of one's normal experience; so that while new centres of
activity are as yet under imperfect control, the normal functions of
the brain and other centres of action are left in neglect. Hence, to
the casual observer, the erratic nature of Genius is not
distinguishable from some incipent forms of insanity.

In just the same way the opening up of new centres of activity in
the psychic nature of man is frequently attended by temporary loss
of control over the normal brain functions. Loss of memory,
hysteria, absentmindedness, unconscious utterance of one's
thoughts, illusions and hallucinations, irritability, indifference to
one's surroundings, and similar perversions, are among the
products of the newly-evolved psychic faculty.

These, however, will pass away when the faculty has been brought
under control of the mind. Nature is jealous of its offspring, and
concentrates the whole of its forces when in the act of generation.
That is the reason of its apparent neglect of powers and function
already under its control while the evolution of a new faculty is in
process.

The would-be seer, therefore, must be prepared to pay the price of
any success which may attend his efforts in the direction of
inducing clairvoyance by means of the crystal.

"The universe is thine. Take what thou wilt, but pay the price," is
the mandate of Nature. "What shall be the price of this new
faculty?" the reader may ask. The answer is the same in regard to
this or any other faculty of the soul: "What is it worth to yourself?
That is the price you must pay."

With this equation in mind the reader is asked to consider
seriously the phenomena indicated in the foregoing pages.



CHAPTER VIII.

DIRECTIONS FOR USING THE OVOIDS AND SHPERES FOR CRYSTAL OR MIRROR
VISION

Daylight and artificial light are both equally suitable. A North
light is the best suited to the human eye.

Observer should sit back to the light, holding the Ovoid or Sphere
in the palm of the hand, which may rest comfortably on the lap, or
it can be placed on a table with a stand under it, and a back screen
of black velvet or dark material. The latter materially assists by
cutting off side lights and reflections. Steady gazing in complete
silence is absolutely necessary, for unlike other occult phenomena,
the distraction the attention of primary (ordinary) consciousness is
a great disadvantage. Success depends chiefly upon idiosyncrasy
or faculty in the gazers, for "Seers" are very often men and women
of imperfect education, in fact they seem "born rather than made"
but the faculty may be developed in many people, seemingly at
first insensitive, by frequent short trials, say fifteen to twenty
minutes at a time, or less if they get tired.

Success is indicated when the Sphere or Ovoid, ceasing to reflect,
becomes milky, a clouded colour following (generally red, and its
complementary green), turning to blackness, which seems to roll
away like a curtain, disclosing to the view of the student, pictures,
scenes, figures in action, sentences of warnings, advice, etc., etc.

Revival of latent or lapsed memory is one of the leading features
of this experiment. A book of instructions, carefully copied by
Raphael from the old astrological works, is prepared specially for
his crystals, price 1s. 2d. post free.

THE PRACTICE OF CRYSTAL VISION

Magi Spheres are considered the best. The price a few years ago
was L3 3s. each, but the sale having become larger and the process
less expensive, they are now sent packed with instructions for 15s.
6d., in a velvet-lined specially made jewel case. "Some persons
see at once, others after a time. Women see better than men
visions of the past, present, and future, on the subjects upon which
the mind feels anxious. It does not require a knowledge of
astrology to be able to use the crystal."

  No. 1, in case, with instruction, 15s. 6d.
   "  2,    "          "         "  21s.
   "  3,    "          "         "  50s.
   "  4,    "          "         "  60s.



CHAPTER IX.

CONCISE DICTIONARY OF ASTROLOGICAL TERMS

AFFLICTION.--When a planet is on the cross (square) or in
opposition, it is said to afflict.

AIRY SIGNS.--Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius. These are the mental
signs.

ANGLES.--The cardinal points forming the cross or square; the
first, fourth, seventh, and tenth houses.

APPLICATION.--As its name implies, when one planet applies to
another. The Moon applies to all the planets, being the quickest
traveller.

AQUARIUS (the Water bearer).--The eleventh sign of the zodiac,
or 300 deg. from the 0 deg. of Aries. The Sun enters Aquarius 
about the 21st of January each year.

ARIES (the Ram).--The first sign of the zodiac. In making up the
360 deg. in the zodiac, we count from 0 deg. of Aries. The Sun enters
Aries on the 21st of March each year.

ASCENDANT.--This is the first house, or that point which rises at
birth.

ASCENDING.--When a planet is between the fourth and tenth
house; it is always the east.

ASPECTS.--This means the relationship one planet, or sign, has to
another in the zodiac. The Table of Aspects should be well
studied; it is important.

BENEFICS.--Jupiter and Venus are always good, because they
give Hope and Love, and, if we add the Sun, we have Faith, Hope,
and Charity.

BESIEGED.--A term used when a planet is found between two
others; if between Jupiter and Venus, it is good; if between Saturn
and Mars, evil.

BI-CORPOREAL SIGNS.--So-called because they are double. It
is rarely used. The signs are Gemini, Sagittarius, and Pisces.

CADENT.--The third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth houses are cadent.
It means falling from angles.

CANCER (the Crab).--The fourth sign of the zodiac; it is 90 deg. from
0 deg. The Sun enters Cancer on 21st June.

CAPRICORN (the Goat).--The tenth sign of the zodiac, into
which the Sun enters on the 21st of December.

CARDINAL SIGNS.--Aries, Cancer, Libra, and, Capricorn. These
four signs form the

         S
       E + W
         N

they are important signs.

COMMON SIGNS.--Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and Pisces.

CONJUNCTION.--When two planets are close together, or within
orbs of each other. At New Moon the Moon is conjunction Sun.

CULMINATE.--When a planet is in the mid-heaven, it is said to
culminate; it means being on the cusp of the tenth.

CUSP.--The beginning of any house. At noon the Sun is on the
cusp of the tenth house. It means the first point of the houses.

DECLINATION.--The distance any planet is North or South of
the Equator.

DECREASING IN LIGHT.--When a planet is past the opposition
of the Sun, it is then said to be weak.

DEGREE.--The 360th part of the zodiac; its mark is  deg.; 90 deg. is a
square; 120 deg. a trine of the zodiac.

DESCENDANT.--The seventh house, or opposite to the
Ascendant; the West.

DESCENDING.--When a planet is between the tenth and seventh
houses.

DETRIMENT.--A planet in a sign opposite to its own house is in
its detriment. The house of the Moon is Cancer. When the Moon is
in Capricorn, it is in its detriment.

DIGNITIES.--When a planet is in exaltation, or in an angle,
increasing in light, etc.

DIRECT.--When the planets are moving in their true order
through the zodiac.

DIRECTIONS.--The period after birth. The position of the planets
as life advances. The Sun moves about one degree per day, and
this is equivalent to one year. The thirtieth day after birth would
denote the thirtieth year of life, and the Directions would be taken
out of the ephemeris for this day, the Sun's aspects forming the
primary directions and the Moon the secondary.

DRAGON'S HEAD.--The Moon's North Node, or when she crosses
the ecliptic into north latitude. The Moon's course is of
serpentine form, having a head and tail.

DRAGON'S TAIL.--The Moon's South Node when she crosses into
south latitude.

EARTHLY SIGNS.--Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn.

ECLIPSE.--An obscuration of a heavenly body, owing to the
interposition of another. The Moon in the shadow of the Sun is
eclipsed.

ECLIPTIC.--The circle of the heavens which the Sun appears to
describe in the course of the year, in consequence of the earth's
motion round him.

ELEVATED.--The planet nearest to the mid-heaven is elevated
over any other.

EPHEMERIS.--A Table for each day, giving the latitude and
longitude of the planets. "Raphael's" _Ephemeris_, price 1s., is
considered the best. It is all that is needed to cast the horoscope.

EQUINOCTIAL SIGNS.--Aries and Libra.

EXALTATION.--There are certain houses in which a planet is
exalted, as follows: Sun, Aries; Moon, Taurus; Mercury, Gemini;
Jupiter, Cancer; Saturn, Libra; Mars, Capricorn; Venus, Pisces.

FALL.--When a planet is in a sign opposite to its exaltation, it is
weak.

FEMININE SIGNS.--The odd signs, as Taurus, Cancer, Virgo,
Scorpio, Capricorn, Pisces.

FIERY SIGNS.--Aries, Leo, Sagittarius.

FIGURE.--A map of the heavens is called by astrologers a figure.

FIXED SIGNS.--Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius.

FORTUNES.--Jupiter, Venus, and the Sun when well placed.

FRUITFUL SIGNS.--Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces.

GEMINI.--The third sign, or house of Mercury. The Sun enters the
sign about 21st May.

GENETHLIACAL.--That which applies to the geneture in nativity.

GEOCENTRIC.--As viewed from the centre of the earth.

GELIOCENTRIC.--As seen from or having reference to the centre
of the Sun.

HOUSES.--One of the twelve divisions of the zodiac.

IMUM COELE.--The fourth house, or lower meridian.

INCREASING IN LIGHT.--When the Moon or any planet is leaving
the Sun, until the opposition is reached.

INFORTUNES.--Saturn, Mars, and Uranus when afflicted.

INTERCEPTED.--A sign lying between the cusp of two houses.

LATITUDE.--The distance of any planet north or south of the
ecliptic.

LEO.--The fifth sign in the zodiac; the house of the Sun.

LIBRA.--The seventh sign and house of Venus.

LOGARITHMS.--Of great use to astrologers. A Table of artificial
numbers; to be found at the back of "Raphael's" _Ephemeris_.

LONGITUDE.--The angular distance of a heavenly body from the
first point of Aries, measured from the ecliptic as seen from the
earth.

LORD.--The ruler of a sign or house. Mars is the lord of Aries,
and if Aries was in Ascendant, it would be lord and ruler.

LUMINARIES.--The Sun and Moon.

LUNATION.--A lunar period.

MALEFICS.--See Infortunes.

MASCULINE SIGNS.--Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra, Sagittarius,
Aquarius.

MASCULINE PLANETS.--Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn.

MODERN ASTROLOGY.--A monthly magazine of interest to all
thinkers.

NORTHERN SIGNS.--Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo,
Virgo.

OCCIDENTAL.--The western portion of the map.

OPPOSITION.--When two planets are opposite each other, or
180 deg. distant.

ORBS.--The orbs of the planets are the number of degrees allowed
to each in which their influence is felt. Five degrees all round is
the safest number to give.

ORIENTAL.--When a planet is in the eastern part of the heavens.

PARALLELS.--The declination north or south of the equator. It is
a position considered of the nature of a conjunction.

PART OF FORTUNE.--A point in the horoscope where the rays
of the Sun and Moon converge.

PISCES.--The twelfth sign of the zodiac.

QUERENT.--One who asks a horary question.

QUESITED.--The one enquired about.

QUINTILE.--An aspect of 72 deg. in longitude.

RADICAL.--That which is connected with the radix, or root,
dealing with the horoscope.

RECEPTION.--The planet that receives the aspect.

RECTIFICATION.--A method by which the true Ascendant is
discovered.

RETROGRADE.--An apparent motion of a planet that is not in the
order of the signs.

REVOLUTIONS.--A solar revolution is the return of the Sun to its
place at birth.

SAGITTARUS.--The ninth sign of the zodiac.

SCHEME.--A map of the heavens.

SEMI-SEXTILE.--A difference of 300 in longitude; a weak, good
aspect.

SEMI-SQUARE.--An aspect of 450 difference in longitude; an
evil aspect.

SEPARATION.--When a planet is separating from another.

SESQUIQUADRATE.--An evil aspect being a difference of 1350
in longitude.

SEXTILE.--A good aspect, a difference of 60 deg. in longitude.

SIGNIFICATION.--The ruling planet, or word, of the Ascendant.

SOUTHERN SIGNS.--Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius Capricorn,
Aquarius, Pisces.

SPECULUM.--A Table of the aspects in the horoscope.

STATIONARY.--When a planet appears to have no motion, it is
said to be stationary.

SUCCEDENT.--Those houses which follow the angles. The second,
fifth, eighth, and eleventh.

TABLE OF HOUSES.--A Table for calculating nativities.

TAURUS.--The second sign of the zodiac and the house of Venus.

TRANSITS.--The passing of the planets over places or points in
the horoscopes by daily motion, as seen from the Ephemeris.

TRINE.--A good aspect; a difference of 120 deg. in longitude.

URANUS.--The name given to the planet Uranus, or Herschel.

VIRGO.--The sixth sign in the zodiac; the house of Mercury.

ZENITH.--The point directly overhead. The pole of the horizon.

ZODIAC.--The belt of the heavens containing the twelve signs,
divided into 300 parts each, making 3600.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of How to Read the Crystal, by Sepharial

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOW TO READ THE CRYSTAL ***

***** This file should be named 26622.txt or 26622.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/6/6/2/26622/

Produced by Ruth Hart

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
